A REPLY TO FVLKE, In defense of M. D. Allens scroll of Articles, and book of
Purgatory.

By Richard Bristo Doctor of Divinity.

Tit. 3. Haereticum hominem post vnam and secundam correptionem deuita: sciens
quia subuersus est, qui eiusmodi est, and deliquit cum sit proprio iudicio
condemnatus.

Avoid the Heretic man after the first and second correption: knowing that he
which is such, is subverted and sins, sith that he is condemned by his own
Judgment.

Perused and allowed by me Th. Stapleton.

Imprinted at Louaine by John Lion. Anno Dom. 1580.

TO THE READER.
IT may serve greatly to thy edification (gentle Reader) as it also pertains
much to my purpose in this book, to let thee understand, that where as there
are two ways of finding out Christian truth when it is in controversy, the
one by treating of every matter in particular, the other by giving certain
general rules that are infallible: Twelve or thirteen years ago M.D. Allen,
having amongst other learned Catholics of our time and country on this side
the sea, opened and defended in print most perspicuously and substantially,
certain special articles of the Catholic says: and being driven not long
after by sickness to seek to the air of his native soil, did in the short
space of his abode there, deal also the other way with many Gentlemen,
confirming some, and setting up again others, by most evident and undoubted
rules of truth, which were always common for the most part among Catholics,
but the weight of them deeply considered of very few, and the number of them
as yet neither by him nor by any other bound up together. Only to one
gentleman requesting so much, he gave a copy of them, such a one as of
extemporall and private writing might be looked for.

It is now nine years since I heard the same of his own mouth, what time I came
first into his blessed family, and was present very often when amongst us he
discoursed familiarly upon the said rules, to such liking of my part, that I
left him not until I had entreated him to take his pen one morning, and out
of his memory to frame me also a copy. Which copy a friend having seen
here with me, who afterward was sent home into our lords harvest, in a letter
from thence desired instantly to be made partaker thereof, affirming that he saw
how medicinable it would be to many souls, I communicated the matter to the
Author of it. He being wholly occupied him self in public teaching of
Divinity, would have me who then had more leisure, though for skill not worthy
to bear his book, to devise somewhat upon those and the like rules, which
might in print be published to the world: not as though the very bare rules, as
in the foresaid copies, were not convenient and sufficient, specially for men
of intelligence and that willingly would be informed, but that by the
declaration and confirmation of them the rude also and obstinate might be
induced. And this was the occasion of my Motives in the end of the year 1574.
and also of my Demaundes in the beginning of the year 1576, which I made upon
the motion of certain, who desired to have the Motives printed again, because
the first impression was for the greater part taken and destroyed by the
adversaries.

And now after all this, the last year 1577. comes forth from one W. Fulke
an heretic, a pretended answer to the first copy above mentioned, or to some
extract thereof, joined with another like answer of the same Authors to D.
Allens book of Purgatory, and to my hands it came a few weeks ago, even
an. 1578 stylo R.
this late Christmas. Since which time reading it twice over, I find, that he
never so much as once mentions either my Motives, or my Demaundes, and much
less does he ever go about to infringe any of my probations therein
contained. And yet notwithstanding this deep silence, Fulke li. 2. p. 107.
in one place he bewrays him self to have known of them, where he glaunceth
at the divine work of a certain healing which I reported in my Motives, Moti.
5. fol. 19.
and says, As you have miracles now in Flaunders of the honest woman of the
old Baily in London. Although otherwise also who can think it possible for
him to have heard nothing (at least when he sought to print his) of books
written so late of the same matter, and so well known to the Superintendent of
London and innumerable others of that side, which also any man that had seen
the copy that Fulke answers, might easily conceive to proceed from the same
Author, and me only to be his scholar, howbeit I also not obscurely professed
as much, where I said: Mot. f. 2^
[The preiudices and evidences for the Catholic faith against all heresies,
are innumerable and superable: and my chance it has been, through the
merciful providence and goodness of God, to live certain years in company
with Catholic men of great virtue, wisdom, and knowledge, blessed of God most
liberally with his graces, such as our miserable country is not worthy of:
whose daily familiar talk of such things I have used to hear, as to my great
admiration, so likewise with all diligence and attention. And what I have
through such communication at sundry times, or of my self at other times, by
means thereof observed, I purpose as memory shall serve me, and God assist
me, being thereunto both justly moved, and earnestly required, in this book at
once to utter it in part.]

If I may say what I do guess hereat, I suppose that it should still have lain
by him, Fulk to the Reader.
as it has done (he says) these eight or nine years, and never have been put
in print, but only for show of an answer to my Motives and Demaundes,
specially seeing that, where as D. Allens writing was called only by the name
of Articles, this man at every Article has also printed the word Demaundes,
because every Article consists of certain Demaundes: by mean whereof I
know already my self, some that are deceived, and think it to be an answer
unto me, yet in truth it touches not me at all, neither makes any just
answer to D. Allen, but all so simply and so feebly, that he is feign to set
it out without privilege, as also his other book against Purgatory, Ibidem.
though that book was authorized (he says) almost two years ago, wherein I
know not whether we may believe his bare word, for many causes easy to be
here noted, and one namely, for that he thus writes in the same: We believe
that Pa. 450 What if the Church were in England only: or one were king of
al countries sometime vvher it is?
the Catholic Church has no chief governor upon earth but Christ, unto whom
all power is given in heaven and earth. Well, if it have authority, at the
least without privilege it has it, and his former book neither has privilege
nor authority. and yet out it comes, by permission at the least, to make
forsooth a face and show of somewhat for a time, and if after it chance to be
of some Catholic dashed out of countenance, then the shame to be no man's but
only Fulkes.

All which considered, I doubted a while, whether it were good to return him
an answer, or no, least peradventure I should but lease my labor, and rather
to expect yet somewhat longer, whether any do answer my Motives or Demands, as
by advise out of England, I have now more then this tweluemonth waited
thereupon. Yet my resolution has been, seeing that abundans cautio non nocet,
to put out my hand a little, and take of his vizard, that being plainly
discovered, every man may behold and abhor his foul favor, and bear me
witness that he had been better to keep in, not only those nine years and
two years, but also for ever, following rather the ensamples of those other two
brethren mentioned in his preface to the Reader, of whom the one purposed to
have answered the book of Purgatory himself, but afterward undertook rather
the printing of Fulkes answer: the other learnedly began the answering of it,
but was, he knows not how, let from the accomplishing of the same. So has
Satan hitherto hindered the setting abroad of this answer (says he of his
own) but God has now at length brought it forth: I doubt not (he adds) but
to his glory, and the confusion of satan in his members the Papists. As I also
doubt not, but God in deed has brought it forth, to his glory, and to the
confusion of heresy, so, that satan had done more politikely, to have hindered
still, if he could, the setting abroad of it, such stuff it contains. Better
stuff we should have had, if better had they had.

Well, seeing that M.D. Allen is otherwise and better occupied, I, who have
already succeeded him in his Articles, and do owe unto him (at one word) all
duty, both for the public, and namely for my private, will here with the
help of God, lay so much of Fulks wares open, out of both his books, that
although my meaning is directly against his first book, yet my treatise shall
appear to be a just reply to both his books.

that out of the true Church is no salvation, See the contents more at large
in the end of this book.
to this end, that when as in my process it shall be manifest, that he and
his fellows are out of the true Church, and that we have the true Church, both
they may clearly see in what case they stand, and their fellows may look in
time unto their reconciliation.

in substance of religion, or have gone out of the unity of their communion,
it may evidently be seen, that we likewise at this time be of the same true
Church, and he with his fellows to be without the true Church, because they be
out of our Church.

Thirdly, for as much as on the other side he could not deny,

Nay, I will further declare in the fourth place, that he charge

Fifthly, I will report the reason for which (by his saying) they

After this I will note briefly his zeal toward Calvin and

Seventhly, I will declare, how that, seeing manifestly the Christian
Religion, to make clearly against him and his, he is feign, and nothing abasht
at the matter, to take exception against all, by the bare name and color of
Only Scripture: and therein behaueth him self so boldly, as if the holy
Scripture were as manifestly with him, as all the other are manifestly against
him. Where also because, like an other Phormio homo confidens, he provoke us
to a disputation of Scripture, I will make him a reasonable offer.





to send such a book abroad.

Which thou shall again more plainly perceive in the eleventh

And again, as plainly in the twelft Chapter, where I will

In the conclusion, I will amongst some other things advertise

But now, let us come to the perfourming of these our promises.

Ar. and Pur. in the margins, signify the page of Fulkes books against the
Articles and against Purgatory. A REPLY TO FVLKE, In defense of M. D. Allens
scroll of Articles, and book of Purgatory.
The first Chapter. That he confesses out of the true Church to be no
salvation.
THis I show briefly and most plainly by his own words, as where he says: The
house of refuge or defense, may be applied to the Church, Ar. page 108.
out of which is no salvation: and in whose bosom it becomes every man to
rest, which shall look for the refuge and defense of God. Ar. 83.
And in an other place: There is no man of what age or years soever he be, that
can be saved, except he be a member of the Catholic Church. Again: This we
affirm, that out of the Church there is no salvation. Again: We utterly
deny, that beside the true Church, Ar. 62. Ar. 76.
there was an untrue church, that practiced those offices ( of baptizing and
other spiritual actions) to the salvation of any man. And again: No man
alive, Ar. 73.
that knows what the true Church means, will say, that any man can be saved
out of the true Church. For he that is not a member of the body of Christ, can
by no mean receive any benefit of Christ to his salvation. Therefore this is
certain, that out of this Church none could be saved. This then being so
confessed (as in our Church it is also openly practiced, first in baptism to
take men in, then in reconciliation, if they went or were cast afterward out,
to receive them in again) I will stand no longer upon it, but proceed
further.

The second Chapter. That he confesses the known Church of the first 600.
years after Christ, and the known members thereof.
THis likewise will be evident by his own words (if the Catholic ear can
bear his blasphemies withal) and first if we consider what he writes of the
Romans and their Bishops, both since Bonifacius the third, and also before him.

Ar 35.
Being asked, [What year the religion of the Papists came in and prevailed?]
Thus he answers: We may well say, that the religion of the Papists came in,
and prevailed, that year in which the Pope first obtained his antichristian
exaltation, which was in the year of our Lord 607, when Boniface the third for
a great sum of money, obtained of Phocas, the traiterous murderer and
adultrous Emperor, that the Bishop of Rome should be called and counted the
head of all the Church. And what after that? Since that time ( says he) that
devilish heresy has always increased in error, until the year of our Lord
1414. Whereupon in other places he says again: Ar. 27. Pur. 344
From Boniface the third all blasphemous heretics, and antichrists. And
again: Or any succeeded Boniface the third, which beside their abominable
life, were all heretics and antichrists. And where he speaks of the old
Doctors, by and by he adds as in an antithesis: Pur. 405
Nay rather count upon the Popes to be pillars of your Church, Doctors of your
learning, and Fathers of your faith, that have been within these seven or eight
hundred years.

By this that he says of the time after Boniface the third, you perceive his
confession as touching the time before him. Yet to make it more plain, he shall
expressly make him self his own confession: Pur. 194.
Gregory was the last of all the Romish Bishops in whom was any spark of
goodness: because Boniface his successor, See page
and all the rest, by Gregory's own judgment and prophecy, were all
Antichrists. And most manifestly in an other place, Pur. 372
where D. Allen urges the succession of the Roman Bishops by example of
Ireneus, Cyprian, Tertullian, Optatus, Hierome, Augustine, and Vincentius
Lirinensis, who confounded therewith all heretics, and says: [It is a
strange thing, that the Fathers having then store of Apostolic Successions,
did ever choose out for the warrant of their faith, from amongst the rest, the
Roman Seat: and now when there is no Apostolic Church left in the whole
world but it, that they will not have us refer our faith to it, which was
ever of all other most free from falsehood.] To this Fulke in his answer
says: That these men specially named the Church of Rome, it was, because the
Church of Rome at that time, as it was founded by the Apostles, so it
continued in the doctrine of the Apostles. And a little after: As for that which
M. Allen counts so strange, it is for lack of skill and right judgment.
For the same cause that moved those ancient Fathers to appeal to the
judgment of the Church of Rome, moves us now to condemn the Church of
Rome of heresy. Wherefore did they reverence the Church of Rome? Ask
Tertullian, he answers, True doctrine in the true Church, how long?
because it had by Succession retained even until his days, that faith which
it did first receive of the Apostles: Therefore it was a true Church,
therefore it was an Apostolic Church. This answer he learned of his master
Calvin, who in his Institutions first puts down our allegation, saying:
Call. Ins. li. 4. ca. 2 nu. 2.3.
Magnifice illi quidem suam nobis Ecclesiam commendant. Allegant enim eam apud
se initio sana doctrina and sanguine Martyrum been fundatam, perpetua
Episcoporum Successione conseruatam fuisse ne intercideret. Commemorant quanti
hanc Successione^ fecerint Irenaeus, Tertullianus, Origenes, Augustinus, and
alij. that is: They in deed set forth unto us their Church very gloriously.
for they allege that being in the beginning well founded amongst them with
sound doctrine and with the blood of Martyrs, it was by the continual
Succession of Bishops preserved from decaying. They report out of Irenaeus,
Tertullian, Origene, Augustine, and others, how highly they esteemed this
Succession. And then he puts hereunto his own answer, saying: Cum extra
controuersiam esset, nihil a principio vsque ad illam aetatem mutatum fuisse in
doctrina, etc. that is: Considering that it was a plain case, that from the
beginning even until that time nothing was changed in doctrine, the holy
Doctors took in argument that which was sufficient for the overthrowing of all
new errors, to wit, That they oppugned the doctrine which even from the
very Apostles them selves had been inuiolably and with one consent retained.
This grant both of the master and of his Scholar, as more by a great deal,
then in this Chapter we needed, The true Church not only to have continued so
long it self, but also to have kept inuiolably and generally with one accord
the true faith and true doctrine which of the Apostles the^ selves she had
received. The like he confesses of our own Country also, Ar. 49.
where he says: The Church of the Brytaines before Augustine ( whom Saint
Gregory sent from Rome to convert the English in our said country of
Britannie) came in with Romish service, had they not trow you Authentical
Service: which continued in the faith of Christ even from the Apostles time. To
which confession let it be added out of S. Bedes Story, that the Bed. hist.
li. 2. ca. 4.2. and li. 3. ca. 25.
greatest point wherein the Christian Brytons and our Apostle S. Augustine
differed, was about the keeping of Easter day, and that also not so great as in
old time between S. Victor of Rome and the Christians of Asia (as this man
ignorantly Pur. 371. here. ca. 10. page
somwhere affirms) that is to say, not whether it should be always kept with
the Jews upon the very day of the full Moon according to the heresy of the
Aug. heresi. 29.
Tessaresdecatite or Quartadecimani. (for that observation, Eus. in vita Constable.
li. 3. ca. 28.
Britannie, as the Emperor Eus. in vita Constable. li. 3. ca. 28.
Constantinus witnesses, detested no less then other provinces at the time of
the Nicene Council) but only upon what Beda supra.
sunday it should be kept. So then this being their greatest difference, and
yet therein also the right observation being that which was brought from Rome,
as no man will deny, you see what grant this man must make, as to Britannie,
so likewise to Rome at that time, to wit, not only the true Church, but
withal the same faith which the Apostles taught, though in this Chapter (as I
have already said) we look no more but for the true Church.

Which same true Church he grants again many other ways unto the Romans
and their Bishops, in that he gives it to sundry notable personages and
companies that were in unity and in one Church with the said Romans: as to
the ancient Doctors and Councels, to the Martyrs, Monks, and other
Christians, not only that frequented those Cryptes or holy vautes under the
heathen and persecuting Emperors, but also that gathered themselves afterward
in those magnificall new Temples under the Christian Catholic Emperors: and
finally to those Catholic Emperors themselves, even to Mauritius who lived
with S. Gregory.

Ar. 60.
Of the Doctors his confession is this: The most approved writers, Tertullian,
Cyprian, Origin, Epiphanius, Hilarious, Chrysostamus, Ieronymus, Ambrosius,
Augustinus, etc. were doubtless members of the true Church of Christ. Again,
Ar. 71.
The Church of the Arians, was not the Catholic Church: but Athanasius, and a
Such is his skill in the story of that time.
few other, that were banished and persecuted, were the true Catholic Church.
Again, Ar. 59.
Justinius Martyr, and Irenaeus, two of the most ancient authentical writers,
that the Church next unto the Apostles had. And again, Pur. 434.
The old doctors had their measure of Gods spirit. Cyprian and Cornelius were
both endued with Gods spirit, and both martyrs. Again, Pur. 405.
The Doctors of Gods Church, Augustine, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Basil, etc.
Again, It is a good argument, Ar. 27.
that the Popish Church is not the Church of Christ, because it was never
hidden since it first sprang up, in so much that you can name all the notable
persons in all ages in their government and ministry, and especially the
succession of A proper distribution, the Popes in all ages to be ours: and yet
the Apostles and Doctors, to be his. Sapientes confitentur and non abscondunt
patres suos: quoth Eliphaz against Job. cap. xv.
Popes you can rehearse in order upon your fingers. But our Church (which has
not had so many registers, chroniclers, and remembrancers) has perhaps fewer,
but yet honester men to name: we can name Peter, Paul, etc. Justinius, Irenaeus,
Cyprianus, Athanasius, Hilarious, Ambrosius, Augustinus, Gyldas, etc Then as
touching ancient Councels, thus he says: Ar. 97.
The four best general councels were gathered by our Church. Again, Pur.
430. Pur. 296.
If any Council decree according to the Scriptures (as the Council of the
Apostles did, Act. 15, and the Council of Nice, with diverse other) we receive
them with all humility as the oracles of God. To this place of Doctors and
Councels pertains that also which he confesses of the Church that resisted
and overcame the old heresies: as where D. Allen had said, [It is not you that
shall outface Gods Church. she has by the spirit of God beaten down your
proudders, the Arrians, the Macedonians, the Anabaptists ( as the Donatistes,
etc.) and all your predecessors.] He answers, 297.
You boast that your Church has beaten down our proudders, the Arrians,
Macedonians, Anabaptists. It was the Church of Christ, that ouerthrewe those
Heretics. And in an other place likewise: Ar. 10.
[I demand ( says D. Allen) what Church has mightily gone through, borne
down, and fully vanquished, all heresies in times past, as well against the
blessed Trinity, as other articles of our Religion?] I answer, ( says Fulke)
the true Catholic Church has always resisted all false opinions, contrary
to the word of God, as her duty was: and fought against them with the sword
of the spirit, which is the word of God, and by the aid of God obtained the
victory, and triumphed over them. So did the fathers of the primitive Church,
from time to time, confute heresies by the Scriptures, and declare in their
writings, that by them they are to be confuted. for examples sake of a great
number, I will allege a few: and he alleges Hilarious, Basilius Magnus,
Chrysostom, Augustine, Leo the first Bishop of Rome, and the whole Council of
Constantinople the sixth. And so concludes saying: Thus I have declared by
ensample and authority of these fathers, that the true Church of Christ, has
convicted all heretics, only by the Scripture. If only by the scriptures,
See cap. 9. par. 2. page Ar. 52.
so much the better you do like of her, and that in this Chapter nothing
misliketh me. Now let us see what he confesses of the ancient Monks also.
The Church of God ( says he) has always had Schools or Universities for the
maintenance of godly learning: for the first colleges of Monks in solitary
places, were nothing else, but Colleges of students, that were afterward, as
occasion served, taken to serve in the Church, as appears by Chrisostom in
his book de Sacerdotio, where he shows that Basilius, who was a Monk with
him, was taken by violence and made a minister of the Church, as he him self
was afterward. Also in the Bishops house was a College of students: and our
histories testify, that at Bangor in Wales was a great university of learned
men. Whether S. Chrysostom, S. Basil, and those other ancient Monks, both
in our own and also in other countries, were nothing else but students, it is
not the question of this place: See cap. 10. them. 25. page
but only do I note here, that he confesses them to have been of the Church
of God.

Then as concerning the times first of persecution, afterward of peace, under
the Emperors both heathen and Christian, he utters his confession of the
true Church, in these words: Our assemblies were kept in secret places, Ar.
51.52.
long time after Christ's ascension, in most Countries that were subject to the
Roman Empire, and when Constantinus had given peace to the Church, he builded
Oratories and great Synagoges called Basilicas, for our assemblies and Service.
Also, necessary furniture ( for the service of God) was decreed to the Church
by the Emperor Constantine and his Successors, that were of our Church, before
the revelation of Antichrist, that is (as before you heard his meaning) before
the time of Bonifacius the third. Pur. 342.
Likewise in an other place he confesses both those Caves and Vaultes under
the earth that the old Christian Bishops were content to serve in, before the
time of Constantine, and also, those princely buildinges that by Constantine
and other Christian Princes were first set up for the public exercise of
Christian Religion. To which times belongs also that, wherein he confesses
the conversion of Nations by the true Church, saying: It did not only require,
but also subdue all Nations to the obedience of the faith, Ar. 97.
so many as were ever subdued, in the days of the first Christian Emperors,
and before. Finally, he confesses the Emperors yet more expressly and more
particularly, saying: Ar. 33.
It is an easy matter, to name you the Emperors and princes, which both
offered to the ministers of justice in the right of our Church, and also
maintained our faith and congregation, by Civil laws: as Constantine the
great, Iouinianus, Valentinianus, Theodosius, Archadius, Honorius, Marcianus,
Iustinianus, Mauricius, and diverse others. And to signify that he means
these Emperors to have been such as he would wish for, he adds of the latter
Emperors, and says: I pass over as to well known many of the Grecian
Emperors. Likewise I pass over Charles the great. I will not rehearse those (
later Germane) Princes, that, etc. For although these and such like defended
some part of the truth, which we hold against you, yet least you should
object, it was but in one or two points, I pass them over with silence. And
so much for the true Church in the first. 600. years.

The third Chapter. That he confesses the foresaid true Church to have made so
plainly with us in very many of the controversies of this time, that he is
feign to hold, that the But not his Caluinicall Church.
true Church may err, and also has erred.
AFter all this so smoothly by him confessed of the true Church, and sometime
also of the long continuing thereof in incorruption, if any man marvel to
hear now, that yet withal he holds, the same true Church at the same time
to have been corrupted and to have erred, let him see here in the eleventh
Chapter his manifold manifest contradictions, and he will quickly leave his
marueiling: the matter (he shall perceive) is not so strange in this man, but
very usual and common to contrary him self, as it is also no rare thing in
his master Calvin and the other heretical writers of our time. But here in the
mean while, be it disagreeing, or be it agreeing with that which he has
confessed already, Infra ca. 11. co^tradict. 4.
I will in this present Chapter lay forth his words, first generally that the
true Church may err, and afterward of the particular errors common to the
true Church then, and to our Church now.

The first part. That the true Church may err.
Ar. 86
Therefore that the true Church may err, thus he says: The true and only
Church of Christ can never be void of God his spirit, and yet she may err
from the truth, and be deceived in some things. And a little after: Wherefore
the whole Church militant consisting of men, which are all liars, may err all
together. Ar. 88.
Again: The true and only Church of God, as it is declared before, has no
such privilege granted, but that she may be deceived in some things. And there
beneath: And if it may err, and be deceived it self, what man is he that
need to doubt, whether it may induce any error among the people? In so much
that he is bold to say in an other place: Pur. 367 368.
Of an hundred arguments that S. Augustine uses against the Pelagians, this
insultation ( that their heresy was contrary to the public prayers of the
Church) was one of the feeblest: which took no hold of the Pelagians by force
of truth that is in it, but by their confession and grant. In so much again
that a few lines after he says to D. Allen, or rather to S. Augustine if it be
truly scanned: In deed they were but sorry whelps, that could not say baffe
to the bleating of such a calfe as you are, Modestly.
which think that such a foolish cavil can carry credit with them that have
any cromme of brain in their heads, to wit, The Church prays so, therefore
it is true. Ar. 83.84.
Moreover in an other: If you mean (as it seems, and as the rest of the
Papists do interpret that Article) I believe the Catholic Church, that is,
I believe whatsoever the Church does allow, to be true: I deny that it is
necessary to salvation, that a Christian man should so believe the Catholic
Church, because the Church may err. Again in the same place: But to believe
al and every thing that the Catholic Church by common consent does maintain,
is no Article of our faith, and therefore not necessary to salvation.

The second part. That the true Church did also err: and that in the same
points as we now do err in.
j. Where he charge them with many points together.
Now further that the true Church did also in deed err, and first in the same
points wherein our Church now erreth, as they charge it, thus he says: Ar.
35. Si patrem f. Beelzebub vocauerun^ quanto magis domesticos eius^ Matt. x.
Many abuses and corruptions were entered into the Church of Christ immediately
after the Apostles time, which the devil planted as a preparatiue for his
eldest son Antichrist. By Antichrist he means (God forgive him his
blasphemy) the vicar of Christ him self, and so consequently by that
preparatiue he means such points of the Popes religion as are found against
the Protestants in antiquity. Where to minister him some light by the way (if
it may please God to open his eyes) let him consider that he must confess no
less, Infra c. 11. cont. 8.
yea much more, that the Arian, Sabellian, Nestorian, and infinite other old
Heresies detested now of both our parts, were a preparatiue for Antichrist: and
therefore seeing that Bonifacius the third, and the other Popes after him, have
not received those confessed heresies, that it follows necessarily thereof,
that the Popes are not Antichrist. But that I stray not further from my matter,
but rather reserve every thing to his proper place: he comes else where to
particularities, and says: Pu. 419.
And this was a great corruption of those ancient times, that they did not
always weigh what was most agreeable to the word of God, but if the Gentiles or
Heretics had any thing that seemed to have a show of piety or charity, they
would draw it into use. What, any thing, without exception? Go too then, and
name somewhat for ensample. So they took the sign of the cross from the
Valentinians. What more? Oblations for the days of death and birth, of the
Gentiles. Forth a Gods name. Prescript times of fasting, and unmeasurable
extolling of Sole life in the ministers of the Church, from the Manichees,
Tacianistes, and Montanistes. And yet what more? Prayer for the dead, of the
Montanistes. Forth again? Purgatory fire, of the Origenistes. Say on still:
Yea Ieronym was almost fallen into the heresy of Tertullian, in condemning
second marriage. Once more to ease that stomach: Yea even the name of
sacrifice which was commonly used for the celebration of the Lords supper, they
took up of the Gentiles. All these eight points he so notes in the Fathers
of Gods Church together in one place. Again in an other place after the
sayings of Justinius Martyr and Ireneus alleged: Ar. 60.
The other writers of later years ( says he) we are not afraid to confess
that they have some corruption, whereby you may seem to have color of defense
for Invocation of Saints, prayers for the dead, and diverse superstitious and
superfluous Ceremonies. And that to the same they were no less addicted then
we are, he confesses plainly, where he grants that they accounted the
contrary for no better then heresy. Ar. 44.45 46.
You may perchance ( says he) note the names of them, that preaching the
truth of our doctrine, against your received errors, were accounted of the
world for Heretics. And a little after: I will not dissemble that which you
think the greatest matter. Well then confess the truth: Aerius taught that
prayer for the dead was unprofitable, as witnesses both Epiphanius and
Augustinus, which they count for an error. Also he taught that fasting days
are not to be observed. if he espied the superstition of fasting days, and
reproved it, that was no error at all. And who else? Iouinian affirmed that
virginity was no better then marriage: which if it be well understood, is no
error at all. And if he taught further, that such as could not contain,
though they had vowed virginity, should nevertheless be married. Moreover, if
he taught that fasting, abstinence from certain meats, and other bodily
exercise, of them selves profit little: it was no error, he says, and yet S.
Ieronyme was a most bitter enemy unto Iouinian. Any more? Last of all
Vigilantius wrote against Invocation of Saints, superstition of Relics, and
other Ceremonies. Him Ieronym reproves, or rather rayleth on him: Modestly.
for his reasons are nothing worth that he has against him. Therefore
howsoever Ieronym esteemed him in his rage, if he had none other opinions
contrary to the truth, we doubt not to acknowledge Vigilantius (as many godly
and learned Bishops of his time did) for a true preacher and reprehender of
that superstition whereunto Ieronym was to much addict. He said before that he
would not dissemble, and yet you see his ifs, and Hierome alone against many
godly and learned Bishops. Therefore to make it yet more plain, how in
clearing these Heretics he charge the Fathers, I must report what he has
likewise in other places.

ij. As touching Vigilantius, and invocation of Saints, by it self.
As where D. Allen said: Pur. 306 310.
[So their citing out of S. Ambrose for the improuing of the invocation of holy
Saints, is no more but an abuse of the simples ignorance: knowing well that he
and all other of that time did practice prayers both often to all holy Martyrs,
and sometimes peculiarly to such, whom for patronage they did especially choose
of devotion amongst the rest.] To this he answers: Honorably.
Touching Ambrose (which was suddenly made a Bishop, before he was a perfect
Christian) if some steps of Hethenish Invocation or Rhetorical apostrophees
and prosopopees appear to be in him, and some other about his time, yet was
not that generally received of all the Church in his time. Also where the
question is asked, Ar. 39.
[Whether men began suddenly to require the help of Saints in heaven?] He
answers: Whether suddenly or by little and little man were brought to such
superstition, that they required help of Saints, it makes little matter, yet
it is to be thought, that it grew up, as other errors, by little and little. And
S. Augustine in his book, De cura pro mortuis agenda, wearieth him self, and
in the end can define nothing, in certain, How the Saints in heaven should
hear the prayers of men on earth. Pur. 315.316.317.
Although he can not define, How, yet nevertheless (says D. Allen) he
nothing doubts but intercession may profitably be made to them, and that
also for the deceased.] Whereunto Fulke says again: Augustine in his book De
cura pro mortuis agenda, is full of doubts, that he knows not him self what
to determine, but that he will hold the common opinions received in his time.
And beneath: M. Allen affirms, that S. Augustine never doubts, but
intercession may be made unto them for the dead: whosoever will take the pains
to read the treatise, de cura pro mortuis age^da, shall find nothing else but
doubts and questions of that matter. So he says, not marking what him self
there cites out of that book, August. de ^ur. cap. 16.
to wit, where S. Augustine concludes the whole matter in the end, and
says: [Ista question vires intelligentiae meae vincit, quemadmodu^ opitulantur
Martyrs ijs, quos per eos Certum est opitulari: This question passes the
strength of mine understanding, how the Martyrs help them, whom it is certain
to be helped of them.] Certum est, says S. Augustine, and Fulke alleges it,
and even so Englisheth it, it is certain: and yet, only because he can not
define, How, as to this day also it remains a very hard question, he
sticks not again to say there immediately, These places and the whole
discourse of that book, does prove, that although Augustine were willing to
maintain the superstition that was not thoroughly confirmed in his time, about
Burialls and Invocation of Saints, yet he has nothing of certainty, etc. At
least wise, this declares that S. Ambrose and S. Augustine are joined of him
with S. Hierome in that error, Hier. li. 2. con. Vigil.
and not with Vigilantius amongst those many godly and learned Bishops of that
time, of whom also he has no author, so to count them. by S. Hierome it
appears that they were very few ungodly and unlearned, and against all the
three Patriarchal Churches, of the East, of Egypt, and of the Sea Apostolic,
in that they took part with Vigilantius, and so with Iouinianus condemned by
the authority of the Roman Church. And so much of the ancient true Churches
erring in Invocation of saints.

iij. As touching Iouinian: of fasting, of Virginities merit, of V^^aries
marriage.
Now to add more likewise of their erring in condemning of Iouinian, D. Allens
words are these: [Iouinianus taught the contempt of Christian fastes: matched
marriage with holy maidenhood, Pur. 11.13.
and afterward (to the great wonder of all the Church) persuaded certain
religious women in Rome to forsake their first faith, Hier. con. Ioui. li. 2.
and mary to their damnation: for which plain supporting of undoubted
wickedness, S. Hierome calls them often, Christian Epicures, boulsterers of
sin, and doctors of lust and lechery. Nevertheless the force of Gods grace,
which was great in the spring of our Religion, (the sin of the world not yet
ripe for such open show of licentious life) speedely repressed that wicked
attempt. for as S. Augustine declares, it was so clear a falsehood, that it
never grew to deceive any one of all the Clergy.] Fulkes answer hereunto is
no more but this: If Iouinian were so great an heretic, as you make him, yet
he him self (as you show after out of Augustine) offended not in that which he
persuaded others to do. He means that place when D. Allen somewhat after
speaks of these new Superintendentes and ministers, and says, that [they
much exeede Iouinianus, Pur. 17.22.
who (as Augustine reports of him) being a Monk, maintained the marriage of
Votaries: but yet for diverse inconveniences, him self for all that would not
be married. August. ad quod. haer. 28.
And there to S. Augustine by name he says nothing, but turns his talk to
D. Allen, demau^ding of him thus: Where learned you but of the devil him
self, to command abstinence from meats and marriage for Religions sake, to
some men at all times, and to all men at some times? If for these and for an
hundredth such, you can show no better warrant, then the terms of your
fathers, A good child.
the practice of your elders, or the authority of mortal men, the curse of God
pronounced by Esaias, against them that call evil good, or good evil, must
needs be turned over unto you. With the same boldness in an other place, where
D. Allen had given this observation [You shall not lightly hear an heretic
that denies praying to saints, Pur. 4^1 402.
or holds with open breach of holy vows, allege Iouinianus or Vigilantius.
But they will travail to writhe, with plain injury to the author, some
sentence out of Augustine, or Ambrose, or some other, that by their whole life
and practice open them selves to the world to believe the contrary.] He says
thereunto. M. Allen gives a special note, that we name not Iouinian or
Vigilantius, but rather hang upon some sentence of Augustine or Ambrose, and
thinks we are ashamed of the other.But we neither boast upon Augustine, nor
Ambrose, when they dissent from ( our) doctrine: neither are ashamed of
Vigilantius nor Berengarius, when they agree therewith.

iiij. As touching Ceremonies.
Likewise of their erring in Ceremonies, and such other traditions, this he
says more, besides that which I have already reported: Pur. 256
Their time ( he speaks of Gregory Nissen, and Athanasius the great) had
diverse errors and superstitious Ceremonies. Again, Ar. 91.
If the Church had not approved many unprofitable and hurtful vsages among the
people in S. Augustines time, what need had he to complain, that many of God
his commandments were little regarded, and man's presumptions so highly
esteemed? See the answer. cap. 6. page
[Sed hoc nimis doleo, etc. But herewith I am to much grieved, that many things
which in God his book are most holsomely commanded, are less regarded: and
all things are so full of so many presumptions, that he is more grievously
reproved, which in his Vtas has touched the earth with his bare foot, then he
that has buried his mind in dronkennes:] So far out of S. Augustine.
Therefore if it be an unprofitable and hurtful usage, to prefer man's
traditions before God his commandments, the Church in S. Augustines time
approved an unprofitable and hurtful usage. Furthermore if the Church can not
approve an unprofitable or hurtful usage, wherefore are so many Ceremonies, as
were approved in S. Augustine and S. Ambroses times, abrogated and disanulled,
either because they were unprofitable, Pur. 391. Tert. de coro. mil.
or else hurtful? Again where D. Allen says: [They confess Tertullian.
1300. years ago to have practiced oblations for the dead. And ask him where
he had it (for surely he invented it not him self) and he appoints us to his
forefathers: He names the Apostles for the authors and founders thereof, as of
many other things, which he there reckeneth beside, that were generally
received, and now be of heretics likewise condemned. Pu. 400 393.264
] He answers: Tertullian fathered manifest fables upon the institution of
Christ and the Apostles, as you your self Infra- cap. 6. page
can not deny, if you have any conscience at all. As, On the Sunday and
between Easter and Whitsontide not to fast or pray upon our knees. Also, To
cross our selves in the foreheade at all things whatsoever we do. Also, To
give to them that are newly Baptized, a temper of milk and honey: and from the
day of their Baptism, forbid daily washing all the week after.

v. As touching Purgatory and Praying for the dead.
But for Purgatory and Praying for the dead, because his whole book is of
that matter, he is most profuse in charging that ancient true Church both
fathers and people thereof: and therefore I must stand the longer hereabout,
specially because the Reader shall see therein as in a notable example, to what
shameful confessions against them selves they are driven, whenever they take
in hand to answer thoroughly to any learned Catholic that has thoroughly
written of any controversy. And first I will show what he says of particular
Doctors and their particular times: secondly, of the whole Church in some of
those times: thirdly, of the glorious original that they refer it unto: and
lastly, of the shameful original or head that he refers it unto, and them
also for it.

j. What he says of particular Doctors, and their particular times, for it.
And for the first to begin allow and so go upward: Pur. 158.
Bernard ( says he) is a very late writer, and therefore his authority with
us is of small account in such cases, as he follows the common error of his
time. I take this in the way, without our compass, yet not without good cause,
that conferring the times both within and without those first.600. years, thou
may behold how he charge both a like.

Well then, to come now into our compass, Pur. 166.
of S. Gregory thus he says: When the proof comes, you leap but 600.
years from Christ to Gregory's Dialogues: from which time I will not deny but
you may have great store of such stuff. And not before that time likewise?

Theodoret was an.100. years before S. Gregory: Pur. 123.
and what of him and his time? Oecumenius and Theodoretus ( says he) were
writers about that time, when corruption of doctrine had greatly prevailed.
Again before that time, from the year.430. up to.360. much about one time
these did flourish, Augustine, See M. Rishtons table.
Ambrose, Hierome, Paulinus, Efrem, Chrysostom, Basil, and Epiphanius. And
what of them and their time? I have already rehearsed what he says of S.
Augustine upon his book De cura, Pur. 315.317.
that he would hold the common opinions received in his time, and that he was
willing to maintain the superstition that was not thoroughly confirmed in his
time. 349.
As again: If he had diligently examined the Common error of his time, of
prayer for the dead, he would not so blindly have defended it, as he does in
that book De cura pro mortuis agenda, and else where. And again: In
celebration of the Sacrament, 326.
the superstitious error of that time allowed prayers for the dead generally,
and special remembrance of some in the prayers, as of Monica and Patritius the
parents of S. Augustine. 78.
Again: But Augustine speaks of the amending fire in the place alleged by
M. Allen. He does so in deed: but Augustine had no ground of that fire, but in
the common error of his time. 161.
And again: Concerning Augustine, that error of Purgatory was somewhat risely
budded up in his time. Then of Paulinus: 322.
Purgatory in those days was but even a breeding, and yet not thoroughly
shaped out of prayers for the dead, and such other superstitious ceremonies as
were used about the departed. How handsomely he agrees here with him self, I
dissemble till Contr. 46.47.
the 11. Chapter. Now of Ambrose and others: Ambrose in deed allows prayer
for the dead, as it was a Common error in his time. Pur. 320 262.
Again: But of memories of the dead, and prayers for the dead also, we will not
strive, but that they were used before the times of Beda, Ephraim, and Ambrose.
Moreover, Chrysostom and Ieronym allowed prayers for the dead. 194. 370.
Then of Epiphanius: Because the old Liturgies used to make memory of all
sorts of men that were dead in Christ, he expounds it according to the error
of his time, that this memory was a prayer for the sinners: for the just, as
Patriarchs, Prophets, etc, a signification that they were inferior to Christ. a
simple cause why they should be remembered: but this shift he is driven unto. So
S. Augustins exposition of the like practice, 279.280 August. euc. 110. and ad
dull. q. 4.
saying: [When the sacrifices either of the Altar or of any kind of Alms, be
offered for all men departed and baptized: for the very good, they are
Gratiarum actiones, thanks giving: for them that be not very evil, they are
Propitiationes, procurements of mercy: for the very evil, although they be no
succor to them being dead, yet they are certain comforts to the living.] He
condemns it likewise in these words: These matters stand al upon a false
supposition, that any prayers are auailable for the dead. which when it can not
be proved, it is in vain to show who takes profit by them, who not. And so
much of that time, yea and of more then that time, where he said, before the
times of Efrem and Ambrose.

Let us now ascend to Constantinus Magnus his time, who was the first full
Christian Emperor, and began his reign soon after the year.300. Pur. 313.
In the burial of Constantinus ( says he) there is mention of prayer for his
soul, according to the error of the time, which was Enough for any Christian
man.
the time even of the first Nicen Council also, and he buried in the Greek
Church at Constantinople.

Long before that again about the year.200. flourished Tertullian and Origines,
of that time so he says, after a certain saying of Origens alleged: By this
place it is manifest, Pu. 249.
that Origin ( whom notwithstanding here a little after we shall have for the
founder of Purgatory) and the East Church in his time acknowledged no
Purgatory pains. Again: This one testimony of Origin shall testify, what
the judgment of the Greek Church was concerning Purgatory and prayers for
the dead, from the Apostles time unto his days. Page
To Origens place I must answer in the ninth Chapter: but now do you say on:
I wotte well superstition in the Latin Church was somewhat forwards, in as
much as there was the seat of Antichrist appointed to be set up. Where by the
way may be noted his For the.xii. Chapter.
ignorance, being the foundation of his malice, that he knows not, all the
old heresies to have sprung of the Greeks (whereupon also were holden in the
Greek Church those first four general Councels against them) and not of the
Latins, but contrawise the Roman Church specially to be commended of the
fathers, Vinc. Lir. cap. ix. Ruf. in expo. Symb* number. iii.
For maintaining always most earnestly susceptae semel Religionis
integritatem, the purity of Religion which it first received, neque heresis
vlla illic sumpsit exordium, and that no heresy did spring there. But to our
matter, that forwardnes in the Latin Church he confesses, I think in
respect of Tertullian, whose manifest testimonies he could not otherwise shift
him of, and therefore of him somewhere he says thus: I deny that any of the
ancient Fathers in Christ his time, or Scholars to his Apostles, Pu. 435.
or within one or two hundredth years after Christ (except one that had it of
Montanus the heretic, as he had more things besides) in any one word
maintained your cause, for Purgatory or Prayers for the dead. Mary, Montanus
of whom Tertullian received his heresy, had in all points the opinion of the
Papists. Again, I will not deny but you have much dross and dragges of the
later sort of Doctors, Pur. 247.
and the later, the fuller of dross. But bring me any word out of any that
did write within one.100. years after Christ, that allows prayer or alms
for the dead. Where (as we see) by the later sort of Doctors, he shows him
self to mean such as were without one.100. years after Christ. But of that
one.100. years also, together with Tertullian, and the Fathers before him up
unto Christ, we shall have occasion to say more anon in our third Article.

Having therefore thus showed in this first Article, how he charge the true
confessed Fathers of the true confessed Church with this error (as which he
summeth up together in an other place, Pur. 458.
and says: The error was continued from a corrupt state of the Church of
Christ, unto a plain departing away into the Church of Antichrist.) Let us now
see, how he charge the same whole true Church for some time with the same,
and that the more briefly, because we have now so often hard him say of so
many times, that it was the common error of that time and that time.

ij. What he says of the whole Church in some of those times.
Pur. 382.
Thus he says in one place: If we be asked, how we can shifte our selves
against the general practice of Gods Church, for all popish assertions, and
namely this of praying for the dead: We answer, that we deny the practice to
be general, because we find it Is nothing general, but that which you find
in them?
not in the most ancient writers, that lived within an hundredth years and
more, after the time of Christ. But what say you to the later practice, which
for places then was general, though for times you count it particular? And to
the particular practice of later times, we answer, that it is not sufficient
to control the ancient doctrine and primer practice. Again in an other
place: 370.
The same order ( that was before Epiphanius) and error ( that was in
Epiphanius time) do all the later Liturgies follow ( and therefore, say I,
all the later Bishops and Priests, and people, because they used those
Liturgies) making memory and prayers for all them that are departed in the
faith. What say you then to that practice so general? In the memory of all
departed, they follow the old order: in praying for all, they follow the
later error, which had changed the sacrifice of thanks giving into the
sacrifice of prayer. But more of the old Liturgies now in the third Article,
which must be of the original that the Fathers referred this their practice
unto.

iij. To what origin he confesses the Doctors to refer it, to wit, unto
Scripture, and Tradition of the Apostles.
And here first, for perspicuitie, I remember to the Reader, what S. Augustine
says of fasting: August ^pist. 86. Casul.
[In the Scriptures of the new Testament, Video praeceptum esse Ieiunium, I see
that fasting is commanded: But what days we must keep fast, Non inuenio in
illis literis euidenter praeceptum, I find not in those scriptures evidently
commanded.] And yet the fast of forty days before Easter, and some others,
both he and many more of the Fathers do say to be Au. in p^ 110. and e^ 119.
cap Hie^ ep^ Marcel. Monta^
commended unto us in the Scripture of the new Testament: but specially that it
comes expressly unto us of the Au. in p^ 110. and e^ 119. cap Hie^ ep^ Marcel.
Monta^
Apostles tradition without Scripture. The like they say of prayer for the
dead, that it is expressly found in the holy Scripture: But the certain times
that it is solemnly practiced as upon the burial day, the third, seventh,
thirteth, fourteth, years day, and also in a certain special prayer of the
holy Mass: are (they say) either all or some of them, of the Apostles plain
Tradition, though also commanded to us out of Scripture. So say the Fathers:
and for their so saying, let us now see what this man says of them. And to
omit, (because it requires a longer treaty) that he makes in effect no less
then heretics, of S. Augustine with others, Infr ca. ^ Pur. 214
for auouching sacrifice for the dead, out of the book of Maccabees as out of
Canonical scripture: Gregory, Bernard, and Bid, ( who^ D. Allen alleges
upon the place of Matthew. 12) are of opinion, Pur. 19.^ Gre. 4.19. Ber. Ser. in
Cant Bed. in Mar. 3.
says Fulke, that sins not remitted in this world, may be remitted in the
world to come. But how happens it, that Chrysostom and Ieronym, which both
interpreted that place, could gather no such matter, although they otherwise
allowed Prayer for the dead? the reason must needs be, because the error of
Purgatory growing so much the stronger, as it were nearer to the full
revelation of Antichrist, Gregory and Bid sought not the true meaning of
Christ in this Scripture, but the confirmation of their plausible error. Then
S. Chrysostom bylike will please him: Pur. 251.247. Chris. ho. ^4. in. 1. cor.
15. Such pity may bring you into the pit of hell. Pur. 237.
but hear I pray you, out of an other place: I deny not but that Chrysostom
does allege this example ( of Job sacrificing for his children. Cap. 1.) for
prayers to profit the dead. What shall we say? Those good men in that
declining state of the Church to superstition, being destitute of the clear
testimonies of Scripture, to maintain those plausible errors, are driven to
such simple shifts to uphold them, as it is great pity to see. Again, But
where learned Chrysostom, that prayers and alms had any comfort in them for
the dead? surely he alleges Scripture, but he applies it madly, and yet he
often applies it to the same purpose. Pur. 226. Amb. de. obit. Theod.
Alas good man. Likewise, Ambrose commends Honorius ( the young Emperor) for
solemnising the funerals of Theodosius ( his father) by the space of.40. days
after the example of Joseph. Genesis.50. such superstition crept into the
Church first by emulation of the Paganes, and after seeking for colorable
confirmation in the examples of the Patriarchs. Pur. 363.
Again, Those Doctors that would seek confirmation of prayer and oblation for
the dead in the Scriptures, as Chrysostom and such like, do manifestly wrest
them to their purpose. I do here no more but note that he charge them whom
he confesses to have been of the true Church, even so as he charge us: But
what Scriptures, and how substantially they alleged, I must reserve to See ca.
13.
an other place: As that also which See cap. 9. page
he grateth upon so often out of Tertullian, as if he should confess, that
prayer and oblation for the dead is not taken at all out of the Scriptures:
Whereas in deed he does not so say, but only of the solemn times of such
oblation, in such manner as I alleged a little before out of S. Augustine
concerning fasting and fasting days. The offering anima die, upon the years
myndday for the dead, and the solemn memory of them in the Canon of ye Mass,
these things Tertullian and others ascribe to the Apostles traditions, and not
to precept of the Scripture.

And now for making it such a tradition, what says Fulke again of them? Pur.
39^.
Think you, that prayers for the dead came from the Apostles because
Tertullian says so? And a little after: If Tertullian had no ground of his
saying when he affirmed that oblations for the dead came from the Apostles,
what ground can Augustine have which was 200. years further from the Apostles
time then he? And again: Where Chrysostom says, Pur. 303.
It was agreed by the Apostles, that in the celebration of the holy mysteries,
a remembrance should be made of them that be departed, for they right well knew
great profit to arise thereupon unto them: he must pardon us of crediting him.
It is no marvel now after this to see him feign to deny the Sea cap. 13.
most certain works of the Apostles Scholars, Clemens Romanus, and Dionysius
Areopagita, witnessing the same tradition, and to say, that we have them but of
some counterfayting knave that could not otherwise maintain his heresy to be
old, Pur. 268. The modesty of the man toward the old vvriters.
but by falsifying and counterfayting anew, that which never was in the old
writers heads. Finally unless he make the like counterfaiting knave of S.
Chrysostom also, he may see by this testimony of his, that he had no cause
for this point to charge him or any other after him with such a change of the
old Liturgies, as he does in many places, saying: But be it that Chrysostom
and Basil did write these Liturgies, Pur. 356. Ite^. 360.371.
the oldest Fathers that can be given them: I would know what Liturgies they
had in those Churches, before Chrysostom and Basil devised those forms that
are said to be theirs. If you would in deed know it, and namely for this point
about the dead, Chrysostom him self, as also Augustine, Epiphanius,
Tertullian, and others alleged by D. Allen, has told you, that it was all
one and the same, before and after. It follows in him: And why Chrysostom,
Basil, Gregory, or any other that prescribed new forms of service, were not
content with the old forms that were used in their Churches before their
days: See his boldness.
undoubtedly because they were too simple for their curiosity, too sincere for
their superstition, sauouring of the ancient truth, not favoring their lately
received errors. And a little after: The authors of these Liturgies thought to
confirm it by public authority, which was before but a blind error without
a head. I shall answer this why of yours in the sixth Chapter, where I must
answer for these Fathers.

iiij. He contrariwise fears not nor basheth not to say, they had it from the
devil and his limbs.
Now let us come to the fourth and last article, to see him so far
confronting those Fathers which have thus fathered this matter upon the
Apostles partly their writings, partly their tradition, that he clean
contrary fathereth it upon the devil him self and sundry lims of his, saying
boldly that thence the holy Fathers had it. Ar. 39.
It is certain ( says he) that prayer for the dead was first planted by the
devil, as were other abuses: and because it has a great pretense of charity,
deceived simple men the sooner. Pur. 386.
And with more particularitie in an other place: First the devil suggested
superstitious devotion into the Gentiles: by perverse emulation of whom, Judas
Machabaeus might be deceived. And his fact gave occasion to the ignorant
people of error: And their ignorance first winked at, because it had a show
of piety, confirmed by custom, might at length, ( Pur. 436.
for none of the ancient Fathers within four hundred years was wholly of your
error) be allowed of Augustine and others, who never weyed the matter by
Scriptures, but by the common practice. And this I think ( says he) is the
right pedigree of prayers for the dead and Purgatory. And in an other place
yet more particularly: Pur. 416. Pur. 152.266.386.410.
I have promised ( says he, and that very often, and therefore so much the
more to be noted) to prove that the opinion of Purgatory had the same
original that the most notable Heresies had. He begins that paragraph with
these words: Now at the length comes the author of this Heresy, by the
testimony of Epiphanius and Augustine: whom D. Allen there alleges, that
Aerius an Arian was the first that denied prayers and oblations to profit the
dead. Unto that Fulke goes about there to answer, to quitte Aerius, and to
counteraccuse those Fathers and their fellows. Well then, Purgatory ( says
he) had the same original that the most notable Heresies had. And what was
that? Heresy was received from the devil by Philosophers and Gentiles. And
how prove you that Purgatory was so received? Mary, all Philosophers which
granted the Immortality of the soul, as Phythagoras, Empedocles, and Plato,
assigned three places for the souls departed. And who else? Carpocrates was a
great admirer of Philosophy. This Heretic learning out of Plato his
Philosophy, that men's souls must be purified after their death, invented a
kind of Purgatory out of the opinion of Pythagoras. Yet forward: Origin to
much a Philosopher, was not content with Plato his purification, but he must
bring in Platoes fire also. Is this all? Afterward about S. Augustines time,
the name of Purgatory was first invented, by some mediators and conciliators
of Origens error with the erroneous practice of the Church. Here lo we have
the third place, the purification, the fire, and the name: We lack now but
the relieuing of the Souls there. For that he says: The Heracleonites would
redeem their dead after a new manner, namely by oil, balm, water, and
Invocation said over their heads in the Hebrew tongue. But ( at one stroke to
strike us stark dead) Montanus had in all points the opinion of the Papists.
First that the Patriarchs before Christ's coming were in hell: That Abraham's
bosom was in hell, or in the lower parts: That only Martyrs and perfect men
are priuileged of God to go to Paradise: That all small offenses must be
punished after this life, where the prison is, and the uttermost farthing to be
paid. Then for prayers a little after: And therefore ( says he) it is not
otherwise to be thought, but that the Montanistes upon the ground of this
opinion, not content with the oblations for the dead (which the Church then
had by perverse emulation of the Gentiles, Oblations of thanks giving also, are
heathenish.
and yet were but oblations of thanks giving) they added also prayers for the
spirits of them that were dead, whereof Tertullian makes mention. And that
you may not doubt whether he charge us alone, or also the ancient Fathers,
with all this, go to his words alleged out of the same place in this Chapter
by me before, beginning thus: And this was a great corruption of those ancient
times, that if the Gentiles or Heretics had any thing that seemed to have a show
of piety, or charity, they would draw it into use, etc. After all this he
concludes in the end, saying: Wherefore it is left that Montanus and his
fellows were the first that taught prayers for the dead to be profitable. And
again: Therefore Aerius was not the first that held our opinion: but Mo^tanus
before him was the first that held your opinion thoroughly. Mary you have played
the man in deed, and performed (I trow) every jot of the vaunting promise
that you made a little before, when you said: Pur. 410.
That we can not read out of the word of God, we shall hear of Purgatory,
among the Paganes, Carpocratians, Heracleonites, and Montanistes, of whose
heresies and pestilent practices, the whore of Babylon ( that is as your own
mouth has here confessed, the Church at the farthest by S. Augustines time)
has pacht up her Purgatory and sacrifices for the dead, as by and by I shall
declare.

Thus I have showed, how he notes the true Church for so many particular
errors of ours, as about Ceremonies, about the Cross, about the name of
Sacrifice, about Fastingdayes, and abstinence from certain meats, about Sole
life of the Clergy, and vow of virginity, about merit of the same and of
abstinence, about invocation of Saints, and worshipping of their Relikes, about
Purgatory, and relief of the souls in Purgatory: and that they were so much
addicted thereunto, that they counted the contraries to be Heresies, and being
opposite to the holy Scriptures, and Traditions of the Apostles.

vj. As touching the Popes primacie.
To all these errors I will yet add one more, which he makes so much of, that
he ascribes the Apostasy of the Church by him imagined, to the same. Which,
for all that, I will here show to be imputed by him also to the true Church
that in the second Chapter we heard him to confess. It consists in the
matter of the Popes Superiority. To begin therefore with him an high and come
downward along the true Church until it And yet no man then in the world that
went out from the Pope. Ar. 47. Ar. 36.
vanished quite away forsooth upon a soden by force of a sum of money given
and taken of Bonifacius the third and Phocas the Emperor, thus he has first
of Pope Victor: Victor went about to usurp authority over other Churches. And
again: Victor Bishop of Rome about the year of our Lord 200. passed the
bounds of his authority, in excommunicating of all the Churches of Asia.
Afterward he notes Cornelius and Stephanus Bishops of Rome for the like, in
S. Cyprians time for meddling with Afrike, Asia, and Spain. Furthermore,
Anastasius, Innocentius, Zozimus, Bonifacius, Bishops of Rome all in a row,
challenged prerogative over the Bishops in Aphrica, by forging of a false Canon
of the Nicene Council. And again: Celestinus Bishop of Rome dealt hardly with
the Nouatians. And there in the end: By these examples it is plain, that the
mystery of iniquity began to work ( or as he spoke there a little before,
The Popes authority first began to advance it self) in Victor, Cornelius,
Stephanus, Anastatius, Innocentius, Zozimus, Bonifacius, and Caelestinus. And
in an other place of some of them again: Pur. 255.
The Nicen Council the first and the best, was corrupted with counterfected
Canons by the Bishops of Rome, to maintain their usurped authority, in the
days of S. Augustine. And in the next Chapter we shall hear him call the
Church in Innocentius his time, Pur. 148.
the company which has the Pope for their head, Item, the Pope and al them
that take his part. Finally to come to S. Gregory's time: where D. Allen says
thus: [So if thou would know whether that place that our adversaries impudently
do allege out of Gregory the great, against the Sovereignty of the Sea of
Rome, Pur. 305.310.194.
was in deed written for their seditious purpose: behold the practice of the
same father, and thou shall find him self exercise jurisdiction, at the very
same time when he wrote it, in all Provinces Christianed throughout the world:
both by excommunication of Bishops that governed not well, by often citation of
persons in extreme provinces, by many appeals made unto him, by continual
legacies to other Nations, sent either to convert them to the Faith, or to
govern them in their doubtful affairs, and by all other exercise of
spiritual jurisdiction, etc.] He in his answer is driven to say to this: The
practice of Gregory although it were much more modest then of his Successors,
yet can it not be excused, but it was contrary to his doctrine whereby he
reproves an other ( to wit the Bishop of Constantinople) in that he was not
altogether clear him self. As though either he or any his successor used the
style of universal Bishop, and not all the clean contrary, [Seruus seruorum
Dei, Servant to Gods servants.]

All this I have so copiously alleged out of him (though not so copiously as I
might) for these three purposes: First that ye Reader might clearly see, that
in so many points he confesses him self and his fellow protestants to
dissent from them whom he confesses to have been of the true Church:
Secondly, that again he confesses us in the same points to agree with the
same: Thirdly therefore and especially, that he has not for these points (and
so neither for such as depend of these) just cause to deny us the true
Church, Note well whosoever seek the Church.
which he so grants to them that hold the same points, and that upon the
same grounds, and as earnestly, or (if he will) even as obstinately, as we do
now, condemning their adversaries therein of heresy, and so consequently of
separation from the true Church, howsoever them selves rather are charged by
him to have received of older heretics their opinions: but that contrariwyse
we are for so much to be more excused then they, as we do err by their
authority and the authority of their Successors after them to this time, no
greater authority in the mean time clearly ruling over the case to the
contrary part, but rather the more it is scanned, the more continully it
appears, that their part is still to be followed, and the contrary part
still to be condemned and accursed.

The fourth Chapter. That he charge the said Primitive true Church with
sundry errors, wherewith he neither does, nor will, nor can charge us.
HEre I have to present him with an other reason, why he should grant unto us
the true Church, rather then to the old Fathers, for so much as he will
confess us to be free from diverse errors, that he charge them withal: most
of them also being so great and so gross, that none of the errors that he
imputes to us, can be thought comparable, by the judgment of any man that is
any whitte indifferent, and not altogether blinded with an huge beam of
partiality. And let the Reader lay this to the last Chapter before, and
confer all diligently together: That he confesses (I say) that there may be
a Company which erreth, not only some principal members, but also the whole
body of it, and which erreth obstinately, and moreover which erreth the
grossest errors that can be, and them in no small number: and yet the same
company may be the true Church, and in deed also has been the true
Church: so that no piece of this, nor all this together will serve him (him I
say) to prove, our company not to be the true Church. And then afterward
let it be considered, what better, or what other stuff he has to prove the
same: and if he have any such, either better, or other then this, refuse (a
Gods name) to be of our Church, and seek after him thy salvation where else
thou can find it.

Well then, to come to those other errors that were (as he says) the Primitive
Churches, and are not ours, and to begin at the top: Ar. 35.
D. Allen [requireth the Protestants to declare, when the true Church
decayed.] To this: I answer ( says Fulke) First, Even in the Apostles time
there arose many heresies which did not a little trouble the Church.
Secondlye: But immediately after the Apostles time (while the Fathers of the
Church were earnestly occupied in resisting of horrible heresies) by the
craft of Satan, some errors and abuses crepte into the true Church of Christ:
which at the first, because they were small, and men occupied in greater
matters, were either not espied, or not regarded. And how declares he this?
Justinius Martyr was in this error that the Angels lusted after women, and
therefore were turned into devils. What more? Irenaeus affirms that our
Savior Christ lived here.50. years. And what more? Also both he and Papias
the Disciple of S. John held this error, that Christ should reign a
thousand years after the Resurrection here in flesh. And what of all this?
Whereby it is manifest, seeing these ancient Fathers and pillars of the
Church, were thus stained with errors, that the Church in their time could not
be free from the same. Again, It seems also, that the Church in Justinius
his time was in some error about Second marriages and diuorcementes. After all
which he concludes in the end: And so it is evident, that the true Church
decayed immediately after the Apostles time. Where the diligent Reader marketh,
that he uses, decaying and erring, indifferently one for the other. As for
that which he says there, of abuses and corruptions entered into the Church
of Christ as a preparatiue to the Religion of the Papists, it belonged to the
last Chapter, and therefore I noted it there. Supra page
And so much of the Apostles time, and also of the time immediately after the
Apostles. Let us proceed and come down lower: Cyprians time was such a time (
says he) as Cyprian and all the Bishops of Africa decreed in Council, Pur.
287.
that those which were Baptized by heretics, should be Baptized again. And
therefore it was no such time, but that he and all his fellows might and did
err, in some opinions, contrary to the truth of Gods word. And lower
again, Under the Emperors, Ar. 15.
Constantius, Constans, and Valence, the true Church was greatly infected with
the heresy of Arius: what time also Liberius Bishop of Rome was infected with
the same heresy. Straight after that time did Saint Hierome florishe, whom
amongst others in the second Chapter he confessed to be a member of the true
Church: And him he charge not only, Supra. page
as I alleged in the last Chapter, that he was almost fallen into the heresy
of Tertullian in condemning Second marriages: Pur. 419. Ar. 46.
But also thus in an other place: Consider what perilous assertions these be:
that the Lamb is every where: and that the Martyrs are every where: this is
to destroy the humanity of Christ, and to give divinity unto the Martyrs. I
doubt not but Saint Ieronym, if he had quietly considered these absurdities,
He lacked but such a monitor.
would have revoked them as erroneous and heretical: but while he rather
followed affection then judgment, you may see how he was deceived. At the
same time was the third Council of Carthage, and Saint Augustine one of the
Bishops thereof. Ar. 89.
It he charge thus: The Council of Carthage the third, Cap. 23. determined,
that all prayers at the Altar should be directed only to the Father, and not
to the Son, or the holy Ghost. Whether this be an error, to define, That it
is unlawful to pray to God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, let every man
judge. And to put more weight to this his accusation, he adds: But you will
except that this was a provincial Synod, and not a General Council. But I
answer you, it has the authority of a general Council, because it was
confirmed in the sixte general Council holden at Constantinople in Trullo.

But of all others most insolently he insulteth and triumphs against the
ancient Church, for ministering the blessed Sacrament to Infants. Ar. 87.
I will prove unto you ( says he) that the Church of Rome has falsely
interpreted diverse sentences of Scripture: and therefore by that which she has
done, it can not be doubted but that she may do it. One then for example: S.
Augustine was in this error, that he thought Infants must receive the sacrament
of the body and blood of Christ, under pain of damnation: and was deceived by
false interpretation of this Scripture, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son
of man, and drink his blood. etc. Ioh. 6. This error and false interpretation
he affimeth to be common to all the Western Church, and to Pope Innocent him
self. Contra duas Epist. Pelag. ad Bonifacium li. 2. cap. 4. and contra
Iulianum li. 1. cap. 2. Again in an other place where D. Allen admonished his
Reader, saying: [Pose M. Jewel, where he had, Pur. 145.148.
that the Church of God might err.] Behold, I pray you, the confidence of this
man in his answer thereunto. Whatsoever M. Jewel has affirmed against the
Papists, he has so substantially and learnedly defended, that For many
P^testants nee^ no other bo^ to become C^^tholikes.
he need not to have any other man to answer for him. Therefore if it were not
to choke M. Allen in his own collar, I would travel no further in this
question. How then does he strangle the man? The Church (you say) can not err:
and that company is the Church which has the Pope for their head. Very true,
both the one and the other. If therefore it can be proue^, that the Pope and all
they that take his part have erred, it is sufficiently showed, that the
Church may err. Say then: S. Augustine was in this error (as you will not
deny) that the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ was to be ministered
to Infants: But of the same opinion he affirms that Innocentius Bishop of
Rome, and all the Church in his time was: Therefore the Pope and all the Church
did err. Read Augustine contra Iul. li. 1. cap. 2. Whether he says of
Innocentius, Qui denique paruulos definiuit, nisi manduc auerin^ carnem filij
hominis, vitam prorsus habere non posse, Which has defined, that Infantes,
except they eat the flesh of the son of man, can have no life at all in
them. And by eating the flesh of the son of man, he means eating the
sacrament of his flesh and blood, as it is evident to them that will bestow the
reading of Augustines discourse in that place. Pur. 309.
Again in an other place. And by the way note here, one practice of a notable
error in Augustines time, that the Sacrament of the Lords supper was given to
children, which wist not what it meant, contrary to the word of God, who
requires men to examine them selves before they receive it. Wherefore if any
other practice were in his time, or allowed by him, contrary to Gods word, we
are no more bound unto it, then unto this, which even the Papists them selves
Or else you can not ^e^l.
will confess to be erroneous. Yea he is not afraid to prefer the very
Pelagians in this point before all Gods Church of that time, Pur. 390.
saying: In S. Augustines days (of whose time the history of the Church is By
what Historiographa^?
largely set forth unto us) who preached or writ against that error, which he
and Innocentius Bishop of Rome, and all the Church (as he confessed) did hold,
that Infants must receive the holy Communion or else they should be damned? who
preached against this error, except perhaps the Pelagians that were horrible
heretics. Again: Why was it revealed to the Pelagians, Pur. 422.
that Infantes might be saved without the participation of the sacrament of
Christ's body and blood, rather then unto S. Austine, Innocentius Bishop of
Rome, and (as Augustine says) and the Catholic Fathers of that time? which
thought it was as necessary for them to receive the Communion, as to be
baptized. The revealing of his ignorant sawcines herein, I reserve to the sixth
Chapter. Here I do no more but note what errors he lays to the true Churches
charge, which been these that you have heard.

The fifte Chapter. What reason he renders* why they in those ancient times
had the true Church, notwithstanding these their errors.
THus have we heard of him, that the true Church may remain the true Church
although it err, and that it has erred in many of the same articles wherein
we do now err, and moreover in many other articles beside wherein we do not
err, whereof it follows plainly, that neither our erring, nor these our
errors, no nor any other our errors, are alone sufficient for him to deprive us
of the true Church.

And now, not being able to deprive us of the true Church, if any man do yet
think, that for all that he is not constrained to grant to us the true
Church, let the same man in this Chapter consider, what reason he yields why
our Fathers, notwithstanding their foresaid errors, had the true Church: and he
shall most evidently perceive, that by the same reason we, notwithstanding our
errors, have likewise the true Church.

He names somewhere, Tertullian, Cyprian, Origin, Ar. 61.
Epiphanius, Hilarious, Chrysostomus, Hieronymus, Ambrosius, Augustinus, etc.
and says of them as follows: But for as much as they hold the foundation,
that is Christ, though they have diverse errors and superstitions, they were
doubtless, the members of the true Church of Christ. Pur. 336
In an other place having said that in S. Augustines time, they used
unprofitable prayers for the dead, and many other superstitions, he adds:
neither does it follow that all that taught or believed those errors, so long as
they builded upon Christ the only foundation, have perished. Again: Ar. 74.
We take not upon us to meddle with God his judgments, whom he condemns, or
for what causes, further then the word of God teaches us, namely that as many
as have not believed in the only son of God, are condemned for their
unbelief: other secret causes we remit to his secret counsel and knowledge.
Pur. 34^
In so much that where D. Allen presses this new found Clergy in our
country, for usurping those Colleges and other ecclesiastical provisions
against the wills of the first founders, who meant them to such as should pray
for their souls, and not to such as should preach against the same: he
answers of them likewise and says: Whether any meant to maintain preaching
against Mass or prayers for their own souls, as we know not whether they did
or no, so we count it not material, etc. and whether the buylders of such
places be saved or damned, it perteyneth not to us to judge, or to enquire.
Again, where D. Allen had showed by example of S. Augustine, of his mother,
and of others, that they offered prayers and the sacrifice of the Altar for the
dead, Pur. 325 328.
and thereupon concludes, saying: [Thus lo all these Fathers taught, thus
they practiced, thus they lived, thus they dyed: none was saved then but in
this faith, let no man look to be saved in any other now.] Nay, says
Fulke, not so: For although they were in that time infected with some errors,
yet was the faith of their salvation in the only foundation Jesus Christ, Pur.
238.
etc. in the only mercy of God. Again: We confess that in Chrysostomes days
the only foundation Jesus Christ was taught, and the article of justification
by the only mercy of God was preached: but yet we affirm that much straw,
wood, and other impure matter was builded upon the foundation, which was a
preparatiue to the kingdom of Antichrist which was not long after to be
revealed. Pur. 287.
And in an other place, Cyprians time was no such time but that he and al his
fellows, though they held the foundation of Christ, yet might, and did err in
some opinions, contrary to the truth of Gods word. And again: Cyprian and all the Bishops of Aphrica, were, notwithstanding their error (of Heretics baptism
to be no baptism) in the unity of the church.

In all these places he alludeth (although he never express it) to S. Paul's
saying, 1. Cor. 3.
that, The foundation is Jesus Christ, and, if any man buyld upon this
foundation, he shall be saved, yea also though his buylding or work be wood or
straw, such (to wit) as will wast away in the day of fire. Let us confer
with it this saying, Matt. 7. He builds upon the Rock which hears or
believes my sayings, Aug. in Ps. 103. cor. 3. and de fide and op. ca. 16.
Gala. 5.
and works them. S. Augustine expounds it most aptly in very many places,
when he says, that, Christ to be in the foundation, is, that he have the
principal place in our heart, and nothing at all be preferred before him.
Which is done, if he dwell in our hearts by a working faith: for, That faith
which by love works, being laid in the foundation, suffers none to perish.
So that if we be either out of faith, or out of charity, then be we without
this saving foundation: As are all they that either believe any one heresy, or
break any one commandment by any mortal sin. For so says S. Paul
expressly of Heresies with all other works of the flesh, Gala. 5.
That they which do such things, shall not inherit the kingdom of God. For
which purpose again three places are diligently to be conferred, in all which
the first part of the sentence he changes not at all, but the other part he
varieth three ways, 1. Cor. 7. Gala. 5. Gala. 6.
giving us plainly thereby his meaning: In Christ Jesus (says he) neither
circumcision nor uncircumcision is ought, or can do ought, but a new man, but
faith working by charity, but keeping of Gods commandments. This is the
truth. But now comes Fulke with an other exposition, which first requires
not works of charity, or observation of the commandments, nor secondly also
so much as fidem integram inuiolatamque, a sound and uncorrupted faith: but
only to hold this one article of faith, to believe in the only Son of God,
and, in the only mercy of God. And if any man err about other articles, and
that also so obstinately that he condemns his adversaries for heretics, yet
he holds the foundation, and by virtue of it shall be saved notwithstanding:
and so did S. Augustine and those other Fathers, and therefore they were of the
true Church, and are saved.

How much more warely dealt your master Peter Martyr upon this place to the
Corinthians, who seeing the absurdities hereof, Pet. Mar in. 1. Cor.
thought better to say that the Fathers in the agony of their death
acknowledged their errors. Et non raro fit, etc. It happens often ( says he)
that such as in their whole life time had not the gift to think a right of
Religion, have it often given them at the last hour: to understand in the
agony of death, that the superstitions and abuses to which before they had
yealded them selves, were both vain and also hurtful. Which thing I would not
doubt to have happened to Bernard, Frauncise, Dominike, and many of the
ancient Fathers: because living in the foundation, that is, in Christ,
although they builded many abuses and very many superstitions, yet they might
be saved: howbeit through fire, what time at the last hour they wrestled
against death and the terrors of their sins, and in that wrestling
acknowledged the vanity of their fancies.

Thus you see how they are troubled to save them whom (no less then us) they
should, but dare not to condemn: and while they labor so to do, they do it
(specially Fulke) by such means, as no less serves to save us. For who
knows not, that we believe in the only Son of God, and in the only mercy
of God? and that therefore we look not to be saved by our own works, that is
to say, which we did without him, as when we were in Paganism, or in Iudaisme,
or in Caluinisme, and any other heresy, or finally in any mortal sin, but
only by his works, that is, by his Sacraments that of his great mercy he has
instituted for us, and the good deeds that of his great mercy he has created
in us, in Christ Jesus? even as S. Paul says: Tit. 3.
Not for any works of righteousness, that we did (before Baptism quae fecimus
nos) but for his mercy he has saved us, by Baptism per lanacrum generationis:
that thou may see his mercy and his sacrament stand well together. Ephesians. 2.
And again: for we be his (new) creature, created in Christ Jesus, in good
works. And therefore before we were in Christ Jesus, we had no works to save
us: but they are our works only in Christ Jesus, that save us. For so the same
S. Paul teaches us (as I said before) what it is, that in Christ Jesus is of
power to save us, to wit, our new creation in these good works, our faith
working by charity, our keeping of Gods commandments: so that again his
mercy in Christ Jesus, and his creature or good works in Christ Jesus, stand
well together. And even thus did also those old fathers believe of ye
Sacraments, and of good works, Supra. page
whom he confesses notwithstanding to have believed in ye only Jesus Christ,
and the only mercy of God: believing likewise ye communion of prayers betwixt
all that are in Christ Jesus, Infra. page
either quick or dead, as him self likewise confessed of the^ in ye.3. Supra.
page
Chap. And therefore seeing they notwithstanding that, are confessed to have
believed in the only son, and the only mercy of God, we no less for all
that our belief, must be likewise confessed to believe the same only
foundation, and so consequently to have likewise the true Church and
salvation: be the impudent audacitie of Fulke never so great, to say, that we
build upon no foundation at all, and seek by all means to dig up the only
true foundation of our faith Jesus Christ, making him nothing better then a
common person, except his bare name. Even as his friends and masters be
altogether as lusty with the Fathers them selves, Flaccus Illyric. in Claue
Scripturae, part. i. in praef.
one of them saying of S. Hierome by name, that he was Et morbi humani and
medici Christi ignarus, ignorant both of man's disease and of Christ the
Physician. Therefore let him wrangle as much as he will, this is the plain
case, every indifferent man does see, all like both in us and in the Fathers,
about his supposed foundation: if they held it, we hold it, if we hold it
not, Infra. page
they held it not: and therefore both to be alike justified, or both alike
condemned, as I shall have a place again in the.9. Chapter to declare further,
when I answer to all that he alleges up and down to prove that we agree
not thoroughly with the Fathers in substance of doctrine.

The sixth Chapter. An answer first to all the foresaid errors wherewith he has
charged the Church of the first.600. years: and afterward likewise to all
errors that he lays to the Church of these later times.
HItherto I have so proceeded in this my defense of our Church that now is, as
supposing that both it and the ancient Church before it has erred in manner
as he charge it: and declaring that he must confess it to be the true Church
still notwithstanding that it erreth now, as he confesses it to have been the
true Church before, notwithstanding that it erred in many of the same articles,
and also in sundry others, then. But now if I can further defend it, that for
all his accusations, yet it has not ever erred, neither in those former, nor
in these later ages: Note well, you that seek for the Church.
then will the curable Reader (I hope) much more acknowledge, that it is most
worthily to be sought unto and obeyed, and their Antisynagogue to be forsaken
and abhorred: and that much more again, if moreover I defend it, that also it
can not err. For then, seeing they confess, that theirs may err, it will
follow thereof, that theirs is not the true Church. But that point I will
reserve to the.8. and.9. Chapter, where I will answer the Scriptures and
fathers that he any where alleges to prove, that the true Church may err,
here I will but maintain, that it has not erred.

Fulkes zeal in answering for Calvin and others being in deed of his Church.
And this to do I am moved specially by the truth of the matter it self, but
secondarily also by example of this same Fulke. who though he say that their
Church may err, yet can not his zeal abide to hear that it does err: or
rather he says no more, but that the true Church may err, so, as where he may
seem to speak of a true Church distinct from their Church now, to wit, of the
Fathers Church: But else when he speaks expressly of their own Church that
now is, as he holds always earnestly that it does not err, so he never
says so much plainly, as that it may err: yea sometimes also in his zeal he
breaks out against the Fathers them selves at once and against us: as where
D. Allen said: Pur. 369.371.
[One of them was so impudent, to say in an open book, that the Liturgies of
the Fathers made all against the Catholics.] And a little after: [If their
Service like you so well, or at least better then S. Gregory's Mass: you might
with more honesty have coped for any one of them, then have forged a new one
of your own: which in deed is directly repugnant to all other;rites in the
Christian world.] To this: I answer, says Fulke, We have with more honesty
reformed our Liturgy according to the word of God, and example of the oldest
Church, then Gregory, Basil, Chrysostom (if they were theirs) or whosoever
were authors of those Liturgies did: leaving the ancient Liturgies that were
used in the Church before their time, because they did not sufficiently
express their errors and superstition, and forge them new of their own
contrary to the word of God. And in another place first on ye one side he
accuses S. Ambrose and the Church before and in his time, Pur. 226.
saying, Such superstitions crept into the Church, by emulation of the Paganes.
Then on the other side, of his own he says: For avoiding of all which
inconveniences, that have risen and may rise, The wise Church of Geneua.
by ceremonies practiced at burialls, the Church of Geneua very wisely and
godly, uses no more ceremonies in burying their dead, then are convenient for
the reverent laying up of the corpse. Pur. 412.
Again where D. Allen says: [They be as saucie with Gods Church, Counsels,
and chief governors, as we be with the Iackestrawes of Geneua.] See here, I
pray you, the zeal of the man: You confess hereby your self to be a saucie
Jack. And he adds, that the world can testify, that there is ( passing)
gravity and modesty in the lightest persons of all that Church. Again where
D. Allen says, Pur. 341.
[If all Ecclesiastical foundations should return to the founders again,
because their wills are not fulfilled, that then perhaps this wiued new
Clergy might be driven to serve in a reformed French barn.] his zeal is so
great that he can not hold, but, You jest ( says he) like a scornful caitife,
of those holy assemblees of Gods children in France. Pur. 203.205. Infra. ca.
12. number.
So likewise by name, for Calvin and other his masters, let us a little behold
his impacience. D. Allen touches Calvin for denying all communion between
Christ's members that are in this life and in the next. For this, Fulke says
unto him: You have a pleasure to spue out your pestilent poison against that
noble light of Gods Church, M. Calvin. Again where he notes his strange
doctrine about Christ's discending into hell, Fulke answers: Pur. 61.63
Infra. ca. 1 page
He utters his spite against Calvin: he spitteth out against him most
impudent slanders, raylings, and lies: not satisfying him self with the voice
of a man, he has borrowed the tongue of the devil him self. Whose doctrine God
him self, the Angels, and all the world does know and testify, to be
directly contrary to these slanders. And straight after: But because he would
not be thought to have spued out all his poison, against Calvin, he goulpeth
up another bowlefull of railing and slaundering, against our Bishops, who have
not only suffered, but also commended Caluines books to be read and studied
of the simple Curates, affirming that they do privily set forth by books, that
which they dare not openly preach. All this and more of like sort he has
there, and yet says in the very same place that he does somewhat moderate his
corrupt affections. Also in an other place: Pur. 45.
Without all shame or show of truth most impudently, he faineth a contrariety
between Melancthon and Calvin. O brazen face and iron forehead. With little
zeal he says for another: Pur. 147.89.
Whatsoever M. Jewel has affirmed against the Papists, he has substantially
and learnedly defended. Again: As for that reverend father M. Jewel, whom this
arrogant Louanist calls the English bragger, how well he has answered his
challenge, his own learned labors do more clearly testify unto the world, then
that it can be blemished by this sycophantes brainlesse babbling. In deed he
has so well quitted him self, that the very reading of his answer has
turned many earnest Protestants into earnest Catholics, as both by the
numbers and by the noblenes of the persons it is notoriously known. And even
no better stuff in Caluines Institutions find they, that take the like pains
to examine them and are of judgment to discern, although you trust so much
therein, and say: I would to God that al Papists in England would read that
book, and pray unfeignedly, Pur. 45^
that God would open their eyes, that they may see the truth if it be taught
therein. No sir, not so, that is not the way: There is no book of Heresy,
Iudaisme, nor Mahometisme, but it would overthrow or shake the common sort:
and therefore to read them, and pray, that is not the way to truth, no more
then to swalow poison, and pray, is the way to get or keep health of the body.
You should rather have exhorted men that can, to read the ancient Fathers
works, or such parts of their works as are Institutions or sums of our
faith, as S. Augustines Enchiridion ad Laurentium, also, De heresibus ad
quoduultdeum, the books De fide ad Petrum, and De Ecclesiasticis dogmatibus:
Vincensis Lirinensis his general rules, as it were preseruations against all
heresies, with diverse other: or because we speak of books written at this
time, specially and above all others the Council of Trent, where it entreats
of doctrine. But your zeal is to Calvin and his doctrine, as here you have
showed: it is not to the Fathers and their doctrine, no nor to the doctrine of
the whole Church, which also your self confess to be such. For Calvin
erreth not, you say, D. Allen slaundereth and belyeth him: but the Fathers and
the whole Church have erred. Well touching Calvin, Melancthon, and such others,
you shall (I trust) in time convenient hear D. Allen answer to you for him
self. My purpose here is only, by this ensample of your zeal toward your
Fathers, to show a little of my zeal for our Catholic Fathers, though not
with such big words and loud exclamations against you as you have done
against D. Allen, yet with such truth and reason, as even your self also, if
God of his mercy will take from you that stout heart, may well confess that
you are fully satisfied.

The first part. Concerning the errors that he laid (ca. 3. par. 2.) both to
the Fathers, and to us.
And because I divide this matter into three parts, to wit, the errors that
you lay both to them and to us, the errors that you lay to them and not to us,
and finally the errors that you lay to us, or to the Church of later times: and
not to them. As concerning the first sort which I collected in the third
Chapter, I answer plainly and briefly at once, that they are no errors. But
you will prove it: let us see how.

j. Of the Cross and Images.
They took the sign of the Cross from the Valentinians, Pur. 419.416.
you say. And a little before in the same Paragraph. I could prove out of
Irenaeus and Epiphanius, that the first that brought in estimation the figure
of the Cross and Images, were the Valentinians and Carpocratians. And a little
after, Carpocrates (as Irenaeus does testify) was a great admirer of
Philosophy, in so much that with the Images which he made of Christ, he joined
the Images of Pythagoras, Plato, and Aristotle. Elsewhere you quote also the
places, saying to us: Ar. 22.
Of the Valentinians you learned to have in price the sign of the Cross, and
to abuse the places of Scripture for the same superstitious use: as, God forbid
that I should rejoice but in the Cross of Christ, etc. Irenaeus li. 1. ca. 1.
Gal. 6.
Epiphan. li. 1. Tom. 2. heraes. 31. And there before: To make the Images of
Christ and the Apostles, and to cense them, you learned of the heretics called
Gnostici and Capocratitae, Epiphan. li. 1. Tom. 2. in the Preface, and li. 1.
Tom. 2. haer. 27. And Irenaeus, li. 1. cap. 23.

I answer (that the Reader may wonder at your audacitie) that those authors
there speak not a word of the figure, nor sign, nor use of the Cross: they
tell how those heretics in their fables invented.30. Gods which they called
Aeones, and in them two or three Christ's, and one of the Christ's they called
(amongst other names) stauros, or Crux: And to that Christ they racked that
saying of Saint Paul with others, as also other Scriptures they wrested to
their other Aeones: even so properly as you allege this same Cross of theirs
against our Crossing, as well might those Christ's be alleged against our
Christ.

And as properly again do you against our Images allege the Images of those
heretics: Epiph. li. ^ Tom. 2. in praef. and Haer. 21. Simonianorum. Iren. li.
1. c^ 1. in fine.
Simon Magus (of whom those Gnostici did begin) gave to his Disciples his
own Image In specie Iouis, In form of Jupiter, and also the Image of his
strumpet Helena in figura Mineruae in form of Minerua: Et adorant has hi qui
ab ipso decepti sunt, and these Images do they adore. As if the Lutheranes
should have and adore the Images of Luther and of Katherine his woman, and a
Catholic note them for it: that were you know a sore argument for us to
answer.

Likewise the Carpocratians, who also were Gnostici, had the Images of Jesus,
Epiph. li. 1. To. 2. in pr. and Haer. 27. Iren. lib. 1. cap. 24.
and withal of certain Philosophers: Cum quibus Philosophis etiam alias
Imagines Jesus collocant, etc. With which Philosophers they set up those Images
of Jesus, and then adore them, and celebrate the mysteries of the Paganes. For
having set up these Images, they do afterward keep the rites of the Paganes.
And what be the rites of the Paganes other, then sacrifice, and so forth? Which
Epiphanius adds upon those words of Irenee: Et reliquam obseruationem circa
eas similiter vt Gentes faciunt, They set them together with the Images of the
Philosophers of the world, and keep about them the other rites like as the
Paganes do to their Idols, of whom we read in the times of persecution, that
the worship which they would have the Martyrs to give to their Idols, was
partly sacrifice, partly Incense, which whosoever did, were called Sacrificati,
and Thurificati. And so this manner of those heretics, makes even as much
against our Images, and against the worship that we give to God in the place
where they are, as the Samaritanes example makes against the worshipping of
our Lord, because with him they worshipped other Gods, 4. Reg. 17.
as it is written: They both worshipped our Lord, and also their own gods
withal. Or rather makes less against our doing, because we agree not with
those heretics in neither side, neither making Gods of the Philosophers
Images, nor yet of Jesus his Images, but only of Jesus himself, who is God in
deed above all, and of all to be blessed for evermore.

Ar. 22.
And the same answer take you to that you object to us in like sort again in
one of the places above noted, saying: Of the Colliridianes you learned to make
Images of the virgin Mary, and worship them and her, with offering of candles,
etc. as they did of cakes, etc. Epiph. li. 3. Haer. 79. These Collyridianes
heresy was this, that certain women at a certain solemn time of the year
certain days together did deck a square table, and upon it Offerebant panem,
etc. They did offer a cake in the name of Mary, as if Mary were either a God,
or a Priest, and women her ministers to sacrifice for her. So says Epiphanius
confuting the^ at large, and showing that women could never sacrifice, and that
none but one is to be adored as God, though our Lady be most honorable. Sit in
honor Maria: Pater and filius and Spiritus sanctus adoretur. Reuera sanctum
erat corpus Mariae, non tamen Deus. My purpose is here but to answer: else if
any man desire testimonies for our Images and for our use above them, he may
read D. Saunders book and many other of that matter: It is enough for me here
that Fulke him self has acknowledged, Supra. ca. 3. page
Tertullian to hearse it as a thing then undoubted, that our crossing of our
selves (which is a making of Imagesa, nd a great religion to the same) comes
unto us from the Apostles by tradition. And because we are thus come from
Images to the Saints, let us hear what more you have against the Fathers and
us in that behalf.

ij. Of Invocation of Saints, and worshipping of their Relics.
You remember since the third Chapter that (by your own report) the true
Church counted Vigilantius an heretic for denying the Invocation of Saints
and the worshipping of their Relics (of which and of their Images, again,
Supra. page
the case is all one.) But now you will prove, that the Churches opinion rather
was heresy: for thus you say to us for that matter: Ar. 21.
Of the Ossenes, you received the superstition of Relics: for they used to
take the spittle and other filth from the bodies of Marthys and Marthana, which
were of the seed of Elxai (that is, In peregrinatione religion ergo?
great Saints with them) and used them to cure diseases: as Erasmus
witnesses at Caunterbury were kept the clowtes that Thomas Becket did occupy
to wipe of his sweat, and to blow his nose on, which were kissed as holy
Relics, and thought also to be wholesome for sick folks. Epiph. li. 1. Tom.
1. Haer. 19. This again makes as much against our Relics, as the
Valentinians Cross against our Crosses, and the Carpocratians Images against
our Images. Epiphanius tells, that this Elxai was in Traianus time a great
master of that sect, and that Marthys his kinswoman and Marthana his sister, In
the Ossenes country were adored in their life time as Gods. Pro dijs
adorabantur, etc. Because they were of the said Elxai his stock. quarum etiam
sputa, etc. which women's spittle also, and other filthes of their bodies the
foresaid heretics in that country took to them, in auxilium videlicet
morborum, as to cure diseases: nihil tamen efficiebant, but yet without any
effect at all. As for Erasmus, he knows now (if he did not before) what it is
to have Religion in dirision, and you may remember from whose body were carried
to the sick Sudaria vel Semicinctia, Act. 19.
and their diseases, and evil sprites went away therewith. Open your mouth
also against those Napkins, and call them likewise Clowtes for sweat and for
the nose. Or rather do you apply them (with good counsel) to your disease
also, Chris. To. ^. De vita Bab contra Gentiles.
as S. Chrysostom applies them and the Relics of the Martyr Babylas
together, unto the Paganes, declaring thereby most excellently that Christ must
needs be God, seeing he could give such passing power to the clothes and
bones of his servant.

Ar. 22.
You say moreover to us: Of the Cayanes, you learned to call upon Angels. Epiph.
li. 1. To. 3. haere. 38. Those heretics worshipped Cain, Judas, and such like:
and little esteemed Abel, and such others, yea and (some of them) also Christ
him self. They said also, that none could be saved until they had gone
through all sins. And therefore committed all abominations, and referred them
to this Angel and that Angel, with this invocation: O tu Angele vtor tuo opere,
O tu potestas ago tua^ actionem. O thou such an Angel, I work now thy work:
O thou such a power, I now do thy actio^. And this with them was called
perfecta cognitio, Epip. Haer. 26. and 21. and 27.
even doctorship it self. They agreed in this with the Simoniani, Gnostici,
and Carpocratite, who in their beastlines directed the like most horrible
inuocations to God him self, whom they termed Patrem vniuersorum. Which is as
substantial an argument against all invocation of God, as the other is against
the invocation of Angels. Simon Magus was (you know) in the Apostles time. He
invented many heavens, and many names of Angels, placing these in this heaven,
and those in that heaven, with sundry sacrifices for men to offer by them that
they might so be brought at length to the Father of all. And that none might
otherwise be saved, Epip. Haer. 21.
except he learned, hunc mysticum ductum, this mystical passage, and how to
offer such Sacrifices by those Angels, to the Father of all. Against these
fables it is, that S. Paul instructs the Ephesians and Colossians in those
two Epistles so like in words also, Colos. 2.
that no man deceive them with those inuocations of Angels Religion, non
tenens caput, not holding the head Jesus Christ. But otherwise holding him for
the head, that we are brought to the Father by the holy Angels, as by
Christ's ministers, Hebr. 1.
who sees not in the Scriptures in infinite places? And so does the Church
make all her petitions, all through Christ our Lord, Per Christum dominum
nostrum, to none she commends her otherwise, neither in heaven nor in earth,
so do we all pray and desire to be prayed for one of another: Apoc. 1. Apo.
4. v. 5 and 5. ver. 6. with Heb. 1 ver. 14. Apo. 1. ver. 16.20. Heb. 3. ver. 1.
Apo. 19.22. Apoc. 3.
and so prayed S. John, saying: Grace and peace to you from God the Trinity:
and from the seven Spirits that are before his throne: and from Jesus Christ
according to his humanity: putting Christ in the last place, that he might so,
more hansomely add the rest which he had to say there of him? And this in
that very book, out of which the Protestants abuse two places against the
worshipping of Angels, forgetting also where in the same book God does
promise to make the obstinate Jews to come, and to adore before the feet of
one Angel. Et scient quia ego dilexi te: and they shall know that I have
loved thee. Which all if you also did know, you would not say thus in one
place to us: Even in the Apostles time, when the superstition of Angels began
to be received, there was one step of your way, Pur. 287.
which you hold even to this day, Colos. 2.

iiij. Of abstinence from fleshmeat and from marriage.
Now to another error common to the Fathers and to us: Supra. ca. 3. pa. 2.
diui. 2.
You said in the same third Chapter, and confessed, that they counted Aerius
an heretic, for teaching against our prescript Fastingdayes, and so Iouinianus
likewise, for denying the merit of abstinence from flesh and from marriage,
and for licensing thereupon Votaries and Priests to marry. You on the other
side charged the Fathers, and said, Pur. 419.
that they took prescript times of Fasting, and unmeasurable ( so you term
it) extolling of Sole life in ye Clergy, from the Manichees, Tacianistes, and
Montanistes. But you bring no proof thereof. Ar. 45.
Only this you have in another place: Augustine by authority of Philaster,
charge the same Aerius, with abstinence from flesh. If this be an heresy,
then be all Papists heretics, which count abstinence from flesh an holy
fast. Still you take Richard for Robert. These three heresies condemned flesh
and marriage as pertaining to the ill God, and not to the good God, according to
the heresy of ye Valentinians before them. So writes S. Augustine of the
Tocianistes or Eucratites: Nuptias damnant, etc. They condemn marriages,
August. ad quoduult. haer. 25.40 53.
and esteem of them all a like as of fornications and other pollutions:
neither admit they to their number, any that uses marriage, be it man, or be
it woman. Non vescuntur carnibus, easque omnes abominantur: They eat no flesh,
but count all flesh abominable. He has there of Apostolici or Apotactite
likewise, saying: Eucratitis isti similes sunt, etc. These are like to the
Eucratites. They receive not into their Society them that use marriage, and
have propriety: Such as the Catholic Church has both Monks and of the
Clergy very many. Sed ideo isti haeretici sunt, etc. But therefore these are
heretics, because separating them selves from the Church, they think that
there is no hope for them which use these things, that they do not use. Now
says he of the Aerians afterward: Some say that these do not admit into
their Society, but only such as conteyne them from marriage, and have
renounced all propriety: being therein like to the Eucratites or Apotactites.
Yet from flesh meat, Epiphanius says not that they abstain: But Philaster
lays to them also this abstinence. What abstinence, and how from fleshmeate,
but such as in those Eucratites he had said before? Sure it is, that this
Aerius of his master, called Eustathius, Gang. con. Can. 1.19. Soc. li. 2.
cap. 33.
had this heresy, to whom therefore Concilium Gangrense says Anathema, and to
all that hold the like, to wit, that a Christian using marriage, and eating
flesh, in Regnum Dei introire non possit, can not enter into the kingdom of
God. Et spem non habeat, Nor has ought to hope for. Though withal he taught
Ieiunia praescripta auersanda, that the prescript fastes should be detested,
Dominicisque diebus ieiunandum, and to fast on Sondayes.

iiij. Of Ceremonies and Liturgies.
Ar. 91.
Next after this you charge the ancient Church with approving Ceremonies that
were (as you think) unprofitable and hurtful, because S. Augustine complained
them of presumptions, and because many of them are now abrogated. I might
here, and in many other places, exclaim against you (as you did often against
D. Allen upon light causes) for not quoting your testimonies, and that you have
not read them in the authors, but taken them out of some blind or wilful
collector. But to spare words all that I can, and let the things only to cry
against you: Does not S. Augustine in the very same Epistle and the very same
Chapter (whence your place is taken of certain that were more earnest for
their own private observations, Au. ep. 119. ad Ianuar. cap. 19.
then for Gods commandments, as that against drunkenness) say constantly,
Tamen Ecclesia dei quae sunt contra fidem vel bonam vitam, non approbat, Yet
the Church of God approves not any thing that is against the faith or against
good life. And there also plainly distinguished those presumptions, from such
things as are either contained in the authorities of holy Scriptures, or, found
in the statutes of Bishops Councels, or, fortified by custom of the whole
Church. Saying also in the Epistle next before to the same man, Au. ep. 118 ad
Ianuar cap. 5.
that if the whole Church use any thing, it is a point of most insolent madness,
only to call in question, whether that thing should be so used. Neither if some
such vsages be afterward abrogated, does it follow thereof, Pur. 265.393.400.
Tertul. de Cor. mil. Hier. adue^ Lucif. Act. 15.
that therefore they were before unprofitable, or hurtful, or not of the
Apostles tradition, though Tertullian affirm it, and S. Hierome also even in
Tertullians words, or else that the Church is blasphemous which abrogateth them,
as you conclude. For there might be good cause both of that before, and of this
after: as you see even in that decree of the Apostles which is recorded also in
the Scripture, Of not eating blood, nor flesh that has not the blood let out
of it. Likewise in that custom of the Apostles and of the Churches of God, 1.
Cor. 11.
for men (publicly) to pray and prophecy (or preach) bareheaded. Which of
Bishops in old time, and now also of Doctors, yea in many countries, of all
preachers, is not observed. What ordinary authority ye Church had in the
Apostles time, the same it has still, and also the same spirit to understand
what are the immutable grounds of Religion, and what traditions how and upon
what causes may be changed. Of every particular to give a reason, requires a
special work by it self: but generally the quicker witted may consider,
that in a Nation, when the fulness thereof is baptized, and the articles of
faith thoroughly rooted, there may justly and must needefully be a great
mutation in the Ceremonies, specially of Baptismus adultorum, and Missa
Catechumanorum. And so to plant the Evangelical article of the Resurrection,
the Apostles upon Sondayes and in Quinquagesima, did forbid Solemn fast and
Solemn genuflexions: and the Church afterward much more straictly, what time
the Manichees and other heretics put al their strength to pluck up again the
Apostles plant. But now all such heresies being by such diligence of the
Church quite confounded, and that marvelous article so fastened in all
Christian hearts, as it is wonderful, specially knowing what resistance and
rebellion it has suffered: Now (I say) the Church might well be more remiss
therein, though yet she keeps those Ceremonies still. Aug. ep. 86
Read S. Augustine ad Casulanum of those matters, where also besides this you
shall find also another general reason according to the divine wisdom of
that most Ecclesiastical doctor, to wit, that it suffices if the Church have
unity of faith, as it were intus in membris, inwardly in her limbs, and that
she well may withal have diversity of observations, as it were varietatem in
vest, variety in her queenely garment, according to the Psalm. Psalm. 44.
Which he speaks for diversity of Ceremonies in sundry places at one time*
but it serves for the like diversity in one place at sundry times, as it is
evident.

As for your boldness with the Fathers for their Liturgies, pronouncing that
undoubtedly they changed the ancient truth into their own lately received
errors, Proc. apud Claud. de Saints praef. in Liturg.
or else why were they not content with the old form? Proclus Bishop of
Constantinople about a thousand years ago answers your Why, and tells you,
that S. Basil, and S. Chrysostom did no more but abridge the Liturgy of S.
James the Apostle (which three Liturgies the Council in Trullo also does
acknowledge) and that upon just cause. Can. 32.
But that with errors they corrupted either it or any other form which was
used before them, if any man be so far gone so to think upon your light
word for all the most renowned credit of those Fathers, let the studious of
truth notwithstanding take the pains to confer those Liturgies, and they
shall easily be able of their own inspection to control you, Supra page 21.
as I also before in the third Chapter by plain demonstration disproued you
for the same, and namely in the very same article that forced you to this
absurd and shameless shift.

v. Of Sacrifice: and for the dead.
Now are we come to your next accusation of the ancient Church, concerning
Sacrifice, and concerning the dead. The name of Sacrifice, Pur. 419.
which they commonly used for the celebration of the Lords supper, they took
up of the Gentiles: so you say, but you prove it not. You might as well say,
that they or the Apostles had it of the Gentiles, to name that Sacrifice which
Christ offered upon the Cross. No sir, they named it so, because it was so:
and therefore Christ also said not, This is I that was borne of the virgin,
though that were true, but, This is my body, upon the one, Matt. 26.
and, This is my blood, upon the other. The Apostle also for the same cause
saying of him that comes thereunto unworthily, not that he is guyltie of
Christ, though that be true, 1. Cor. 11.
but that he is guyltie of his body and of his blood, because it is such a
celebration of his death. Whereupon if you knew what is the sacrificing of a
live thing, you should see, that how properly he was sacrificed on the Cross
in an open manner, even as properly he is sacrificed here in a mystical manner.
The same Apostle therefore again saying, that we have an Heb. 13.
Altar to eat of, (which place your blindness Pur. 45^
alleges against this Sacrifice) and also calling it 1. Cor. 10
The table of our Lord in that form of speech as he calls 1. Cor. 10
The table of the devils the sacrifice of the Gentiles, and the Leuiticall
sacrifices likewise the Leuiticall 1. Cor. 10
Altar. Yet you can not find Pur. 200 289.
one word, nor one syllable in the Scripture, of any Sacrifice instituted by
Christ at his last Supper. Whereof we shall say more Cap. 10. Them. 24.

Purgatory.
But to go forward with you to your accusation first of Purgatory, and
afterward of Purgatory fire: To prove that Purgatory came of the Philosophers,
as al most notable heresies did, Pur. 416. Tertul. de anima cap 31.32.
you allege out of Tertullian De anima, that all Philosophers which granted
the souls immortality, assigned three places for the souls departed, heaven,
hell, and a third place of purifying. This argument proves as well, that
heaven, and hell, and the Immortality of the soul, had their original of the
Philosophers. Howbeit also to report the truth, there is no word of any third
place of purifying: but only that such Philosophers made two sorts of
Receptacles, to wit, Supernas mansiones, for Philosophers souls only, and
Inferos, for all other souls: and that about the first they did vary, for
Plato placed it in aethere: Aerius in aere: the Stoikes, circa lunam. This is
all. Again you prove out of Ireneeus, that Purgatory came of Carpocrates the
Heretic, Iren. li. 1. cap. 24.
because he invented a kind of Purgatory, and proved it out of that place of
S. Matthew, Thou shall not come forth until thou have paid the uttermost
farthing, Mat. 5.
even as the Papists do. By this argument again you will win much honesty.
Epiph. li. 1. To. 2. Haer. 27. Tertul. de anima. c. 17
Ireneus, and after him Epiphanius, as also Tertullian in your own book De
anima, do write that the Carpocratians held, that a man must wallow in a^l the
filthe of sin that is in this world, before he can come to life everlasting:
and therefore if he have missed any sin, his soul is reuersed into a body,
and so again, and again, until he have fulfilled all. And for this purpose
Jesus (they say) used this Parable of agreeing with the adversary in the way,
Matt. 5.
etc. Corpus enim dicunt esse carcerem, etc. For that prison they say is the
body: and that which he says, Thou shall not go out thence, until thou have
paid the last farthing, they interpret as if the soul should be turned over
by certain Angels from body to body, semper quoadvsque in omni omnino
operatione* quae in mundo est, fiat, Continually even until it have been in
all and every act of this world, vt nihil amplius relinquatur (says
Epiphanius) ad nefarium quicquam faciendum, so that nothing remain that is
abominable but it is fulfilled.

Purgatory fire.
Pur. 419.418.
You go forward and say, that they took Purgatory fire of the Origenistes,
and the name of Purgatory of certain Mediators who about S. Augustines time
would accord Origens error with the erroneous practice of the church. For it
was Origin that brought in the fire also, and that he would build (as the
Papists do, See here ca. xij. of Christ's damnation temporal, according to
Calvin.
and as he had better reason then the Papists have, out of the 1. Cor. 3. This
you say, but you prove it not, Origens error was that hell fire is not an
everlasting fire, but only a temporal fire, which should in time purge not
only them that had ended their lives in most horrible sins, but also the
devils them selves, Augu. ad quod. haer. 43. Origenist.
(as S. Augustine writes) and so restore them to the kingdom of God: Et
rursus post longissima tempora omnes, etc. And that all again should at length
return to the same miseries: And that the felicities and myseries of men and
Angels, have always had, and always shall have, their turns and courses after
this manner. Thus he erred (you see) about hell and heaven, and about Purgation
of the damned: but of the Purgation of such as die in Gods favor, here is no
word. Unless you reason thus: There is no such Purgatory as Origin and
Carpocrates would have, ergo, no Purgatory at all. Which follows even as
necessarily as this does: There is no such hell nor such heaven as Origin did
put, ergo, no hell at all, nor heaven at all.

Releeuing of the dead by prayer.
Now for the Releeuing of them which else must (as we say, 1. Cor. 3. Supra.
ca. 3 pa. 2.
and as S. Paul says) endure a fiery and therefore a most painful
Purgation: you granted in the third Chapter, that the ancient Fathers of the
true Church, as Epiphanius and Augustine, counted Aerius an heretic, for
teaching, Aug. hae. 5. Epi. hae. 75 Such absurd shifts he is driven unto.
That Prayer for the dead was unprofitable. Orare, vel offerre pro mortuis
oblationem non oportere, he taught (says S. Augustine) That we must not pray,
nor offer oblation for the dead. But you will now prove, and that also Ar. 45.
by the self same Fathers, and out of the self same books of theirs, that
their doctrine rather was heresy. For, If Aerius (say you) was an heretic for
denying prayer for the dead to be profitable: why were the Heracleonites
accused of heresy, because they buried their dead with inuocations? Epipha.
li. 1. Tom. 3. haere. 36. Epiphanius after Secundiani, and Ptolomaitae, writes
in order of Marcosiani, Colarbasiani, See Epip^ ab. haer. 32. ad haer. 36.
and Heracleonitae, saying that they were all Gnostici, (as their predecessors
the Valentinians and Carpocratians) that is to say, men of knowledge. Which
Gnostici, all of them, did count perfectam cognitionem, perfect knowledge or
perfection to be this, if a man forsooth had wallowed himself like a swine in
all and every filth that is, otherwise his soul after death should by the
Judge and his Minister (who were, according to their fables, two of the Angels
that created the world) be imprisoned again in a body. This said all the
Gnostici, and I touched it also above. But the later of them (after the usual
manner of heretics, as Epiphanius notes) not content with their Fathers
inventions, would add somewhat also of their own invention. They invented
therefore a certain Redemption, as they called it: which consisted in a fond
imitation and corruption of the Sacraments of Christ, but in that again,
after the manner of heretics, disagreeing much amongst them selves. For look
how many are the professors of this doctrine, Epiph. haer. 34. Iren. li. 1.
cap. 18.
so many are their Redemptions, says Ireneus, and out of him Epiphanius
speaking of the Marcosians. Some did it by way of a marriage. Some as it were at
Baptism, one sort by water, an other sort by a mixture of oil and water,
both which sorts did after anoint the party with balm: and all, with
certain fond words according to the fables of their heresies. Alij vero haec
anima auersantes, etc. But some other would none of all these, saying, that
the mystery of the unspeakable and invisible power, ought not to be
celebrated in visible and corruptible creatures. Esse autem perfectam
redemptionem, ipsam cognitionem inenarabilis magnitudinis. But that the very
knowledge of the unspeakable majesty, was perfect Redemption. Epiph. haer. 36.
After ye foresaid Marcus, came Heracleon, taking his occasion of Marcus, yet
not redeeming any more as he did, but otherwise, redimens videlicet ad finem
vitae eos, etc. at the hour of their death he redeemed his followers: pouring
on the head of the party, either oil mingled with water, or baulme and water
(such again was the unity of these Heracleonites) together with Marcus his
mad inuocations, and some others: All this to this end, that by virtue of
such anointing and such Inuocations, his body being left here, and his Anima,
Soul, being cast of, apud Opifice^, where the Angel or God Creator is, his
Interior homo, Inward man, might inuisibly pass the said Creator and them
that are beneath and about him, and so escape up to his proper place above all:
specially, if withal he could remember to say to the Creator and those other
powers, as Heracleon had instructed him. The words are to be seen in
Epiphanius, who at length concludes all this gear, and says: Et de
Redemptione quide^ haec sunt quae ad nos deuenerunt, And concerning the
redemption, this is all that has come to my knowledge.

Now this forsooth makes much against our Solemnization of Marriage, much also
against our Baptism or baptizing with water. And even as much against our
oil in Baptism, or Chrisme made of oil and baulme, after Baptism: as much
also against our Anealing at the hour of death, and our prayers for men after
their death: howbeit of praying for the dead in all this was never a word,
neither in it self, nor in any likeness of it, unless you will thereunto
liken those words that the Heracleonites were taught to say after their death,
I know not to whom, that they might go invisible. And yet you do so triumph
in the Heracleonites, that you are up with them against us, in more places also,
saying: The Heracleonites (as Augustine witnesses) came yet a step more
toward the Papists: Pur. 417.
for they would Redeem their dead after a new manner, namely by oil, balm,
water, and inuocations said over their heads in the Hebrew tongue. And
again: Of the Heracleonites you learned to anoint men at the point of death,
with oil, and balm, Ar. 22.
and to cast water upon dead men, with Inuocations. Epiphani. lib. 1. Tom. 3.
Haeres. 36. Even as of the foresaid heretics we learned to Baptize men, and
to marry men. Who sees not rather, that those heretics took their rites of
the Catholic rites, with such mutation as they thought good, so as now the
Caluinistes have made them out of our Mass, a Communion of bread only and
wine.

But if the Heracleonites fail you, Pur. 417.
Montanus had in all points the opinion of the Papists. All those points I
did put in your words, in the third Chapter. But how do you now prove the
same? Because Tertullian was a Montanist: Supra. ca. 3. pa. 2. diui. 4
and he has all these points in his Books that he made being a Montanist,
specially in his Book De anima, where also he tells a Miracle that
confyrmeth prayers to profit the dead: this is all your proof. But I pray
you sir, is all Montanisme, that Tertullian has in his Book De anima, and in
so many other Books which he wrote being a Montanist? then what article of our
Creed almost is not Montanisme? Even in those few lines that you cite, he
has Immortality of the soul, and Resurrection of the flesh, and that which
is his scope in the same place, to wit, (for you seem not to understand it)
the souls suffering in her between this and the Resurrection. If otherwise
therefore, some be truth, though some other be Montanisme, what should you
have done but to look in Epiphanius, in Augustine, and such others, what were
the heresies of Montanus: and not finding prayer for the dead amongst them, to
have refrained your rashness.

You knew this well enough, and therefore notwithstanding your bragges to prove
it, etc. you confess yt it is but your own light suspicion, Pur. 417.
saying: And therefore it is not otherwise to be thought, but that the
Montanistes added (to ye abuse in the Church before) also prayers for the
spirits of them that were dead, whereof Tertullian makes mention in his books
De Castitate and De Monogamia, which were both written to heretics of his
sect, and by those prayers labors to prove (his Montanisme, to wit) that
Second marriages are not lawful. And again: And therefore it may well be, Pur.
263.
that all that Tertullian speaks of prayers and oblations for the dead, was
only in the conuenticles of the Montanistes. All in Tert. is Montanisme, that
Cypr. does not mention.
And this conjecture (you say) seems the more probable, (not, because it is
by any imputed to Montanus, but) because Cyprian (which was afterward a
Catholic Bishop in the same City, where Tertullian some time had lived)
makes no mention of prayers for the dead. A goodly cause: and yet in deed
Cyprian makes such mention thereof, as D. Allen alleges him, Pur. 239.
Infra. page
that your self do say there: This place of Cyprian has more color, but
yet not so clear for Purgatory as M. Allen would seem to make it. And when
you have all done, you stick fast in the lyme. But this by the way. Again
you utter your suspicion, Pur. 419.
saying: Finally it appears that the faithful in Tertullians time, etc.
allowed no Prayers for the dead. And yet of this, least for lack of courage so
great a verse should give us so much as a fillip, though you have been so
uncertain in your premises, you must needs be certain in your conclusion
notwithstanding, and say to us: Therefore Aerius was not the first that held
our opinion (although Epiphanius and Augustine say it never so much) but
Montanus before him was the first that held your opinion thoroughly, against
the Catholics of his time.

Oblations for the dead.
And so much of prayers for the dead. But because Aerius denied not only the
profit of them, but also of oblations for the dead, and was no less for that
also condemned of the Church, you must take pains to quit him of that heresy
likewise, and to charge the Church rather that condemned him, yea and the
Church long before he was borne. Thus then you say, speaking of the times of
Tertullian and Montanus before him: Pur. 417.418.419.
The Church then had oblations for the dead by perverse emulation of the
Gentiles, and yet they were but oblations of thanks giving. You go about to
prove it a little after, saying: And that the practice of the Church for
oblations for the dead at the yearly day of their death, were taken from the
Gentiles, it appears by this that Tertullian counts them of all one origin
(to wit, of the Apostles tradition) with the oblations pro Natalitijs, that
is, for the birth days. And if this be not enough, Beatus Rhemanus (you say) a
Papist, and a great antiquary, does confess it, affirming that by the Canons
of the Nicene Council and other Councels, which he has seen in Libraries,
those oblations pro Natalitijs, with other superstitions, that Tertullian
fathereth upon tradition of the Apostles, were abrogated. After this you be
bold to crow against those ancient times, and to say amongst many other
corruptions which they took of the Gentiles and Heretics. So they took
oblations for the days of death and birth of the Gentiles.

He is a poor antiquarie, which knows not what Natalitia were in old time,
and still are, to wit, the days of Martyrs, Natalitia.
so called, because they were then after many sore pangs delivered out of their
mother the militant Churches womb, and borne unto the life and joy of the
world to come. Which mother of theirs and ours used therefore always, and still
uses, Joan. 6.
for joy that a man is borne to heaven, to offer from year to year upon the
days of their Martyrdom, the oblation or sacrifice of the Altar. For any
other of her children she offers also the same oblation upon the day of his
death, and so forth upon his years Mindeday, year by year, but not with such
joy, but rather mourning with them, and for them, to get them comfort, knowing
that though they also be borne into the world to come, yet, it may be, crying
for a time as all children into this world, and not laughing by and by as the
glorious Martyrs. And these two sorts are the oblations that Tertullian
speaks of, saying: Oblationes pro defunctis, pro natalitijs, Tertul. de Coro.
mil. Cypr. Epi. 37.34.
anima die facimus: We make oblations for the dead, and for the byrthes (of
Martyrs) upon their years day. S. Cyprian likewise: We celebrate the passions
and days of Martyrs with an yearly commemoracion. We celebrate oblations and
sacrifices for their commemorations. And in See Molanus de Martyrolog^ ca. xv.
after Martyrol. vsuardi. Aug. in ps. 118. in. res.
all Martyrologies you may see them called Natalitia, or, Natales. S. Paulinus
has left verses that he wrote ten years together upon the Natalis of S. Felix.
S. Augustine showing that the old persecutors could not hurt the Church, but
rather that they did much good against their wills, amongst other vtilities,
as that the whole earth is clad in purple by the blood of Martyrs: Heaven is
all in flowers by the garlandes of Martyrs: Churches are decked with the
Relikes of Martyrs: Often cures are done by the merits of Martyrs, has also
to our purpose, and says: Insignita sunt tempora Natalitijs Martyrum, Times
are notably marked with the birthdayes of Martyrs. Orig. li. 3. in Job.
Finally Origin says expressly (and the place is often alleged by your self)
Nos itaque non natiuitatis, etc. We do not celebrate the day of birth ( into
this world) considering that it is the entry into dolours and temptations: but
we celebrate the day of death, as being the laying off of all dolours, and
profligation of all temptations.

Pamel. in Cyp. ep. 34
And therefore it little forces what your antiquarie says against antiquity,
of whom also for so saying Pamelius a far better antiquarie then he, says
thus: Quod quam sinistre detorqueat Rhenanus ad dies natalitios Ethnicorum,
nemo ignorare debet, etc. Rhenanus turns this ( place of Tertullian) from the
right meaning very untowardly, to the byrthdayes of the Gentiles. Howbeit in my
judgment Rhenanus there might be better construed, not to say that the
oblations of Christians were ever for their own birthdayes, but that upon the
byrthdayes of the Martyrs which the Church did celebrate with the solemn
oblations of the Altar, many of the people kept drunken feasting, as the
Gentiles did, every one upon his proper byrthday: Which drunken vtas the Church
was feign to tolerate for a time, but afterward the Canons of the Nicene
Council, and others following did forbid it, and change it into alms. If you
could show those Canons, we might be more certain of his meaning. Plain it
is, that he speaks very confusely of birthdayes: And plain again it is,
that such rioting was used of some in Paulinus (whom he there cites) and S.
Augustines times, long after the Nicene Council. See Rhen^ himself (...)
Tert. ad M^tyres, number. ^
And again most sure it is, that the Church always from the beginning has
used, and no Council ever did forbid the keeping of the Martyrs birthdayes
with oblations of the Altar. Finally Rhenanus in those annotations is full of
scapes and ouersightes (and noted accordingly by the learned of this time, very
much) though no ill meaning.

Beeres to carry home the Corpses.
One error more you charge us withal about the dead, touching their bodies, as
the former were touching their souls, Ar. 22.
George the Arian Bishop of Alexandria, invented Beres to carry dead corpses,
charging all men to use them for his own advantage: as do you Papists your
Bearing clothes, and other toys for funeral pompes, Epiph. li. 3. tom. 1.
haer. 76. Epiphanius does not say, that George invented Beres, but that he
devised to have them in a certain number. His words are these, to show the
miserable covetousness of that man: No trade almost so base, no thing so mean,
whereof he sought not gain. For, so much as Beres for the dead, he devised to
make the number of the^ certain, and without those that he ordained, no corpse
of the dead, specially of strangers, was buried: non propter hospitalitatem,
not for any charity toward strangers, but (as I have said) for lucres sake.
For if any buried a corpse otherwise, he came in danger. Now if this or the
like miserablenes be in any Bishop of ours or yours, either to rack his
people, or to usurp the living of his Clergy, what is that against Beeres,
or Bearing clothes, or comely pomp of funerals, or against the Church that
uses them, specially your self also commending in your Geneua Church, Pur. 22^
such Ceremonies as are convenient for the reverent laying up of the Corpse?
unless you think it much for the Church to reap their Carnalia, to whom she
sows Spiritualia: or would provide for your self a Beer and Bearing clothes
against you shall be buried, 1. Cor. 9
rather then to pay the common duties to your parish Church.

Thus have I followed you through all the errors common to us with the ancient
true Church, taken (as you say) of the Gentiles or of Heretics: but (as I
have plainly showed) not any one of them so nor so. What more you have of them,
belongs to the eight and ninth Chapters, where I have promised to answer all
your testimonies out of Scripture and others, about any matter to day in
controversy* and thither I refer the Reader for the last error also about
the Popes Superiority, having nothing here to be answered, because though you
say, that the ancient Church had that error also, yet you do not say, that it
took it of the Gentiles or of any Heretics.

The second part. Concerning the errors that he laid (Cap. 4.) to the Fathers,
and not to us.
j. Touching the heresies which were in their times.
Now follows the second sort of the Churches errors, that is, those errors
which you lay to the ancient true Church, and not to us also. To answer you
thereunto likewise, and that very briefly: What a thing is this that you charge
the Church in the Apostles time, with the heresies that were in the Apostles
times? And the same Church again in the three Arian Emperors time, with the
heresy of Arius? As if a man would charge the same Church now, that is, our
Roman Church, with your heresies. For you say, Ar. 15, 35. Them. 45.46.
not only Pope Liberius (of whom I must answer in the tenth Chapter) but the
true Church was greatly infected with the heresy of Arius: And you bring in
the heresies of the Apostles time, to declare that even then the Church
decayed, counting it also all one to err and to decay. And yet of your own
imagined Church that in the time of Pope Bonifacius the third fled into the
wilderness, you can say thus: Where she has not decayed, Ar. 16.15. Infra. ca.
11 cont. 31.
but been always preserved. D. Allen notwithstanding when he says, that [ the
Church always stood still and steadfast, whilst all other Congregations, as
Arrians, etc. have decayed:] must be controlled, and told of the persecutions
until the time of Constantine, and of great detriment under Iulianus the
Apostata, and of a great Eclipse under the barbarous Goths, etc. Besides the
foresaid infection under the three Arrian Emperors. If amid those persecutions
and heresies it had not been always preserved, then you might have said, that
it had decayed. You show well that hell gates have fought sore against it: but
you show not that they have at any time prevailed. Yea the truth is (and in my
Book of Demaundes, in the second Demand, you have it) that the Church
always prevailed, according to Christ's promise and predictions, and that so
clearly and so gloriously, that both the persecuting Roman Emperors gave
over at length their obstinacy and vain kicking against the prick,
submitting themselves to the very same Church which before they persecuted, yea
moreover continuing Christians even to this day: and also all heresies,
Arrians, and others, vanished quite away: neither the persecutions being ought
else in effect, but an occasion of innumerable Martyrs, the commodities of whom
we heard a little Supra 55. Greg. ^ral. li. 9*7.
before out of S. Augustine: nor again the heresies ought else, but an occasion
of so many most worthy Doctors both Greek and Latin, and their most excellent
writings, at which to this day all the later heretics do quake and tremble,
by which to this day the Catholic Church always conquereth and triumphs.

ij. Touching the errors of S. Cyprian, S. Irenee, and S. Justinius.
Which Doctors, if any of them have erred in some thing or other, yet this is
notable, that not so much as in their errors or any one error of theirs, they
are of your side. The Luciferians and the Donatistes had for them the error of
S. Cyprian and of his Council in Afrike, and therewith they urged the
Catholics very sore, as we see in S. Hierome and in S. Augustine. But the
Protestants (I say) have not so much as any error of any father to urge us
withal.

And to charge the Church with the errors of those Fathers, as you do, What a
thing again is that? as if you would charge Pope Stephanus and the other
Catholics that erred not, with the foresaid error of S. Cyprian. For so you
charge the Church in the times of Papias, Justinius Martyr, and Ireneus, with
their errors, to show that it decayed (at least) immediately after the Apostles
time.

But at leastwise (you will say) some Fathers have erred in some thing, and
therefore it is true that the Fathers may err. Why syrs? Do we attribute
infallibility to every father? Deceive not the people, Pu^. 383.432.
make not as though you had infringed the fathers authority, when you have
showed yt a father has erred, that is not the point between us, therein we
agree together. But this it is that we charge you with, that you resist their
full and whole consent. For to these we ascribe infallible truth: To the
Canonical Scriptures, and tradition of the Apostles, without any limitation at
all: in matters of Religion, To the decrees of Peter and his Chair, because it
is the rock of the Church: and to the whole Church, and therefore again to
the Consent of the Fathers, and to General Counsels confirmed by Peter's
Successor, because these two employ the whole Church. Yea also to Provincial
Counsels confirmed by the same Chair. And therefore any one of these (we
say) can not be against any other of these, no more then Canonical Scripture
can be against Canonical Scripture. And therefore again, if against these or
any one of these, there be (as it may be) any Doctor or Doctors, any
provincial Council, or any General Council, it is therein with us of no
authority, as you see in Saint Cyprian and his Council of Afrike. But yet so
long as the matter is not plainly against these, the particular Doctors and
Council are with us of great authority, though some more then some, according
to the persons, number, question, and other circumstaunces. And hereupon it is,
that we are not hasty (as you are) to charge them with errors when they did
not err, nor also to reveal and to amplify their errors when they did err,
but rather when you reveal them and amplify them, to cover them and make the
least of them, Iren. li. 2. cap. 39.40.
so far as truth will permit us. Now the truth is, that, seeing the
Gnostici said that Christ began to preach in the beginning of his thirtieth
year, and preached but one year, and then suffered in the twelfth month of
the same year, being so of the age of thirty years, to signifye their
thirty Aeones: Ireneus had occasion hereby to rack the age of Christ not
only above thirty years, but also toward.50. years, being able, as he
thought, to yield a good reason against their fabulous reason, why Christ would
be so old, which was, to be an infant with infantes, and so forth, till he
were at length also an old man with old men, as the sanctification and
example of all ages: specially because he thought he had both the Joan. 8
Gospel, and also tradition of his side, having heard of Saint John's
Scholars in Asia, that seniorem aetatem habens dominus noster docebat, Our
Lord was of old age when he Preached, and thinking by old age they must have
meant above.40. toward.50. howbeit the matter of it self is not great, and
then also it was much less. Again, the Gnostici rejected the God Creator
withal his creation, Iren. li. ^ in fine.
as another God from God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore was
Ireneus glad, if he could show that Christ not only took his own flesh, and
made his own Sacraments, of the Creators Creatures, and raised from death his
said own flesh, and so will raise our flesh likewise, but also that he will
after our Resurrection dwell here in the Creators earth with us for a thousand
years: Apoc. 2^
so well he lyketh the Creator and his Creatures: specially because he thought
the Apocalypse of Saint John to be on his side herein, and had in deed on
his side Papias, who either was scholar to Saint John, or rather scholar to
his scholars, Eusebius. li. 3. ca. v
but homo ingenij pertenuis, a man of a very slender wit, as it is easy to
gather of his writings, says Eusebeus, and therefore not altogether such a
one as Saint Paul required, 2. Tim. ^
speaking of the scholars of his scholar Timothy, qui idonei erunt, etc.
such as shall be meet to teach others also: because him self was not
sufficient to understand Apostolicas interpretationes, etc. The Apostles
expositions being made in mystical fygures and dark parables. Howbeit the
matter was not then so great, until Eus. li^ 7. ca. 19 Au. de. (...) li. 20.
ca^ (...) See Bib^cta Sixth Se. li. 5. not. 233
afterward the Church condemned peradventure that opinion in the Heretics
called Chiliastae or Millenarij (who according to Au. (...)
Cerinthus the Heretic in the Apostles time) increased the error with Eus.
(...) 7. ca. 19 Au. de. (...) li. 20. ca^ (...) See Bib^cta Sixth Se. li. 5.
not. 233
intolerable augmentations of belly cheer and fleshely lust which they
expected in those thousand years, as the Turks and Jews do. Dionysius
Alexandrinus wrote against Nepos for it, as Eus. s^ Hic. C^ in Dio^ Alex. (...)
per Esa 18. in p^ Iusti. i^ pol. ad natum.
Eusebius has recorded: and also Saint Hierome De viris illust. And therefore
it seems, some words to be lacking in another place of his, where now we
read as though it was Ireneus, against whom Dionysius wrote. No more was it at
that time a great matter for (g) Justinius Martyr to be ouerseene in the sin
of the Angels: both because his whole drift there, is, notwithstanding this by
word, very true, that one God made all, but some of his Angels did fall from
him, and usurp a tyranny over men, till Christ came to deliver us, and
therefore the same wicked Angels do stir up their Gentiles now against the
Christians being men most innocent and the faithful servants of the true
God: And also because that place Genesis 6. is the first place in the Scripture
where express mention is made of the Angels and of their sin: for that place
Gene. 3. The serpent was craftier then any beast of the earth, how parabalicall
it is? but Genesis 6. the Septuaginta in their authentical translation had then
(as S. Augustine witnesses) plainly Angeli Dei, August. de. Ciu. li. 15. cap.
22.23.
The Angels of God, where we have now but only Filij Dei, The sons of God,
meaning (as it is now commonly thought) The offspring of Seth, that they married
with the daughters of men, that is with the offspring of Caine, which a^ore they
refrained religiously.

iij. Touching Second marriages, and Saint Hierome.
Ar. 35.
But of Justinius his time you say further: It seems also that the Church in
his time was in some error, about Second marriages and diuorcementes. Had you
no more to say, but It seems: and yet could not abstain from accusing the
Church of God? neither yet do you tell us why it seems so, you neither
allege, nor so much as quote any place to prove it. In the works of Justinius
him self, I dare say you have it not. If you took it out of the Magdeburgian
Centuries, follow my counsel hereafter, and look every thing first your
self in the Authors, before you believe your fellows or masters any more:
otherwise they will deceive you still, and so you again deceive your puenies,
if they again will trust your word.

Supra. ca. 4
Of like stuff it is that you accuse S. Hierom also for Second marriages, and
say: Pur. 419.
Yea Ieronym ( Ar. 46.
the great adua^cer of virginity, and dispraiser of marriage) was almost fallen
into the heresy of Tertullia^ in condemning second marriages. You say but
almost, and yt also without any testimony either alleged or quoted. Bylike you
never read S. Hieroms, Apology pro libris aduer. Ioui. where at large he
defends him self against all such cauils of his enemies. Amongst much more,
thus he says there: Non damno digamos, prope ^
imo nec trigamos, etc. I do not condemn them that are twisemaried, no not
thrisemaried, also (if it may be said) eightmaried. Read that book from the
beginning, and stand out (if you can) that very countenance only of this most
grave and singular doctor, wherewith he speaks to his backbiters, saying: An
ego rudis in Scripturis, etc. O belike I was altogether ignorant in the
Scriptures, and began then first to read the holy books: and therefore was not
able in my writing to walk straight between virginity and marriage: but whiles
I exalted virginity against Iouinian, I condemned marriage with Marcion and
Manicheus.

And yet so bold you be with him, behind his back as you think, that you lay
unto him again other two such perilous assertions* such erroneous and
heretical absurdities, Ar. 46.
as no young scholar of divinity would fall into, To destroy the humanity of
Christ, and, To give divinity under the Martyrs. To report the truth,
Vigilantius the heretic did say, against praying to Saints, Hier. ad Vigil. 2
That the souls of the Apostles and Martyrs can not be present at their
sepulchers, and where else they would. This does S. Hierom prove to be absurd
and against the Scripture: considering that The devils gadde over all the
world, and with marvelous celeritie are present every where. And the
Apocalipse says of the Saints, Apoc. 1^
They follow the Lamb whither soever he goes. Of which place S. Hierome
gathers thus: Si agnus vbique, etc. If the Lamb be every where, Ergo, also
these that are with the Lamb, must be believed to be euerywhere. Not meaning
in personal presence every where at once, for so much needs not to the
Invocation of Saints: but of such power they be that they hear their suitors
in all places at once, and can be personally present to heal and help whom
they will: even as the Lamb (that is Christ according to his humanity, as
your self confess, and as throughout that book the word is used) hears
his suitors in all places at once, and in personal presence assisted S.
Stephen, Act. 7.
and whomsoever else he will: I say according also to his humanity, as in that
respect likewise he said: Mat. 2.^
All power is given to me in heaven and in earth. And therefore you shall never
be able in the matter of Invocation of Saints to answer that text, They follow
the Lamb whither soever he goes, having said before that he stood over the
mount Sion, so as Stephen saw him standing: But you must be feign to deny the
Invocation, hearing, assisting of Christ according to his humanity, as much as
you deny the invocation, hearing, and assisting of them that be so with
Christ. S. Hierome is to old a scholar in the Scriptures, or rather to perfect
a master, for you to answer or oppose him.

iiij. Touching praying to the Son, and to the holy Ghost.
If these before be but particular or such other persons as imply not the whole
Church: but yet two most evident examples you have in store against the whole
universal true Church. The first, that the third Council of Carthage (though
a Provincial Synod, yet having the authority of a general Council, because
it was confirmed in a general Council) defined that it is unlawful to pray
to God the son, and God the holy Ghost. Mary this is a great matter in deed,
and incomparably worse, then for Vigilantius or you to say, that it is
unlawful to pray to Christ according to his humanity, or to his Apostles and
Martyrs. But how appears it that they defined so? because they determined,
that al prayers at the Altar should be directed only to the Father, and not to
the Son, Con. Car. 3. ca. 23.
or the holy Ghost. The words of the Council truly reported, are these: Vt
nemo in precibus, etc. That no man in prayers name either the Father for the
Son, or the Son for the Father. For that were to confound the persons,
after the heresy of Sabellius. It follows: And when the Altar is stood at,
let the prayer be directed always to the Father. Now does it follow of this,
that no prayers may be directed to the Son and holy Ghost? Such are his
necessary collections.
or also, that the very prayers at the Altar, may not be directed to them, that
they may not (I say) because for order sake they are appointed to be directed
to the Father?

The Arrians in S. Fulgentius time, above a thousand years ago, Fulgen. ad
Moninum li. 2. quaest. 2. ca. 2.5.
knowing this self same order to have proceeded from the Apostles, and to have
been received and always continued in all Liturgies or Masses throughout all
Christendom, esteemed it amongst their arguments as aperse. But he teaches
the Catholics to answer both those Arrians, and this Protestant. First he
repeateth the argument, speaking to his friend Moninus: Dicis a nonnullis te
interrogatum, etc. Thou say that many have asked thee of the sacrifice of
the body and blood of Christ, which many think to be offered to the Father
only. Also thou say that this argument is as it were the triumph of the
heretics. Then he answers it at large, to our purpose at length he says,
that the Catholics must understand, that all service of any honor and
sacrifice is given of the Catholic Church together both to the Father, and to
the Son, and to the holy Ghost, that is, to the holy Trinity. For though he
that offers, directs the prayer to the person of the Father, this is not
any prejudice to the Son, or to the holy Ghost. He declares it thus, because
The conclusion of the same prayer, for so much as it has the name of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost, shows that there is no difference in the
Trinity. Look in the Canon of the Mass, and you shall more easily perceive
his meaning. The prayer there begins thus, being directed to the Father: Te
igitur clementissime pater, etc. Therefore o most merciful Father, with humble
supplication we beseech thee for Jesus Christ his sake thy son our Lord,
etc. And it is in the end concluded thus: Per ipsum, and cum ipso, and in
ipso, etc. By him, and with him, and in him, is to thee God the Father, in the
unity of the holy Ghost, all honor and glory world without end, Amen.
Whereupon also among his instructions to his friend Petrus Diaconus (which you
allege under the name of S. Augustine, here cap. 10. them. 24. Fulg. (alia^
Aug.) de fi^ de ad Pet. Diac. ca. 19
) being too light in very diverse companies in his pilgrimage to Jerusalem,
he says: Hold most firmly, and in no wise doubt, but to the Son with the
Father and the holy Ghost, they did sacrifice those beasts in the time of the
old Testament: And to him now in the new Testament, with the Father and the
holy Ghost, (cum quibus illi est vna diuinitas, he having one Godhead with
them) the H. Church Catholic over all the world ceasseth not to offer in
faith and charity the sacrifice of bread and wine, etc. Therefore you might as
well have charged Christ him self, for directing so likewise the prayer that
he taught us: Our father, etc.

v. Of ministering the blessed Sacrament to Infantes.
But the other error is (he says) a notable error, and such a practice as
even the Papists them selves will confess to be erroneous. This it was: S.
Augustine, and Pope Innocentius, and all the Catholic Fathers of that time, and
all the Western Church, yea all the Church, excepting none but only the
Pelagians: ministered the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood to Infantes, yea
and thought it as necessary for them as Baptism, to wit, that they must
receive it, or else they should be damned. And will not D. Allen deny this, will
the Papists them selves confess it? for so you say boldly, but in your
boldness you open withal your wilful ignorance. Fulke never read the Council
of Trent.
Who would think it, if your self did not by this confess it, that you never
read the Council of Trent? And what a presumption is this, for you to preach,
yea and to write against the doctrine of the Catholic Church, nothing
regarding either what it is, or how it is explicated, defended, defined, by
occasion of your heresies, of the Catholic Bishops in their General Council:
As if an Arrian doctor should never have seen the Council of Nice. Well, our
country men may perceive by this, what blind guides they have of you* Read
the Council of Trent (I exhort both you and all other that can) specially that
half of it which is of doctrine, and you will either embrace it, as it is most
worthy, and as I pray God to give you the grace: or at leastwise you shall
better know thereby what it is that you must confute, where now most of you do
commonly fight only with your own shadows, either of ignorance, or (which is
worse) of wilfulnes, not knowing what in deed we teach.

There (to our present purpose) you shall find the said Council, after that it
has said, Trid. Con. Se. 21. ca. 4.
That Infantes lacking the use of reason, are by no necessity bound to the
sacramental receiving of the Eucharist, to declare moreover, and say: Neque
ideo damnanda est antiquitas, etc. Neither for all that is antiquity to be
condemned, if it practiced that manner sometime in some places: For as those
most holy Fathers had pro illius temporis ratione, answerable to that time, sui
facti probabilem causam, a reasonable cause of their so doing: so verily that
they did it not for any necessity to salvation, without controversy it must
be believed. This declaration of the Council may satisfy not only all
Catholics, to whom it is the declaration of the Holy Ghost him self, but also
any other reasonable man, to whom it can not possibly be less then the
declaration of many most learned and most discrete men, which knew well what
they said, and that they could not be therein disproued. In so much that
Kemnitius the Lutheran Protestant not so much as once touches the Council for
this, though he write of purpose against the Council.

Yet for more satisfaction of all men, I say further to open the case
particularly: The heresy of the Pelagians was, that Man or Freewill of man, is
still, notwithstanding the fall of Adam, See A^ ad quo haer. 88 lagian^
sufficient of his own natural strength, without Christ or the grace of
Christ, to salvation: And so consequently they said, children to be borne in
innocence, and not in sin. The Catholics to prove the contrary of
children, alleged the necessity of their Baptism, confirming it by that
Scripture, Except one be regenerate of water, non potest introire in Regnum
Dei, he can not enter into the kingdom of God. Joan. 3
The Pelagians seeing so plain a text, confessed they Original sin? No,
heretical pertinacie would not let them: but a strange shifte they had. They
granted upon this text, that children unbaptized should not in deed come into
the kingdom of God, for lack of Baptism: but yet for their natural
innocence without Christ, they should have life everlasting in a certain
other place out of the kingdom of God. The Catholics replied against that
vain shift, and alleged this text: Joan. 6
Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, non
habebitis vitam in vobis, you shall not have life in you. Who now would accuse
those Fathers of error? Yea who would not admire in them such readiness to
replye so properly to the purpose? or let any man stand up, and say, that the
Pelagians are not by this confuted: and their children excluded, as before from
the kingdom of God, so now also from life, and so left in death, and therefore
in sin, and therefore again not innocent, and all this for lack of the
Grace of Christ in Baptism? But now putting the case, that a child were
baptized, and then immediately died before he received sacramentally the
Eucharist, who reading innumerable places of those fathers concerning the force
of Baptism, sees not that they give to such a child remission of sins, and
therefore also, liuerie from death, and therefore again life everlasting and
the kingdom of God? Or let any man bring me one place of those Doctors,
speaking to this case, (of a child I say baptized but not communicated,) and
holding the contrary. For between them and the Pelagians that was not the
case, nor the question as I have showed, but they brought in the Eucharist
only to prove that Baptism is necessary to the everlasting life of children.

All which by this one place of S. Augustines will be evident: even for your
own purpose also it is plainer then ye two places that your self allege:
Augu. De pec. mer. and rem. li. 1. ca. 20.
If a child (says Augustine) having received baptism depart out of this life,
soluto reatu cui originaliter erat obnaxius, etc. Seeing the guilt is loosed to
the which he was bond by birth, he shall be perfect in that light, which with
the presence of the Creator does lighten such as are justified. Peccata enim
sola separant inter Deu^ and homines, for nothing but sins makes separation
between God and men, and sins are loosed by the grace of Christ. Then a little
after, of ye Pelagia^s he says: They would give to children unbaptized
salvation and life everlasting, for cause of their innocence, but shut them
from the kingdom of heaven, because they are not Baptized. For they have
forsooth a starting and a lurking hole, because our Lord said not, If one be
not regenerate of water and the spirit, non habebit vitam, he shall not have
life: but he said, non intrabit in Regnum Dei, he shall not enter into the
kingdom of God. Nam si illud dixisset, for if he had said that, ( quoth they)
it had been so plain that no doubt could have risen thereof. How then does S.
Augustine join issue with them hereupon? Auferatur ergo iam dubitatio, etc.
Say you so? Now then away with doubting, let us hear our Lord, not the
suspicions and conjectures of mortal men. Why? have you a plain word of our
Lords own mouth, for the necessity of Baptism, also to life everlasting?
Dominu^ audiamus, inquam, non quidem hoc de Sacramento lanacri dicentem, Let us
hear our Lord, I say: I grant he speaks it not of the Sacracrament of
Baptism: sed de Sacramento sanctae, etc. but of the Sacrament of his holy
table, quo nemo rite nisi, etc. And yet nevertheless it serves well to our
question of Baptism, because no man comes lawfully to that table unless he
be Baptized. Then he brings forth the place, Except ye eat, etc. you shall
not have life in you. And so he triumphs, saying: What seek we further? what
can they answer to this, if they will not be obstinate? By and by he
declares, though it were said of baptism, Qui non renatus fuerit, He that is
not regenerate, and here it is not said likewise, He that does not eat, but,
If you do not eat, as though he spoke to men of understanding, and not to
Infantes, yet that this place must needs pertain also to Infantes. And so it
is evident, that, although he understand the place of the Sacrament and of
Infantes, yet he brings it not to prove the necessity of that Sacrament to
Infantes, but the necessity of Baptism to Infantes. Marie, perceiving that he
might be mistaken of his Reader, he does commonly, though it needed not against
the Pelagians, insinuate most vigilantly by the way, that in Baptism it
self, they receive also the other Sacrament, not sacramentally, but
spiritually, that is, Augu^ pec. m^ 3. cap.
the effect of the other Sacrament, Quoniam nihil agitur aliud cum paruuli
baptizantur, nisi vt incorporentur Ecclesiae, id est, Christi Corpori
membrisque socientur, Because when Infantes are Baptized, it is for no other
cause, but that they may be incorporated to the Church, that is to say,
joined to the body and members of Christ. See D^ len d^ cha. ^ 31. pa^
It is so therefore with children by Baptism, as it is with older people by an
earnest desire to the Eucharist: for as these have Votum explicitum, an
express desire to it: so they have Votum implicitum a close desire to it, and
that serves them both, to obtain the effect thereof, though not in so great
measure, as if they received it also sacramently. Nevertheless there may be
just causes, to keep it from children generally, as there are just causes to
keep it sometime, yea at Easter also, from some of the older sort.

But if antiquity did not count it necessary for children, at least wise
they gave it (you will say) to children, and that is contrary to, Probet semet
ipsum homo, 1. Co^
let a man examyne him self before he receive it. Why sir? is there any
fear, least children that are Baptized, come to it unworthily, that is, being
in mortal sin? has any adultus by penance a better warrant to presume unto
it, then a child by Baptism? Know you not how S. Augustine and the whole
Church holds, that in Baptism a child repents and believes by others?
eue^ so he there also examineth himself by others. As other repenting, and
other believing, so likewise other examining is not necessary for a child,
though for so great a sacrament it be more convenient. And so both the Church
now does well not to Communicate children, and they also before did not ill, who
did Communicate them, who yet were not so many as Fulke does make them. We
heard erewhile what the Tridentine Fathers said, Falsification by adding.
Aliquando in quibusdam locis, that manner was sometime in some places.

The third part. Concerning the errors that he lays to the Church of later
times, and not of old.
And thus much of the second sort of errors, laid by you to the ancient true
Church, and not also to the Church of these later times, which you take not to
be the true Church. Now therefore (as it follows) let us hear and examine
the third and last sort of errors, such as you lay to this Church of later
times, and not also to the primitive Church as you call it, meaning the
first.600. years. Which errors will be so few, and so light (in respect of
those which he has already charged the true Church withal) specialy when they
are duly scanned, Note you that would the true Church.
that it may be both a sure confirmation to the Catholics, and a just motive
to all others to embrace the Church of this time, no less then of old time,
considering that it is no less, yea much more unreprovable of the adversary:
as in deed also of good reason it must so be, because more time has given to
the Holy Ghost and still does give more occasions to define and declare many
points, that were before doubted of by some. Referring them to the.10. Chapter,
Cap. 10. de. 45.46
such errors as he lays to the later Popes personally, because they concern
not the whole Church, as neither the pretensed Arrianisme of Liberius in old
time: Cap. 10. them. 38.
such errors also as he lays to us now, in respect of our shaven beardes,
rounded heads, with other like, taken (as he says) of certain old heretics,
because he him self also counts these but small matters: Therefore (I say)
reserving these to their proper place, we have here no more but four or five
to speak of.

j. Touching the bodies of Angels.
One he reports thus: Ar. 90.
The second Council of Nice determined that Angels and souls of men, had
bodies, were visible, and circumscriptible, and therefore might be painted. And
this it affirms to be the judgment of the Catholic Church. Con. Nice. 2.
Actio. 5. I answer, you mispeport the matter: for it is not the Councels
determination, no nor saying also, but the saying only of Ioannes Bishop of
Thessalonica, rehearsed in the Council amongst many other authors, with this
admonition given after it to the Council by Tharasius Bishop of
Constantinople, that they consider hereby the madness of them that overthrew the
Images of our Lord and of his undefiled mother, seeing this holy father does
show, that Angels also may be painted. And touching Ioannes him self, his
error is not so great as your ignorance makes it, saying: If this be not to
induce an error, to make men believe that Angels and spirits have bodies
visible and circumscriptible, there was never any error since the world began.
Soft man, you go to far, other manner of errors (you may remember) have been
since the world began, which might not be defended, as he defends his, saying
to the Gentill (with whom he there talks) of Angels, ipsa Catholica Ecclesia
sic sentit, The Catholic Church so thinks, (quibus and animas nostras
adiungo, To who^ I join also our souls) that they are pardie intellectual,
Heb. 1 of psa
but not altogether vnbodily and invisible, as you Gentiles do say, but of a
thin, and ayrie, or fiery body, as it is written, His Angels he makes
spirits, and his ministers burning fire. And by the Catholic Church what he
means, he straight declares, saying: So thought And so P^ must put (...)
rather to errors of primitiu^ Church.
many of the holy fathers, we know, as Basilius, Athanasius, Methodius, and
they that hold with them, qui stant ab illis: signifying that some other
Catholics held otherwise. Aug. ^ cap. 5
And not only S. Augustine numbreth it amongst the things, That without sin a
man may be ignorant of, and therefore need not cum discrimine, with peril to
be affirmed, or denied, or defined: but also to this day no such determination
or declaration of the question is made, (as the The in q. d moni.
best also do grant) to condemn the assertion as heretical, though Co^ sub
I^ cap. 1* ^
sufficient to count it now temerarious and erroneous.

ij. Touching the Popes superiority over the Council.
But the next error of our Church, is (I trow) unanswerable, being such a one
also, as not only shows us to err, but moreover depriueth us of al certentie
of truth. Mary that in deed must be seen unto, as you tell us, saying, that
we have need to lay our heads together about it. Ar. 63.85.
And this it is: Your Canonistes and Divines (he says) be not agreed about the
chiefest articles of your Religion, that is, 1 Whether the Pope be above the
Council, or the Council above the Pope. 2 Whether the Pope may err and not
the Council, or whether the Council may err and not the Pope. And what then?
These two, The Popes determination, and the Councels determination, being the
rules of truth in your religion, and not agreed upon: how can any truth be
certain in your Church? Again by and by after: You Papists, some holding of
the Pope, and some of the Council, as rules of truth, can have no ground nor
certentie of truth. Therefore if you would have me, or any man to be of your
belief, first determine how I shall know when I am in a right belief. And
that be all which troubles you, me thinks I should be able to satisfy you
or any other reasonable man as you are, if I say, that you may know, (and that
by the consent of both these parties) that you are in a right belief, when you
hold those determinations, that without controversy are jointly the
determinations both of the Pope and of the Council together, as the
determinations of the Council of Trent, and of all other Councels without
controversy confirmed by the Pope. Other Councels that are certain not to be
confirmed by him, or also not certain to be confirmed by him, no man will bind
you to believe them, or at the least not before it be certain, and so are you
easily answered, though it be supposed the matter to be so uncertain amongst
us as you make it. But now how much more, if it be not so? For how do you prove
this disagreement: The Council of Ferraria and Florence, determined, That the
Pope was above the Council, and that the Council might err. And Eugenius
quartus, that gathered the Council of Ferraria and Florence, was of the same
judgment. All this I grant. Now what have you for the other side? The
Councels of Constance and Basil, determined, That the Council was above the
Pope, and that the Pope may err. Let this also be granted. And Martinus
quintus the Pope, chosen by the Council of Constance, was of the same
judgment. Nay sir, who there, that you prove not, nor never shall prove: but
only, that Sess. v^ Con. Co^^
Martinus quintus, at the petition of the Polonian Ambassador, confirmed those
determinations alone of the Council of Constance, which were against the
errors of Wiclefe, Hus, and Hierome of Prage. And that Sess. 4 Con. Ba^
Nicolaus quintus, to avoid much confusion, ratified the collations of
Benefices and such like things done in the Council of Basil. And that Sess.
16 Con. Ba^
Eugenius quartus did no more but declare, that from the beginning to a
certain time the same of Basil was Legitimum Concilium, a lawful Council,
and lawfully continuated. But otherwise, as concerning the determinations and
decrees of it, neither Eugenius, nor he that Are. 91*
you name, to wit, Nicolaus, confirmed it, yea Leo decimus afterward in his
Sess. (...)
Lateran Council most expressly rejected it, comparing it to the second
Ephesine Synod commonly called Lestrice, which was repealed afterward by
commandment of Pope Leo the first, in the Council of Chalcedon. Go now, and
say still in your vain spirit of childish insultation: Gentle master N.
reconcile me these together: This triu^ wants ^^thing but (...) victory.
because it is a case, that may trouble a man's conscience that would believe
your Church, and if he have any wit, restrain him for ever coming into your
Church. If you can not untie this knot, nor wind your self out of this maze,
etc. So insoluble forsooth are your arguments against the Church of God.

iij. Touching the Constance Council presumption.
But the third error (I trow) will stick faster by us, because it is amongst
those determinations of the Council of Constance which were made against the
foresaid Heretics, which I have confessed to be confirmed also by the Pope.
And this it is in Fulke his own words: Pur. 4.
It is horrible presumption, that any man, or multitude of men, should take
upon them authority to define against the word of God: as the Council of
Constance, which decrees in plain words, That notwithstanding Christ
instituted the Sacrament to be received in both kinds, and that the faithful
in the Primitive Church did so receive it, Manifest falsification.
yet the custom of the Church of Rome shall prevail, and whosoever says
contrary, is an heretic, etc. These he printeth in a distinct letter as the
plain words of that Council, Con. Co^st. Sess. 13.
but the words truly reported are otherwise. The Council first tells that
certain temerarious persons not only do communicate the lay people in both
kinds, and after supper, but also obstinately hold that they must be so
communicated. See Augu. ep. 118. ca. 6
Then says the Council, Hinc est, etc. Upon this occasion this Council does
declare, determine, and define, that although Christ did institute after supper
this venerable sacrament ( there is one piece:) And did minister it to his
disciples under both forms of bread and wine, ( there is the other piece:) yet
this notwithstanding, the authority of the sacred Canons, also, the laudable
and approved custom of the Church, has observed, and does observe, that this
same sacrament must not be consecrated after supper, nor received of the
faithful when they have broken their fast, etc. ( there is again for the
first piece:) And likewise, that although this same sacrament were in the
primitive Church received of the faithful under both forms: yet for the
avoiding of certain dangers and scandles, this custom was reasonably brought
in, that they which consecrate, receive it under both, and the layetie only
under the form of bread, etc. (there is again for the second piece.) That
which you report is one thing, and this is an other thing. For you also your
self (I think) will not deny, but that it is a good custom, not to
consecrate nor receive it after supper, although Christ did institute it after
supper. Neither do you therein grant, Christ's institution to be against that
custom. 1 No more does the Council grant, that practice of the primitive
Church to be against the custom of one form. For both are very reasonable,
and therefore both standing well together, not only at diverse times, but also
at one time in diverse places, or of diverse persons. 2 Much less does the
Council grant (as you make it to do) that Christ's institution was against
this custom of one form, 3 adding also such presumptuous words, to say, and
yet the custom of the Church of Rome shall prevail. No such words are there,
read the whole Chapter who will, he shall find to be spoken very reasonably,
very modestly, and every way as may beseem a Council.

iiij. Touching certain false interpretations of Scripture.
To the last error I refer certain outcries that he makes against our
Church, for the false interpretation of certain scriptures.

But first let ye Reader hear D. Allen out of his book of Purgatory: [Marke
well, ( he says) and you shall perceive, Cap. 11. Pur. 14
that the Church of Christ has ever given room to the diversity of men's
wits, the division of graces, and sundry gifts, in exposition of most places
of the whole Testament: with this prouiso always, that no man of singularity
should father any falsehood or untruth upon any text.] And to declare this
doing of the Church, he there alleges that worthy Doctor of the Church S.
Augustine, Au. co^ li. 12. c^ ad. 32. Doc. C^sti. li. 1.36 and li cap. 27
who in two books writes excellently and copiously to this purpose, requiring
principally that in every text a man always shoot at the sense of the
writer, Least by use of missing the way, he be brought to go also the sideway
or the contrary way. But although he miss that sense, if he hit any other
sense, quae fidae rectae non refragatur, that is not repugnant to the right
faith, or, quae aedificandae charitati sit vtilis, that may serve well to the
edifying of charity toward God and our neighbor: that then nihil periculi
est, there is no danger, non perniciose fallitur, he is not harmefully
deceived, nec omnio mentitur, no nor is a liar at all: But rather the writer
him self, Et ipsam sententiam forsitan vidit, peradventure saw even that sense
also, or at the least, the Spirit of God which was in him, foresaw that the
same sense also would come in the Readers way, Imo ut accurreret, quia, etc.
Yea and ordained that it should come in his way, for it also stands on truth.

Now upon this in his article of the Churches erring, Ar. 86.
he offers the Protestants, and says: [Let any man prove unto me, that the
true and only Church of God, may falsely interpret any sentence of holy
Scripture, and I recant.] Fulke hereunto says: This gentle offer must needs
be taken. I will prove unto you, that the Church of Rome has falsely
interpreted diverse sentences of Scripture: and therefore by that which she has
done, it can not be doubted but that she may do it. And for the first he
there brings forth Pope Innocentius with S. Augustine and all the Western
Church at that time, falsely interpreting this Scripture, Supra. ca. 6 pa. 2.
Except ye eat the flesh, etc. Whereunto I have already answered.

For the next, he says: Furthermore, the second Council of Nice, how many
textes of Scripture does it salsely interpret? which it were to tedious to
repeat: yet for example sake, I will rehearse some of them:

God made man to his own image, Genesis 1. therefore we must have Images in the
Church.

No man lights a candle and sets it under a Bushel. Mat. 5. therefore
Images must be set upon the Altars.

As we have heard, so we have seen in the City of our God, Psalm. 48. that is:
God must not be known by only hearing of his word, but also by sight of
Images.

If these be not true interpretations, I report me to you. This is answered
already by y^ which has been said out of S. Augustine. For, to interpret any
text for Ecclesiastical Images, is to interpret it, for the right faith, and
not to interpret it falsely, or to father any falsehood upon it. We need not to
defend in Counsels any more but their definitions: and therefore if they
define, that this text has this sense, as the Council of Trent has done in
some, we defend it accordingly. Otherwise neither ye Council takes upon it to
hit always the very sense of the text. And yet notwithstanding (by S.
Augustine a maiori, in the places above noted) I advise all men, not to be
saucie with Councels, no nor with particular Doctors, lightly judging them, and
saying, that they miss ye right sense: least their saucines have one day sour
sauce. And specially you Sir, if you make not amends in time, look you to
drink of your Master Caluins Cup, Calu. Insti. li. 1. ca. 11.
whose malicious steps you here blindly follow, neglecting to look before
you leaped. For I must tell you yet further, that the Council, for all your
saying, does not so interpret those textes. But only ye little Emperor
Constantinus and his mother Irene in their Epistle to ye Synod, do exhort the
fathers being then gathered, to declare their Synodicall judgment, Action. 1.
as other Synodes before them had done, and so to give forth the world their
light and the light of the Holy ghost. For as much as no man lighting a Candle,
puts it under a bushel, according to our Lords saying, but upon a
Candlestick, that it may give light to all that are in the house. Is not this
application most apt to that text, and even to the intention of our Lord when
he spoke it?

Likewise it is not the Council, but ye Pope Adrianus, which in his Epistle to
the forsaid Emperors says, Acti^
Yea also our Maker and worker God our Lord, after his own Image and likeness
did shape man of the clay, and did lighten him, setting him in free power of
him self. Not citing it to conclude, that therefore we must have Images in the
Church: but to answer Nugas the triflyng objection of the Heretics, who
pretended, the making of an Image to be against the article of one God. Not so,
says the Pope: Nequaquam autem sic statuamus, Let us not be so persuaded. For
all yt we exhibit, in desideriu^ dei Sanctoru^que eius perficitur, is in fine
a great list to God and to his Saints. For (as he there cites the saying of
Stephanus Episcopus Bostrorum) If Adam had been an Image of the devils, yt is
to say, of false or other Gods, undoubtedly he had been to be rejected, and
unworthy to be received: But seeing that he is the Image of God, he is to be
honored, and worthy to be admitted. For even so every Image is holy, that is
made in the name of God, be it an Image of the Angels, or of the Prophets, or
of the Apostles, or of the Martyrs, or of other just persons. Reply now upon
this answer, if it be so unapt, and prosecute the former trifling objection.

Neither again is it the Council, which cites that verse of the Psalm of
hearing and seeing, but a Deacon called Epiphanius, Actio^ tom. 1.
reads to the Council a confutation that he him self (as it seems) made
for Images against the book of the Image breakers Synod: and therein having
showed, that the tradition of the Church always used to paint Christ's life,
as well as to read ye Gospel of it: he descanteth by and by thereon, both out
of true Philosophy, how that reading, by the ear, and painting, by ye eye,
engender in the mind Vnam cognitionem, qua ad recordationem reru^ gestarum
peruenitur, One knowing, whereby to come in remembrance of the acts them
selves* and also out of divine scripture Can^
where ye bride desires to see the face of her bridegroom, and not only to
hear his voice: where also we sing out of the Psa^
Psalm, As we have heard, so also have we seen. To this purpose he cites
those texts, not to show how God must be known, as you pretend, but, About the
story of Christ's Manhood and merciful acts thereof: neither to prove
immediately, that the said story must be painted, but to declare, that whereas
it must be remembered, the Church therefore has done conveniently always both
to read it and to paint it, because both these together tend to one
remembrance. What is here for Momus to carpe or cavil at?

Let us see what more he has of this sort, for false interpretation of
Scripture. Beside these, I will bring you (says he) a sentence of holy
Scripture, not only falsely interpreted in sense, but also falsified in
words, and concerning not a small matter, but even one of the chief articles
of our faith. This ensample shall be a knocker I trow, and without all
redemption, manifestly against some article of faith. Let us hear it then: It
is written in the.10. Chapter of the Gospel after S. John, the.29. verse. My
father which gave them unto me (speaking of his sheep) is greater then all.
Cap. 2.
This sentence has the Council of Laterane, holden under Pope Innocent the
third (where were present 70. Metropolitanes, 400. Bishops, 12. Abbates, and,
800. Priors conuentualles, in all.1300. Prelates) falsified in words, after
this manner, Pater quod dedit mihi, maius est omnibus, that is, That which the
father has given me, is greater then all. This sentence they allege, to
prove, that God the father begetting his Son from everlasting, gave his own
substance unto him. Why? is that to prove a falsehood, or the truth? your
self seem to have confessed, or no doubt you will confess, that it is to
prove the truth: And yet what a do you make about it? for you say again: Go
your ways now and persuade us, that your Church can not interpret any
sentence of the Scripture falsely, when the Laterane Council, which is your
represented Church, has thus both falsified, and falsely interpreted this
Scripture. And again: Persuade men, that they may safely lean to the
interpretation of your Church, when among a thousand and three hundred
Prelates, gathered Canonically in a Council, not one was found that could
epsy such gross abusing of the word of God, but let it pass in a Canon,
under the name of the whole Council. And yet once again: Persuade men, that
in all controversies, and condemning of errors they must be revealed by the
determination of your Church, when the Fathers of the Laterane Council, can
not confute the error of Ioachim Abbot, concerning the divinity of Christ, but
by falsifying and false interpreting of Scripture. By this we may, I think,
easily persuade the Reader, that if you had in deed any matter against our
Church, you would both let us hear it, and also never have done with it. Why
man? here is no false determination any way, nor no false interpretation, in D.
Allens sense, and therefore also here is nothing to the purpose. Yea I add
moreover, here is no false interpretation also in your own sense, that is to
say, no unapt interpretation, as your self also will grant, supposing once
the text to be as the Council alleges it. And therefore, of your two crimes,
you must strike out the one, to wit, false or unapt interpretation, and then
all is about the other, wherein you say no less then four times, that the
Council has falsified the words of that text. And what reason, yea what
color have you for that? Is it not in the vulgar Latin translation verbatim as
the Council alleges it? And so is the Council cleared of that crime also.
Will you now charge your copy, and frame your accusation anew against the
translation, as differing from the original, that is, from the Greek? But before
you do so, take my counsel with you, and be sure first that the Greek is so
as you say. For some Greek copies, Cyr. ^ Joan. Au. i^ 10. tr^ Hila. li. 7. p^
medi^ Amb^ Spi. S^ li. 3. c^
of ancient also had even as we have: as namely the copy which S. Cyrill,
being a Greek Doctor, expounds. And who can doubt, but the copy also of our
most ancient, yea and most authentical Translator, had even as he translated?
Which also the most ancient Latin Doctors, as S. Augustine by name, S.
Ambrose, yea and S. Hilarie too, did read iump as we do. And the Latins vi^
Amb^ Rom^
by reason should in this matter be better witnesses then ye Greeks, specially
seeing such variety among the Greeks also them selves, for as much as the
Arrians never reigned so, nothing like, in the Latin Church, as they did in
the Greek, where they were to cancel, to change, to corrupt, what they would.
And so are you answered fully in every side, nor you only, but Ioachim also him
self, if he would go about to make his vantage as you instruct him.

One text more corrupted by our Church, as he says, and then an end. These be
his words: Ar. 7^
How corrupt that Latin translation is, which they would needs thrust upon
us, is sufficiently known to all learned men, even in such textes as are the
most colorable places for the defense of Popish doctrine. I will give one
example for all: They allege the text 1. Cor. 10. Qui stat, videat ne cadat,
He that stands let him take heed he fall not) against the certainty of
faith. Whereas the Greek has not, He that stands, Stand out of his light
that the child may see.
but, He that thinks he stands, let him take heed he fall not. Why man?
look better in the text. 1. Cor. 10. our translation is there, not as you
charge it, but even as you say the Greek to be: Qui se existimat stare, videat
ne cadat. And yet you infer, saying: Thus the Popish Church can not
altogether excuse her self, from corrupting the text of the Testament: whether
it was of fraud, or of ignorance, or of negligence, the Lord knows.

This is your goodly substantial stuff that you have against the Popish
Church: which may seem you well amongst the blind, that will needs follow
such blind guides. But us that have eyes, how can you alienate from it with
such gear? yea could you more confirm us in our liking of it, then after this
sort to bewray your selves, that you have no matter, no substance, yea no
shadow of any thing, against it? Well, in the name of God bethink your selves
in time, and humble your selves to your loving Mother, this one only Church of
God. In old time it was the true Church, as your self confess, and therefore
if you had lived then, you would not have spurned against it, you would have
been a good child of it, yea also though you thought it to err. How much
more, considering now you see that it erred not, as you thought it did? Prove
therefore that your heart means, as your tongue speaks: Prove it (I say) by
yielding to the same Church now, which you see now no less, yea much more
cleared from all errors, in this answer to each error that you have charged it
withal. Or at leastwise

The seventh Chapter. That he has no other shift against our manifold
Evidences (so clear they be) but the name of Only Scripture, as well about each
controversy, as also about the meaning of Scripture it self: And how timorous
he makes us, and how bold he bears him self hereupon.
WHat shameful confessions he has been feign to make against his own side,
and for our side, it has here many ways in sundry chapters appeared already.
But the same will now again appear much more clearly, if in this Chapter we
run over the common Evidences of Christian truth, out of which I framed my
declaration in my books of Motives and Demaundes, and consider that he is
feign to confess them al to be against him, and therefore to take exception
against them, and say, that neither they, nor any thing else that can be brought
forth, is good evidence in such suites, but Scripture alone, and such
Scripture also as is so plain and manifest for the matter, that it can not by
any subtlety be avoided of the adversary. For he knows well pardy, that we
bring forth not other evidences alone, but Scripture also with them. But the
others he sees to be so plain, that there is no remedy unless they be
cancelled. Mary from our Scriptures he has an evasion, as he thinks, to
wrangle and say that they be not plain and evident for us, but so that he can
wrest the^ to an other meaning.

The first part. How he excepteth by Only Scripture, against all other
Evidences in the controversies that are between us.
j. Against the rule to know heresy, etc.
Well then, let us hear him speak in his own words: and first, how he makes
his exception, being charged many ways with the crime of heresy. Notable it
is, both to the confirmation of the Catholic, and also to the conversion of
the Heretic, to behold how the more that he fluttereth to get out, the more
he wrappeth him self in the lime.

Ar. 44. First Authors. As in my fourth demand. old heresies demand xxxviij.
Whereas you brag (says he to D. Allen) to note unto us every one of our
Capitaines, by their names, and the several errors that they taught, and the
time and year when they arose against the former received truth: Except you
note unto us the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, and Christ him
self, you shall never be able to perform that you promise. For we teach
nothing but the eternal truth of God. Wherefore we refuse not to be counted
heretics, if you can prove that we hold any one article of faith contrary to
the Scripture. And immediately: You may perchance note the names of them, that
preaching the truth of our doctrine against your received errors, were
accounted of the world (so he terms them whom he him self confesses to
have been the true Church) for heretics. But you must prove that their
opinions are contrary to the word of God, or else all your labor is in
vain. Supra page 10.
And for example: (more store the Reader may see here in the third Chapter,) I
will not dissemble, (says he) Aerius taught that prayer for the dead was
unprofitable, as witnesses both Epiphanius and Augustinus: which they account
for an error. But neither of them both reproves it by the Scripture. Pur. 416.
And the same again in another place: Now at the length comes the author of
this heresy by the testimony of Epiphanius and Augustine. But neither of them
confuteth it by the Scriptures. Pur. 426.
And in an other place, thus boldly: For our part it is sufficient, that we
know God in his holy word to be the first founder of our doctrine, and
therefore that they lie blasphemously, which would make any heretic the author
of it. And thereupon he concludes, forsooth with great honesty, saying:
Wherefore, Ar. 44.
if Aerius had not been an Arrian, this opinion could not have made him an
heretic. Where, to pass that blasphemy, only this I say, August. ad quoduu.
in praef. and in epilogo.
that he seems not to know the purpose of S. Augustine in that book De
haeresibus ad quoduultdeum, which he says was likewise the purpose of
Epiphanius, not to confute, but only to report the heresies that had been
before his time, and that not without great profit to the Reader, Cum scire
sufficiat, etc. because it is enough only to know, that the Catholic Churches
judgment is against these, and that no man must receive into his belief any
one of these. And again: Multum adiuuat cor fidele, etc. It greatly helps
the faithful heart* only to know what must not be believed, although he be
not able to confute it by disputing. Lo then, you faithful hearts, the case
is so clear, Note, ^ seek the this con^ of Fulke^
that the very adversary confesses, both that the same was the true Catholic
Church, and also that it judged Aerius to be an heretic: help your selves
therefore, and make your profit of this confession, assuring your selves upon
the Catholic Doctors lesson, that seeing the Church was against Aerius, the
scripture could not be with him, because one Spirit of truth speaks both in
the Church and in the Scripture. As for Fulke, and all that he here says, you
see it is no other then if Aerius, Iouinianus, or Vigilantius had said unto
you, Ask my fellow whether I be a thief. Naught else it is that he there
again concludes for those three heresiarkes, saying: Thus, Ar 4^
you are not able to name any, which preached any article of our doctrine, but
the same was consonant to the Scripture. Of the same sort also in an other
place: Therefore (M. Allen, or, Pur. 3^
S. Augustine rather) if you will teach your Scholars to keep us at the baye
as heretics, you must not teach them to bark and baule, nothing but the Church
the Church, like tinkers curres, O vvor^ stimatio^ he has Church.
but you must instruct them to open cunningly out of the Scriptures, how our
doctrine is contrary to the truth, and yours agreeable to the same. Again
like one that would appoint his enemy not to invade him with a gunne, because
he knows not how to save him self from the shot of it, but to take some
other weapon, and that of his making, in an other place he says, And
especially in this controversy, Pur. 12
where either party charge other with heresy (howbeit, I trow, his party
charge not so S. Epiphanius, and S. Augustine, though they so charge his
Patriarch Aerius) it had been convenient, that the right definition or
description of an heretic had been first set down, that men might thereby
have learned, who is justly to be burdened with that crime. For an heretic is
he that in the Church, obstinately maintains an opinion, that is contrary
to the doctrine of God contained in the holy Scriptures, which if any of us can
be proved to do, then let us not be spared, An her^ a man in Church (...)
Fulk, F^ a nobis, (...) John. Infra.
but condemned for Heretics. In deed if an Heretic, be a man in the Church,
you are cockesure, and not only you and Aerius, but Arrius, Pelagius, and all
other heretics that ever were: and we rather with S. Augustine, S. Epiphanius,
and such others, in danger. To this place it belongs that again he says:
Pur. 402.
M. Allen gives a special note, that we name not Iouinian, or Vigilantius,
the plain auouchers of our opinions: but rather labor to writh with plain
injury to the Author, some sentence out of Augustine, or Ambrose, or some
other, that opened them selves to the world to believe the contrary: And
thinks we are ashamed of the other. In deed if we depended upon any man's
authority, or that any man or men were the Authors of our faith, we should
be injurious unto them if we did not acknowledge our founders, But seeing God
him self is the Father of that doctrine, which we have received by his holy
word, we are not ashamed of Vigilantius nor Berengarius, when they agree
therewith. Only the Canonical Scriptures are the rule, by which we judge of
all men and their writings, of all doctrine and the teachers thereof. Pur. 409.
Again: And therefore it is but vain bragging, that you promise to seek out
other Fathers of our persuasion, then the Apostles of Christ* by whose holy
writings, we never refuse to be judged. For the Scripture is the only high
way to the truth, with the guidance of Gods spirit. And again: You spend many
words in vain, Pur. 412.
to pro^e, that the first author of an opinion being found, the opinion is
found to be an heresy. It shall be granted with all favor, but so that no
man shall be counted the first author of an opinion that is able to prove his
opinion out of the word of God. And withal, that whosoever is not able to
prove by the word of God, any opinion, that he holds obstinately, though he
have many authors before him, yet he is nevertheless an Though i^ be S.
Augustine him self, and though he hold the foundation here cap. v.
heretic. And so much of their first authors found out by us, as Aerius,
Iouinianus, Vigilantius, and such other old heresiarches, condemned (he
confesses) by the true Church of Christ, but contrary (he says) to the
Scriptures of Christ.

Now on the other side, being urged by D. Allen to find in like manner our
first Authors, or else it will follow, the Apostles to be our authors, Pur. 391.
hear what he says thereunto: Must we find out the authors of your
heresies? nay justify them your selves by the word of God if you can. You
shall not compel us to tell you, where, when, or how your heresy came in. It
chaufeth him, that we show so plain an evidence against his side, and he can
not show the like against us: and therefore he is feign to fly again to his
cold exception of only Scripture, as though to justify our doctrine by the
Apostles, and that so sensibly, were not enough.

But most ridiculous of all it is, to see him come in with this exception,
where D. Allen alleged Tertullia^ for this rule. Pur. 4 Ar. 42
That doctrine (says Fulke) which is first (agreeable to Tertullians rule) is
undoubtedly true, and that which is later, is false. But how shall the first
doctrine be known, but by the word of God, wherein all the doctrine of God is
taught? Tert. (...) praesc.
Tertullian there has an other rule against such heresies as presumed Inserere
se aetati Apostolicae, To say that their founders lived in the Apostles time.
But this our rule he gives against all such as rise any time after, as Aerius,
Luther, Calvin, etc. bidding us then to consider what was taught and believed
immediately before they arose: for ye undoubtedly is the truth, and their later
doctrine is falsehood. Now then how ridiculous is it for Fulke to run from
Tertullians meaning, and yet to pretend that he agrees to Tertullians Rule?

The same rule, with an amplification also, Antiq^ Them.
and in the same meaning, does likewise Vince^tius Lirine^sis give, to wit, If
any Novelty arise at any time, yea and prevail so much afterward in process
of time, as to make an universal corruption, so yt almost no country of
Christendom be free from it, (as this merchant boasts at this day of the
most of Europe, England, Scotland, Ireland, Ar. 3. Infra. Them. (...)
France, Germany, Denmark, Suetia, Bohemia, Polonia, and a great number also
in Spain, and Italy) that then we look unto Antiquity, that is, to the time
before such novelty prevailed, and before it arose: as what was taught and
believed immediately before Luther began these innouations. And therefore
alike ridiculous it is, that he says: We refuse not the rule of Vincentius
Lirinensis, Pur. 3^
concerning Antiquity: so you can prove that it has God to be the Author, the
Prophets, and Apostles. As for witnesses under this antiquity, we pass not
for them. Why man? The rule that you receive, proves it? The Apostles (I say)
to be the Authors of our solemn prayer for the dead in the holy Mass, and of
any other such article, because it has such antiquity as I have now said, and
as Vincentius meant.

And so much, upon the Rule of finding out ye first authors of any doctrine,
and the same therefore to be heretical: or not finding them, and the same
therefore to be Apostolical. Whither is to be referred that Rule also of D.
Allens, that such as commonly by Christian people be named Heretics, Names:
them. 7.8.
always prove in the end to be heretics in deed, notwithstanding their
craking of Gods word. Whereunto Fulkes exception is the self same again,
saying: Ar. 65.
The true Christians at this day being of the Papists (which after a sort are
named Christians) called heretics, and in reproach Protestants and
Caluinistes: in that their faith agrees with the word of God, prove themselves
in deed to be true Christians and no heretics.

ij. Against the Apostles Traditions.
Traditions. Them. 29. Pur. 362.
Now let us hear, how he makes his said exception also against the Traditions
of the Apostles. Thus he speaks: M. Allen refers the institution of Prayer
and Sacrifice for the dead, to the tradition of the Apostles. Of whom will he
be afeard to lie, when he fathereth such a blasphemy upon the Apostles. Soft
man, be good to D. Allen for their sakes that follow. For you your self go
forward in the same place, and say: But who is witness that this is the
tradition of the Apostles? Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine, Ieronym, and a great
many more. This you could not, and therefore do not deny, but come in with your
stale exception, saying: But if it be lawful for me once to pose the Papists,
I would learn why the Lord would not have this doubtless institution,
plainly, or at leastwise obscurely set forth by Matthew, Mark, Luke, or Paul,
which all have set forth the story of the institution of the Sacrament? If it
were not meet at all to be put in writing, why was it disclosed by
Tertullian, Cyprian, Pur. 387.
Augustine, etc? Likewise in an other place: If prayer for the dead was
appointed by the Apostles commandment, why is there never a word thereof in
their writings? If I were disposed to pose you, this question would make you
clawe your poll a hundred times before you could imagine any collourable
answer: for right answer you shall never be able to make. In deed a
doughtie question it is. As though if a Christian can not answer every why of
ye Infidel, our Religion therefore is straight in hazard. Ar. 48.
It may trouble a wise man to answer all the questions that a fool ca^
propound, you say your self. And yet neither you, nor any other Infidel shall
ever find the learned to seek. It is for your religion to be to seek of
answers, because it began but yesterday, and is neither yet thoroughly shaped.
But the Catholic, which is the only Christian Religion, coming of God, and so
many hundred years sithence continuing, has been by our forefathers and the
holy Ghost so sifted to our hands, that the answer is always ready, before the
question be demanded. Briefly therefore S. Augustine one of our Masters and
Doctors in Christ, has taught us, if we be posed about the Churches order in
Baptism, to answer, Au. d^ and op.
that Serie Traditionis scimus, By the course of tradition we know what things
are to be done therein, although they be not expressed in the Scriptures, and
that, for breuities sake. So likewise, being posed about the order of this
other Sacrament, to answer, Quia multum erat, etc. Au. E^ ad Ia^ cap. 6
Because it was much for the Apostle to signify in his Epistle to the
Corinthians the whole order of the action that the universal Church through
all the world observed: therefore having said somewhat of the same Sacrament,
yea and as much as all the Evangelists, by and by he added, And when I come,
1. Cor
I will prescribe the rest of the orders. Vnde intelligi datur ( says S.
Augustine) And thereby we may understand, that whatsoever is not varied in any
variety of vsages, was of his prescribing. This is our answer, and you knew
it partly before. For you say: I know the Papists will fly to those words of
the Apostle, Pur. 3^
The rest I will set in order when I come. And good reason, S. Augustine
teaches us so to do. And what say you to him for it: But that is so manifest
to be spoken of matters of external comelines, (and not of doctrine of the
Sacrament, as Prayers and Sacrifices) that no man which understands what
diatazesthai does signify, can doubt or make any question of it. Be it so, as
you say: But what? have you forgotten the thing whereof you speak? Is it not of
that Solemn prayer for the dead in the celebration of the Sacrifice? That
prayer (we say) is diatazis, one of S. Paul's ordinations: What improper speech
is here? specially S. Augustine saying again in another place: Aug^ ver. ^
Ser. 3
Hoc enim a patribus traditum vniuersa obseruat Ecclesia. This being a
tradition of the Fathers, ( that is, the Apostles) the whole Church observes (
and therefore it is such a thing as nulla morum diuersitate variatur) when they
which are departed in the communion ( or unity) of the body and blood of
Christ, be in their place mentioned at the same Sacrifice, To pray for them,
and to mention that for them also it is offered.

Thus you have a piece of the cause, why the Scriptures contained not the whole
order of celebration of the Sacraments, to wit, for breuities sake. And what
does that or any other cause let other writers to make mention of such things,
when Aerius the heretic compelled them, or any other just occasion was
ministered? You imagine, (and that deceives you) as though the Apostles
purposed to put all in writing. Which if they had, neither so many of them,
That al is not written.
nor one of them so often, would have mentioned one thing. But as the purpose
of the holy Ghost in the books of the Old Testament, was principally, to
foreshew manifoldly Christ and his Church: so in the books of the New
Testament, as in the gospels, Joan. 19. Luke 24.
to show Christ, even to Consummatum est, and Impleri omnia quae scripta sunt
de me. And in the Acts of the Apostles, to show Christ's Church according to
the old predictions, beginning amongst the Jews, and increasing to the
Gentiles, yea and removing with S. Paul from Jerusalem the head of the Jews,
worthily reprobated, and setting in Rome the head of the Gentiles, by mercy
elected. And all this but as it were the first birth of the Church: for
Consummatum est, could not be told by way of a Story, before the end of the
world: though foretold it is (the whole course, I say, of the Church, even to
the glorious consummation thereof) in the Apocalipse. The other Books were
written, specially against the perfidious Jews, and other false Masters of
that time: As likewise in every age afterward, against the several heresies of
each age, we have the Ecclesiastical (I say not, Canonical) writers and
Councels. And therefore, unless any thing belonging to each time, be omitted in
the writings of each time, no marvel at all for the omission of other things,
which there was then no such occasion to express. This I should have reserved
to an other place, but that this insolent Poser might not abide any delay.

Pur. 264.
Now then to go forward with him: I know (says he) the Papists will answer,
that Tradition is of as good credit as the Scripture, 1. These. 2. 2. These. 2.
1. Cor. 11.
and is the word of God unwritten, as well as the Scripture is the word of God
written. And good reason, for the Scripture it self so teaches us. But why
then (says he) do they not observe all things that Tertullian in the same
place affirms to be Tradition? This Why, I have answered in the sixth Chapter.
Supra ^ par. 1. d^ Pur. 36
Moreover he says: Their writings are to us the only true testimony of their
tradition. So were they not to the Thessalonians. For they had of S. Paul,
Traditiones per sermone^ and per epistolam, Pur. 40
Traditions partly by word of mouth, partly by writing. Yea he says further:
When the Apostolic writing can not be showed, it is but the point of an
Heretic to boast of Apostolic tradition. So he says to D. Allen. But to the
old Fathers I hope he will be somewhat better, and content to take only his
exception against them: as where he says: Pur. 39.^
If Tertullian had no ground of his saying, when he affirmed that Oblations for
the dead came from the Apostles, what ground can Augustine have, which was 200.
years further from the Apostles time then he? Again: Pur. 39
Chrysostom can no more prove, that Prayer for the dead came from the
Apostles, then Tertullian can prove that oblation for the dead came from them.
Again: But where he says, Pur. 30 304.
It was decreed by the Apostles that in the celebration of the holy mysteries a
remembrance should be made of them that are departed, He must pardon us of
crediting, because he can not show it out of the Acts and writings of the
Apostles. We must not believe Chrysostom without Scripture, affirming that it
was ordained so by the Apostles. Howbeit sometime he is bolder yet with the
Fathers for auouching this Tradition. He dare not call them heretics for it:
but yet he dares to charge them with doutfulnes and contradiction about it.
For of Chrysostom he says: Pur. 39 Chryso^ Ep. ad ^ Hom. 3
Lo (M. Allen) your own Doctor confesses it is but small help, that can be
procured by prayers, alms, or remembrance of the^ at the celebration of the
holy Mysteries. You will say, that soon after he says, The Apostles that
instituted such memory, knew that much commodity came to the dead. Then see
how soon he forgets himself, when he follows not the rule of holy
scripture. And again: Ar. 39.
Yet did not praying for the dead so prevail in the Primitive Church, that
they durst define, what profit the souls received thereby: for Chrysostom
says: Let us procure them some help, small help truly, but yet let us help
them. Likewise Augustine, Aug. ^ fes. lib. cap. 13.
where he prays for his father and mother, declares how uncertain he was of
the matter. One while he fears the danger of every soul that dies in Adam:
An other while he believes, that they need not his prayer, yet he desires
God to accept the same, and move other men to remember them in their prayers.
Thus it is necessary that they wander, which lean unto men's traditions
without the word of God. And in the same place: S. Augustine in his book De
cura pro mortuis agenda, wearieth him self, and in the end can define nothing
in certain, how the Saints in heaven should hear the prayers of men on
earth. Such doubtfulnes they fall into, that leave the word of God, and lean
to traditions. Although he were willing to maintain Invocation of Saints, Pur.
317.
yet he has nothing of certentie out of the word of God, either to persuade
his own conscience, or to satisfy them that moved the doubts unto him. For
S. Augustine De cura, I have answered in the third Chapter. Supra page 12.
In his Confessions he is not uncertain of the matter, as you pretend, but of
the persons need, and that but of his mothers need (not also of his fathers,
as you say) because she was so perfect a woman. Even as our faith also of the
matter is most certain: though of our particular friends state after their
departure, we be uncertain. For concerning the living also, Job. 1.
was Job uncertain of ye profitablenes of Sacrifice, because early in the
morning he used to offer for his children, after they had been feasting
together, Dicebat enim, ne forte peccauerint filij mei, For he said, lest
peradventure my children have sinned? And touching S. Chrysostom, whom you
think so very a child to forget him self so soon, your self in deed a
very child for so thinking: He there speaks first of For such as die
unreconciled.
them, Qui cum peccatis suis hinc abscedunt, Which go hence with their sins,
and says, that they can not be helped after their death. Then he speaks For
Catholics that be rich.
of them, Who are departed in the faith, but yet being rich, they did not
procure by their riches any comfort to their own souls. To these, we that are
their friends, may with our riches and prayers procure some help, but little in
respect of that they might have procured them selves. So says he. He speaks
in such a comparison. Neither is the Apostolic Memento within his comparison,
although it might have been well enough. For although by it come much
commodity, much utility, to the dead: yet nothing so much when it is procured
by their friends, as when it is procured by them selves: specially, because a
man's own works are also meritorious of everlasting reward. so are not his
friends works, they are not meritorious unto him at all, no nor so
satisfactorious of temporal pain, as his own, nothing like.

iij. Against the Churches authority.
And so much of the Apostles and their Traditions. Authority Them. 34. Divine
service, Them. 22. Pur. 264.
You shall now hear him make the same exception against the Churches Practice
and Judgment. But admit (says he) that the Church of God in Tertullians time
used prayers and oblations for the dead. Let us consider upon what ground they
were used. Tertullian himself shall say for me, that the same custom, with
many other which he there rehearses, as coming from the Apostles, has no
ground in the holy Scripture. It is good to take that which is so frankely
given: and more is Tertullian to be commended, that confesses the ground of
his error not to be taken out of the word of God, then they that labor to
wrest the Scriptures to find that which Tertullian confesses is not to be
found in them. You are hasty to take it, but Tertullian does not give it, as I
have plainly showed you in the third Chapter. Supra. pa. 2 diui. 3.


Again, he excepteth against the Churches Practice in her Liturgy or Mass,
and says: We have with more honesty reformed our Liturgy according to the
word of God, then Gregory, Pur. 371.
Basil, Chrysostom, or whosoever were authors of those Liturgies, did leave
the ancient Liturgies that were used in the Church before their time, and
forge them new of their own, contrary to the word of God: we neither refuse
the Latin Church, while it was pure, nor receive the East Church wherein it was
corrupt: But the Scripture is a rule unto us to judge all Churches by. And yet
that we may not think him a coward, he says else where to D. Allen. But to
follow you at the heels (as far as you dare go: Pur. 349.
I will agree with S. Augustines Rule* (quod legem credendi, lex statuit
supplicandi, the order of ye Churches prayer, is ever a plain prescription to
all the faithful what to believe: so says S. Augustine, and so does D Allen
allege it: but because Fulke could not make his flourish with that end forward,
he turns the staff, as though S. Augustine and D. Allen had said:
Falsification by changing.
) that the law of believing, should make a law of praying. And then he
bestirreth him self like a man, and adds of his own: But faith if it be
true, has no other ground but the word of God: Therefore prayer if it proved of
true faith, has no other Rule to frame it by, but the word of God. And by and
by after: Which rule (of only Scripture) if Augustine had diligently followed,
in examining the common error of his time, Of prayer for the dead at that time,
he would not so O videns.
blindly have defended that which by holy Scripture he was not able to
maintain.

And no less bold he is with the Practice commended even in the Canonical
Scripture it self: Seeing this fact of Judas Machabaeus, Pur. 210.
has no commandment in the Law, it is so far of that it is to be drawn
into example, that we may be bold to condemn it for sin and disobedience.

Now concerning the judgment of the Church, he excepteth against it likewise,
Ar. 86.
saying: As for doubts that arise by difficulty of Scripture, or contention
of heresy, they must be resolved and determined, only by Scriptures. For
there is never a^ cause heretike^ make d^^bt of the Church, this heretic will
that no Christian lean unto it.
heresy, but there is as great doubt of the Church, as of the matter in
question. Only the Scripture is the stay of a Christian man's conscience. As
though that heresies never made doubt of ye scriptures also, either of all, or
of some piece, namely your selves now of the Machabees. And expressly against
his own Church he makes the same exception, Ar. 58.
saying: And the Protestants in Europe will also be ruled by their Superiors,
so far as their Superiors are ruled by Gods word. Again, Among the
Protestants, to the Church of Saxony, humbly affected is the Church of
Denmark: to the Church of Heluetia, the Church of France: to the Church of
England, the Church of Scotland: But so, that none of these allow any consent
or submission, but to the truth, which must be tried only by Gods word. With
that but so you will consent, I trow, to Iackstrawe also: and therefore it is a
marvelous humble affection, that your Churches have one to an other. Anno. 1.
Elizab.
Your own Church of England in general Parliament, was then much to blame,
to enact four Rules for condemning of heresy. First, if it were against
Canonical Scripture. Secondly, if it were against ye first.4. General
Councels, or against any one of the^. Thirdly, if against any other general
Counsel also, but ye with your acception, to wit, so far as ye said Council
followed the line of Scripture: and fourthly, simpliciter whatsoever this high
Court of Parliament shall adiudge to be heresy. You notwithstanding have
written, as before. And again: Neither do we require you to believe any one
company of men, Ar. 62.
more then another: but to believe the truth before falsehood, which you must
search in the word of truth. It was belike for this, and much other such
Apocriphall stuff, that your book was kept in so long, and in the end also
feign to come forth without privilege.

Yea he is so peremptory in his exception, Fu^e vvil not believe the Apostles
nor the Angels without Scripture.
ye most absurdly he attributes to ye Apostles themselves without scripture no
more then to Iackstraw, and consequently with scripture as much to Iackstraw as
to ye Apostles. For thus he says speaking of D. Allen: He speaks it because
he believes it. Pur. 24.4. 2. Cor. 4.
He would feign counterfeit his speech like the Apostle: but the ground of his
belief is not, as the Apostles was, the word of God, but the practice of me^,
which though they were never so good, yet they were such as might deceive and
be deceived. Again, Pur. 449. Gal. 1.
where he abuses that which S. Paul speaks to the Galathians of preaching,
and their receiving of it, and turns it as spoken of only Scripture. It
vexes you at the very heart (says he) that we require the authority of the
holy Scriptures, to confirm your doctrine, having a plain commandment out
of the word of God, that, if any man teach otherwise then the word of God
allows, he is to be accursed. As though S. Paul there commanded to accurse
him self, and all the Apostles, and the universal Church of Christ, if they
confirmed not all their doctrine, with express Scriptures, in such manner as
you here require. No Sir, nothing so: Only he accurseth them, which should
preach contrary to that he had preached, and the Galathians had received,
which was (as you see) tradition by mouth, in which manner he taught them and
other Churches all Christian Religion, and therein as one principal point, the
Canon of ye scriptures, both old and new, if at the leastwise any Books of the
new as then were written, which could not be many before the Epistle to the
Galathians, being (as by conference of times it may well be proved) the first
of all S. Paul's Epistles.

And so much of the Churches authority in her Judgments, and Practice, namely
of her divine Service. Whereunto I join, as the principalles in the authority,
first the Counsels, and secondly ye Popes. For to the^ likewise he makes his
exception, Pur. 430. Councels. Them. 27.
saying: Wherefore if any Counsel decree according to the Scriptures, (as the
Counsel of the Apostles did Act. 15. and the Counsel of Nice, with diverse
other,) we receive them with all humility, as the oracles of God. But if any
Council decree contrary to the authority of the Scriptures, (as many did)
without all presumption or pride we may justly reject them. Pur. 194. See
Apostolic. Them. 28.
Then of the other: Yet is not all that Gregory writ, of equal authority
with the word of God: without authority whereof, we believe not an Angel from
heaven, as I have often showed, much less a Bishop of Rome. And not only
against each Pope severally, but also against their whole line and entire
Succession he excepteth in like manner, saying: Succession: Them. 43. A^. 28.
Although we could rehearse in order as many Successions in our Church, as the
Papists boast of in theirs, yet were that nothing to prove it to be the Church
of Christ, which must be tried only by the Scriptures. And a little after: We
require at the Papists hands, that they show them selves to hold the Church,
not by Succession of Bishops, or rehearsing of their names, but only by the
Scriptures. For although we did rehearse innumerable names of Bishops in
orderly Succession on our side, we would not require men to believe us, but
only because we prove the doctrine of our Church by the authority of the
Scriptures. In deed we must acknowledge, Fulke what a frankeling.
that you deal very frankely with us, to renounce so freely such a goodly
evidence, because you can not make so much as any show thereof. For otherwise,
when you have any color of any thing at all, what mountybanke peddler is so
facing, so boasting, so vaunting, as you and your fellows.

iiij. Against the Fathers.
Fathers. Them. 26.
Now after all this I will open his like excepting against the Fathers both in
general, and also expressing diverse of their names, although it has been
opened in part already by other occasions.

And touching the first: true it is that he often braggeth much of the Fathers
which lived in the first Ar. 39. Pu. 30.177 435.370.371.
two hundred, or Pur. 186.247.304.331.357.364.382.
one hundred years, chalenging us to prove our doctrine out of them, and not
out of the later Fathers after them, even with as much reason as he commonly
chalengeth us to prove all out of ye scriptures, utterly without all ground,
and but mere voluntarily, Fulkes two Onelies.
the one, as the other: which ensample therefore is much to be noted. But here
notwithstanding I shall declare, how he excepteth smothly and simply, against
all the Fathers, against all in general, and expressly also saying were they
never so ancient. Wherein how well he agrees with him self I defer to the
eleventh Chapter. And in effect he has already so done, in calling so often
before for Only Scripture. But yet to show it more manifestly, and as it were
the very face it self, thus he says: Pur. 205.
Whatsoever he was, or how long soever it be since he wrote, because it has
not authority in the word of God, I weigh it as the words of a man, whose
credit in divine matters is nothing without the word of God. Again: Pur. 202.
When all authority out of Gods word fails you, whereby you should prove that
the souls departed receive benefit by the merits of the living, you fly to
the authority of men. But man's authority is to weak to carry away so
weighty a matter. Away with men's writings, show me but one Scripture to prove
it. Again: If for these and an hundred such, Pur. 22.
you can show no better warrant then the terms of your fathers, the practice
of your elders, or the authority of mortal men, the curse of God by Esaias,
must needs be turned over unto you. Again: Pur. 58.
Your reasons either be manifest wrestings of the holy Scripture, or else are
builded upon the authority of mortal men. Again: Pur. 386.
We need no shift, M. Allen, for the authority of the Doctors, whom we never
allow for Canonical Scriptures: and therefore we may boldly say, Whatsoever we
find in the^ agreeable to the Scriptures (he means, expressed in the
Scriptures) we receive it with their praise? and whatsoever is disagreable to
the Scriptures, we refuse with their leave. Again: Pur. 363.
Now touching the credit and worthiness of these whom M. Allen so highly
extolleth: as I would not go about to diminish it, if they were to be compared
with us: so when they are As though we opposed the doctors to the Apostles.
opposed against the manifest word of God, and the credit of the holy
Apostles the ministers of the holy Ghost: there is no cause that we should be
carried away with them.

That which he says here (as his Masters taught him) of mortal men, D. Allen
knew aforehand, and forewarned the Reader thereof, where he said: [Melancton,
Pur. 384.
as though he were no man that might err himself, says the Doctors were men.]
And again to see their absurdity, in the same term of mortal men, Mortal
men.
are comprehended also the Apostles them selves: and if they sometime seem to
separate them selves from it, they mean then by the Apostles nothing but the
Scriptures of the Apostles. As Fulke in certain places noted before, and
again where he says to D. Allen: Ar. 59.
You shall never bring us to acknowledge that S. Paul is against us in any
article of our faith, but we agree wholly with him. Nevertheless I know what
you mean, and I will not be afraid to utter it. For as much as immediately
after the Apostles time corruption entered into the Church, you think that we
dare not depend upon any one man's judgment, and therein you are not deceived,
for we must depend only upon Gods word. Even so dealt the unbelievers and the
doubtful and weak with the Apostles in their life time, yea and with Christ
him self: and yet to win such persons, both the Apostles, yea and Christ
himself, condescended to them accordingly. If the Protestants would in like
sort have dealt with him and them, not to have believed them in any thing
without Scripture, the faithful (I think) for all that were not so strait
laced, but believed them upon their own word, not Christ only, but also his
Apostles, because of the spirit of truth that he sent to them, and not to them
only, but also to his Church after them for ever: and therefore they will also
no less at all times believe the said Church for the same spirit, assuring
them selves, that the said spirit agrees still with him self, whersoeuer
and howsoever he speaks, be it in the Scriptures, or be it in the Church, and
in the Church Primitive, or in the Church of later times: and again in the
Pastors of the Primitive Church, as the Apostles, or in the Pastors of the
Church afterward at any time in general Council or otherwise consenting
together.

It is no maruayle after this generality, to see him now except against the
Fathers in particular, naming the times, and the persons. Ar. 60.
as first the times, where he says: The other writers of later years (after
Ireneus and Justinius) we are not afraid to confess that they have some
corruption, whereby you may seem to have color of defense for Invocation of
Saints, prayer for the dead, Pur. ^87.
and diverse Ceremonies. And, Although the custom of praying for the dead be an
ancient error, so that few of the later writers there are, but they show them
selves to be infected therewith, yet they had no ground out of the Scriptures
to warrant their doing. Pur. 262.
Again: But of memories of the dead, and prayers for the dead also, we will not
strive but that they were used before the times of Cyprian and Ambrose: but
without warrant of Gods word or authority of Scriptures, but such as is
pitifully wrested and drawn unto them. Again: Pur. 30.
But it suffices you that your forefathers, more then a thousand years ago,
called the place of suffera^ce, Purgatory. But I pray you what is it called in
the Scripture, either of the old Testament, or the new? Diverse errors be older
then a 1000. years: but age can never make falsehood to be truth, and therefore I
weigh not your It is pride to follovv the fathers and humility to co^demn them.
proud brags worth a straw. Again: And this was a great corruption of those
ancient times, that they did not always weigh what was most agreeable to the
word of God, but if the Gentiles or Heretics had any thing, Pur. 419.
and the rest as above in the third Chapter. And again: Supra. page 9.
Those of the ancient Fathers that agreed with you in any part of your
assertion, notwithstanding many excellent gifts that they had, Pur. 436.
dissented (therein) from manifest truth of the Scriptures.

And so by name likewise he says of certain, as for example: Damascene your
doctor should first have reproved that persuasion by Scripture. Again: Pur.
412. Pur. 60.
The supposall of S. Augustine is set down, which because it is but the
authority of a man, it is not of sufficient weight to bear down the
testimony of Gods word. Again: Pur. 395.
And even the authority of Athanasius without the word of God, is the
authority of man. We count not all his writings for Canonical Scriptures, but
we judge them by the Canonical Scriptures. And again: Pur. 255.256.
Gregory Nissene and Athanasius the Great, There is no cause why we should
believe either of them both in an article of faith without the authority of the
word of God.

The second part. Being told that the question between us is not (as he makes
it) of the Scriptures authority, but of the meaning: how there likewise
against all the Expositors he makes the same exception of Only Scripture,
requiring also Scripture to be expounded by Scripture.
Now after all this froth of words, let us see him come once to the point, and
report him self the substance of our matter. These be his own words: But the
controversy is not (M. Allen faith) of the authority of the Scriptures in
this matter, Pur. 363,
but of the true meaning of them, which it is more like that they (the Doctors)
being such men, then we so far inferior to them, should know. And what says
he thereunto? I answer, says he, and yet not one word there to the question.
Else where he says thereunto, (as I will report anon his words) that also the
meaning of ye Scriptures must be searched out of the Scriptures only. Well
sir, but whencesoeuer and wheresoever it must be searched, who is more like to
find it, the Doctors, or you? and so, neither that which you say in other
places, answers the question. But in this place (read it who list) your
answer is quite and clean from the question, which was, Whether be more like
to know the true meaning of the Scriptures, the Doctors, or you? And yet you
pype up the triumph there and say: Thus have these Heretics no ground of their
heresy: but shift from the word of Scripture to Tradition, from Tradition to
the meaning of Scripture, from the plain meaning of Scripture to the opinions
of men. Yea and he counts him self and his companies happy for such blind
presumption to search the meaning of the Scriptures only out of the Scriptures
without the commentaries of the Doctors, (but not also) I trow, without the
Commentaries of Calvin and such like companions) thus he says: Pur. 407.
And happy be those, which not regarding the streams of waters that run
through the veins of earth, but seeking to the only fountain of heavenly
truth, contained in the holy Scriptures, have certain comfort of salvation.
Pur. 285.
And again to the same purpose: Surely as the Sun is not obscured with the
dust that a Cock casts up when he scrapeth on the dunghill: The Doctors
vvritings a dunghill.
no more is the Son of righteousness, or the light of his holy word,
darkened by all the myste of men's devises, which Allen, or his accomplices can
raise out of the whole heap of superstition and error, to deface the glory of
his Church. The word of the Lord is a light unto our steps, and therefore we
will not walk in the darkness of men's traditions. Our doctrine shall one day be
tried before God, and therefore we make no account how we be judged by man's
day. 1. Cor. 4.
(So properly he utters his presumption in the words that the Apostle clean
contrary did speak in exceeding great fear.) It follows: Your way is your
own way, and not the way of the Lord: and because you take another way unto
salvation then the only right way Jesus Christ, therefore by his own
sentence, you are al thieves and murderers. Has any seen a man so drunken, so
blinded, with pride?

Well then: in the other place, of searching the meaning out of the Scriptures
them selves alone, and neglecting the received Expositors, what says he?
Whether the old Doctors be more like to understand the Scriptures then the
Protestants: Pur. 434.
I have answered before, we will make no comparison with them. Modestly spoken,
a man would think: but what follows? Neither will we challenge the likelihood
to us, neither will we leave it to them. I mary, hold your own we pray you.
And why so? For whether soever we do, we shall be never the more certain of
the truth. You say true, for so much as concerns your selves. For in deed
no certainty of truth, but most certain certainty of error, in your
understanding. But in what so ever the Doctors do agree, who so expounds the
Scripture unto that, shall be ever most certain of the truth (which is enough)
though not always certain of that same very places meaning, as in the sixth
Chapter I declared more at large. Forth now, a Gods name: Supra. cap. 6. par. 2.
But this will we set down as a most certain principle, that no man can
understand the Scriptures, but by the same Spirit by which they were written.
The meaning of some place one may attain unto, which has not that Spirit: but
to understand them always agreeably to the truth, can not be without that same
Spirit. Forth again: What then? shall we arrogate the Spirit as proper to us,
and deny it to them? God forbid. They had their measure of Gods spirit, and so
have we. Hereof arises an objection. How then? is the Spirit of God contrary
to it self, because they and we agree not in all things? He answers, God
forbid. Cyprian and Cornelius were both endued with Gods Spirit, yet they
agreed not both in one interpretation nor judgment of the scripture. Yea Sir,
Cyprian as he was of Cornelius his Spirit, so was he likewise of Cornelius his
judgment, implicit as we term it, though explicit he were of an other, of
an erronius judgment, and that according to his own humane spirit, and not
according to Gods Spirit. As at this day likewise, and always, whenever any
Catholic man of ignorance erreth expressly, yet notwithstanding in effect he
is of the truth with the other Catholics which err not, because he quietly
continues in unity with them, nor does not obstinatly hold his own error
against them. Now whether the case be so between the old Doctors and you,
briefly and manifestly it is declared by this, that neither you at this time
will be reformed by them, nor they in their time would be reformed by your
forefathers, Aerius, Iouinianus, and such like.

But now that you have abrogated the understanding of the Scriptures from Gods
spirit both in the Doctors and in your selves, say on, and tell us your
advise: What then? there remains but this second principle as certain as
the first, That the Spirit of God has a meaning in the Scriptures, which is
not to be sought out of the Scriptures in the opinions of deceiuable men, but
only in the Scriptures, where is nothing but the spirit of truth. No sir, why?
suppose those men were the Apostles them selves, or any other having the same
spirit of truth that the Apostles first had, but of that enough before:
forth therefore: Therefore that the spirit may declare his own meaning, Ar.
86.
one place of Scripture must be expounded by an other, (for the hard places of
Scripture must be opened by easy places) all other ordinary means and helps,
of wit, learning, knowledge of tongs, diligence in hearing, reading, and
praying, are subordinate, and serving to this search and trial. And is this
way so sure and certain? I mary. For who soever observes this search and
trial most precisely, shall come to the knowledge of the truth most
certainly. And may he not trust an other which has so precisely observed it?
as for example, the Protestants, me thinks, as your self, or M. Calvin,
etc. but I cry you mercy, you meant not them. Well then, may he not trust the
old Fathers therein? A comfortable doctrine for the ignorant, forsooth*
or did not they observe it diligently? No: for who so ever is negligent in
this search and trial, though he have otherwise never so many and excellent
graces and gifts, may easily be deceived, yea (you speak now a great word)
even when he thinks he follows the authority of the Scriptures. Which
(search) if the ancient Fathers had always followed, they should not so
lightly have passed over some things (as to condemn the Protestants in
Aerius and Vigilantius, etc.) and other things so slenderly have maintained,
(as the doctrine of the Papists.)

Well then, I see, all is in a man's own diligence, to trust no man nor men,
but to read the Scriptures, confer the places, and so gather the meaning by
him self: this is your most certain way. I must therefore tell you a little of
our diligence therein, that you may certify us whether it be enough, or no. and
the rather because you exhort our master D. Allen, and say to him: Pur. 9.
Try the rule of the Protestants, and search the word of God in the holy
Scriptures, and then undoubtedly you shall find the truth, and the Church
also that is the pillar of truth. And again, Ar. 62.
Who have the truth, you must search in the word of truth, desiring the
spirit of truth, that you may understand and believe the truth: and so
without doubt you shall come to the knowledge of the truth, and of the Church
of God which is the pillar of truth. So it is then good sir: In this Seminary
of English divines under the government of D. Allen, maintained by his holiness
for the salvation of our country (as he mainteineth the like for Germany
also, for Bohemia, and Students of Polonia, The Popes Seminary for England.
Suetia, Slauonia, Hungaria, etc. yea for the Greeks likewise, yea also for
the Hebrews) we have such exercise in the scriptures, that we read over ye old
Testament, in every three years, twelve times, one of which times has joined
with it an examination by conference from Chapter to Chapter, and from verse to
verse. The new Testament we read over in the same three years, sixteen times,
with a treble examination of the same sort. And not content with those
examinations, we afterward write moreover in paper books, and lay together all the sentences that belong to the controversies of this time, every one in his
place. And without all vanity, to speak one word of my self, after many
years study before after the manner of England (as many of your own side can
bear me witness) I have since then followed this foresaid trade nine years.
This is partly our diligence in the scriptures, besides much other exercise
both in the same and in all the study of divinity. What more diligence would
you have us use? this is the principal, and (as you make it) all in all. All
other helps you count but subordinate and serving unto this. And yet in them
also, I dare say, if you knew us, you would allow us for sufficient at the
least: You may, by the trace of God, ere it be long, have some taste of us
therein, when one of us shall set forth a book to show to the world, that the
Hebrew and Greek textes, in nothing make for you against us, and in very many
things make for us against you much more plainly, then our vulgar Latin text.
Now then, how much more certain of the truth be we, then you, also by your
own rule, because your diligence herein is nothing comparable: but specially,
because together with this rule we use the expositio^s that you renounce, of
the ancient Fathers, who for such conference of places, and all other study
of the Scriptures, were pearlesse.

The third part. What he means by his Only Scripture: and that thereby he
excepteth also against Scripture it self.
Thus have we heard this Protestant call for express Scripture in all things,
yea also in the expounding of Scripture. Now, that he seem not too straight
and rigorous in his exception, he will tell us what he means thereby, as it
were to give us more scope, but in deed (as we shall hear soon after) to shut
us straighter up, and to except also against Scripture it self, unless it be
so plain and evident for us, that by no subteltie of theirs they may avoid it.

Concerning the former, thus he says: When we require express Scripture for
every controversy, we do not require that every thing should be named in
Scripture, but necessarily concluded out of the true meaning of the Scriptures
and purpose of the holy Ghost in them. Then on the other side, he almost
repents himself again for granting so much, and says: And yet we may
say, Pur. 438.
it is a great prejudice against your Purgatory and prayer, that it is not so
much as once named in the Scriptures. Again, If the holy Ghost had ever
allowed Prayer for the dead, he would once at the least have uttered the same
plainly, in holy Canonical Scriptures. Pur. 452.
Canonical he says, to except against the very meaning of it also, which he
sees in the books of the Machabees: rather shall that Canonical Scripture
not be Canonical, for so plainly naming that which the ears of the
Protestants can not abide.

Well, in the other Canonical Scriptures the name is not, and that is a great
prejudice against us. But he will be favorable unto us, a great prejudice shall
not make him give judgment against us, if at least The thing it self be
taught or can be proved by the Scriptures. Yet again he remembers him self,
Pur. 452.
that D. Allen has alleged many Scriptures for that thing, and the old
Fathers likewise before him: and therefore to tie us yet straighter with
another exception, he said here a little before, But we require that every thing
be necessarily concluded out of the true meaning of the Scriptures. And again
he says, speaking of D. Allen: See the confidence of the man, he is sure, Pur.
364.
that if we were examined of our conscience, what trial of this doubt we would
wish, there is none we could name, but his cause might well abide it. Whereunto
he answers, saying: Why M. Allen, we have testified of our conscience long
ago, that the only authority of Gods word written, shall satisfy us, as
well in this as in all other matters. If you were able we should have heard
before this time some sentence of Scripture, to maintain prayer and sacrifice
for the dead. (Why? in the third Chapter here you confessed that you have heard
of him diverse sentences, and not of him alone, Supra. page 19.
but also of the Fathers of the true Church. Yea but now says he, I add my
exception, and say therefore, some sentence) not standing upon voluntary
collection, but either in plain words or necessary conclusion. For there is
nothing that we are bound to know, nothing that we are bound to do, but either
in express words, or in necessary collection (which is as good as express
words) it is set forth in the holy Scriptures. Again, Pur. 452.
All truth may be proved by Scripture, either in plain words, or by
necessary conclusion, which is all one. And again: Pur. 189.
There is For example: your own heresy.
no heresy so absurd, which Satan puts into the head of wicked men, but it
may find some sound of words in so many Books of the holy scriptures, that by
perverse wits may be wrested unto it. But the doctrine of Gods truth and all
articles of our belief, are plainly taught in the Scripture, either by
manifest words, or by necessary conclusion and argument, which by no subtlety
of Satan or his instruments, may be avoided or deluded. And this is the
difference between heresy and truth, when they both appeal to the authority
of Scripture. Which difference as it may be found in all heresies, so in none
more notably, then in this error of Purgatory. Consider what texts of holy
Scripture are alleged against it, rather.
for it, and you shall see they can not bring one, out of which any necessary
argument may be framed to prove their cause, or which has not by learned
interpretors of the old time been otherwise expounded then of their cause.
Pur. 176.
Yea and more then that, The word of God does neither expressly, nor by any
probable collection allow it, but manifestly condemn it. Pur. 185.
Again, He could not with any semely color establish purgatory, by the
authority of the Scripture, the only testimony of Gods word and will
reueiled, and confirmed by his holy Spirit. The Machabees to be even so
confirmed as well as the other books, he can never avoid, and in effect he
grants, as I shall note in the eleventh Chapter amongst his contradictions.
Which is sufficient, I trow, to make at the least a seemly color, and a
probable collection: but in deed also a conclusion so necessary, that he can
never answer it, but by shaking the authority of all the Canonical
Scriptures, in derogating from their confirmation which yet him self does
attribute to the holy Spirit.

The fourth part. What great promises he makes to bring most evident Scripture
against us, and also by Scripture to prove his sense of the Scripture:
Triumphing also before the victory, and saying, that we dare not be tried by
Scripture, but reject the Scriptures. Whereupon a fourefold offer is made unto
him.
Now that we have seen how precise he is with us, to admit law that he so
rigorously prescribes to us, whether his Scriptures be so plain, so manifest,
so evident, that by no sutteltie they can be avoided. But that we shall see in
the next Chapter: no need of sutteltie, I assure you, to avoid or delude them,
so frivolous are his allegations, that with all facility and truth we shall
answer them. Here in the mean time, in the end of this Chapter, I will only
lay forth his great promises aforehande, and so come orderly to the matter.

And to omit, if he should have to do with all the old and new heresies, what
manifest and necessary confutations he would frame against them all and every
one, out of the Scriptures alone, having freely before them renounced al other
probations, according to his former sayings here, that all truth, and, all
articles of our belief are plainly taught in the Scripture, and may be so
proved by Scripture, and that there is nothing that we are bound to know,
nothing that we are bound to do, but it is so set forth in the scriptures: His
great promises.
I will charge him no more but with his promise that he makes of so confuting
us by plain Scriptures, notwithstanding that all other evidences make for us
in such sort as he has already confessed. Thus he says: Pur. 187.
And that which I have to say in confutation of your heresy, shall be no
worse then the very word of God it self, which is better then the consent of
all the world against it. And again: Pur. 30.
I am one of the least of Gods Ministers, yet by his grace and authority of
his holy word, I shall be able to overthrow both this and all other Babilonicall
bulwarks that are cast up by Satan and all his instruments for the defense of
Popish heresy against the truth of God. And neither the mist of men's
inue^tions (which you call the light of Apostolic tradition) shall be able to
darken the truth of the Gospel: nor the errors of mortal men (which you term
the force of Gods truth) shall bear down the authority of Gods holy
spirit. Again: Pur. 12.
We be able to show manifest evidence that our adversaries doctrine is clean
contrary to the Scriptures of God. Again: Ar. 3.
We affirm that the Apostles taught none other faith in stead of true
Christianity, but that which we hold, as we are ready to prove by the word of
God. Again: I can prove by S. Paul's writings, Ar. 59.
that in all articles of faith, he taught the same which we believe. And for
trial of this, because it would require a whole volume, if I should prove
every particular article, wherein we dissent from you Papists: If you will
name an article (in the next Chapter your self shall name ynowe. Yet, if you
will, let it be this: that Antichrist is not one certain person, and that the
Churches fleeing into the wilderness at his coming, is to become invisible to
the world: and that the beginning of that coming and fleing, should be so
soon after Christ's passion: the continuance, so many ages: the end, so long
before Christ's second coming.) wherein we agree not with S. Paul, If I be
not able to prove that we agree with him in the meaning thereof, I will revoke
that article and agree with you therein. Yea and also to prove his own
meaning, and to disprove our meaning, when we both allege Scriptures, he will
seek, as he required of us, to nothing likewise but Scripture it self. For
the meaning of the word (he says) you should believe us rather then the
Papists, because our grounds and proves are better then theirs: or else we
require not to be believed better then they. And there again: If you bring out
a false sense, we believe you not, because we know it to be false, and are
able to prove by the word of God, that it is contrary to the meaning of the
holy Ghost.

His triumphing in lying.
These are his worthy promises. Of which he has been so liberal, belike,
because he knew that we dare not once appear, when Scriptures be alleged by
the Protestants. For such are his words. Pur. 380.
We can show no cause in the world (you say) why we need in any one point of
controversy depart from your Church. Yet M. Allen, this one cause shall serve
for all, because your Church is departed from the truth of Gods word, and dare
not abide the trial thereof, but will sit like a proud dame in a Chair,
Ar. 28.
and control the Scriptures. Again: The Popish Church can by no reason
challenge Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets, seeing she refuses to be tried
by their doctrine uttered in their writings. Again: The spouse of Christ,
hears the voice of Christ, Ar. 99.6.
and is ruled thereby. But the Romish Church will in no wise be ruled Only by
the voice of Christ: therefore she is not the Spouse of Christ.

Where, by his foysting in of the word (Only) in the Minor, we may note the
cause that moves him to say, that our Church refuses the Scriptures: as if
he should say, that we refuse faith, because we refuse only faith: or that any
man refuses his own best evidence, because he will not at the instance of his
adversary renounce all his other evidences, be they never so many, never so
good, never so well tried and so much used by his auncetors, and also most
agreeable, every one of them, to his foresaid best evidence. Ar. 85.


He says moreover, She has nothing less then the true sense of Gods word,
which submits the same to her own judgment. Ar. 107.
Again: The Popish Church so manifestly dissenteth from the word of truth,
that she dare not be judged thereby, but most blasphemously submits the same
to her own judgment. Again, In the Popish Church Gods word is made subject
to men's determinations and authorities. And again, Pur. 219.
By which it is manifest that you do reject the whole authority of all the
Canonical Scriptures: when you affirm that no book of holy Scripture is
Canonical, but so far forth as your Church will allow it. Moreover when
you will not admit any sense of the Scripture, but such as your Church will
allow.

Here are two other causes of the same again: As if he would say, that the
Apostles in their time, or the Church then, Note which is this Popish Church.
submitted and made subject the Scriptures to men, most blasphemously, and
only of their own will, 2. Pet. 3.
because they took upon them to judge of the true sense: and namely S. Peter,
for saying, that the unlearned (him self being but a fisherman) and the
unstable, do misconster S. Paul's Epistles, sicut and caeteras Scripturas, as
also the other Scriptures, to their own damnation. And again, as though the
same Apostles, and the Church after them, manifestly rejected the whole
authority of all the Canonical Scriptures, Canonical.
and did al only of their own will, because they made a Canon or Canons (as
all the laws of the Church are called Canons) whereof the said Scriptures were
and are called Canonical, whereupon himself also counts them as confirmed by
the holy Ghost.

Well, for these goodly causes he is bold to say, that the Church (of which
Christ said generally, If he will not hear the Church, Mat. 18.
count him for an heathen and a publican) refuses and rejects the
Scriptures. And again to D. Allen: Pur. 438.
As for the evident word of God, you shame not to boast of that to be your
trial, which you dare as well eat a faggot as abide the judgment of it, in
any lawful conference or disputation. Your great belwethers and bishops
declared before the whole world in the conference of Westminster, what they
durst abide; when they came to handstrokes. It is a gay matter for such a
chattering Pie, as you are, to make a fond flourish a far off in words, to
please your patrons and exhibitioners: it is an other thing to stand to the
proof in deed. And again to him: Pur. 346.
Where as you wish that Bedes history were made familiar unto all English men,
they were better to consider the word of God and the history of the Acts of
the Apostles: Which if you durst abide the trial thereof, you would exhort men
to read it, at least wise that understand Latin. And if you were as zealous to
set forth the glory of God, as you are to maintain your own traditions, one
or other of you, which have so long found fault with our translations of the
Scriptures, would have taken pains to translate them truly your selves, as
well as to translate Bedes book.

You say the disputation at Westminster Anno 1. Elizab. was before the whole
world, as one that care not what you say, which you declare again in speaking
of D. Allens exhibitioners, and his pleasing of them, a thing whereof you know
nothing, nor (as I think) no body else, unless some body may know that which is
not. He is rather him self the Exhibitioner of our whole country (like an
other Joseph) and might be yours also, if you were happy. How much more justly
then may we say, that the Council of Trent was holden before the whole world?
And what conference will you admit for lawful on our part, when as you
refused to come to that assembly at Trent, being yet so earnestly, so safely,
and so honorably invited thither, as the Safeconduites extant in the Acts of
the Council do witness, together with the very experience also of those few
petites of Germany that came thither? Or what conference shall on your part
be thought iniquous and unjust toward us, when you shame not to extol that
mock conference of Westminster?

A fourefolde offer.
Well, because you challenge us to a disputation, and are suffered to set it
forth in print, hear what I will say unto you: The Council of Trent counted
you their subjects as much as you count us the subjects of England, and
the state there, is of all Catholic Princes granted to be far preeminent.
Do you therefore procure us a safeconduite from the Court in Kings, what I
said to this effect before I knew of this your challenge. See likewise of the
same in my first Demand, which is of old Conference at Carthage betwixt the
Catholics and the Donatistes, about the true Church which the Scriptures
commend unto us: Whereof I shall have occasion to say more in the tenth
Chapter.

If to reject this offer, the Governors by your procurement, or Collatio
Carthaginensis, in such manner as I have briefly required in my said first
Demand.

Or if you dare not do that neither for all your crakes, thirdly I Motives and
Demaundes, then that? And touching a Catholic translation of the Scriptures,
you show your self to know little, God wotteth, what is D. Allens desire and
mind therein. But all men may assure them selves, that any thing lacks
thereunto rather then good will and fervent zeal, specially because we see it
translated already by Catholics into al other languages almost, and because we
know sundry commodities that might ensue thereof, and namely because we lament
to see so many souls to dye in the most wholesome waters, being turned into
deadly bitterness by your Star Absinthin, Apoc. 8.
your blindness withal being such, that leaving both the authentical Greek
of the Septuaginta, which the Apostles and Primitive Church did use, and also
the authentical Latin, which the Church has used so many hundred years, in
some part even from the beginning almost: you have served our country with ye
old Testament of the late obstinate Jews vowelling, dividing, and reading, it
being of it self but one verse in the whole Psalter, and each other particular
book, and only consonantes, and to be read according to the tradition of the
faithful (which tradition we know by our authentical translations) and not of
the incredulous and perfidious.

No, no, whenever we should make (if we were in case and place) a Catholic
translation, and send the copies in, they should be in no less danger of your
searchers and fyres, then our other books have been, and are every day more
and more: but yet that danger should not stay us, if nothing else did: knowing
that such a translation will confound you ten thousand times more then all the
other books have done.

Last of all, if none of my former requests can find place with you, at the
least wise you shall have here in the Chapter following an answer to all your
Scriptures hither unto alleged in both your books, to chaw upon for a while.
And then tell your Reader, when, as you have here renounced all other
evidences, so he shall see that you are no less destitute of Scripture also:
tell him then (I say) blaming D. Allen, Pur. 364.
and saying: And yet he wondreth that we are so blind that we can not see the
clear light of truth. And again in the end of your book, Pur. 458.
In Gods name let the Readers way indifferently, and as they see this point (of
the dead) handled, so let them judge of the rest. The truth is vpholden by
evident testimony of Scripture: the error by custom, practice, and judgment
of men. The truth seeks understanding of the Scriptures, of the spirit of
God in the Scriptures: error, at the mouths of mortal men. Now the^ to these
evident Scriptures, in the name of God, and to your divine understanding of
them.

The eight Chapter. To show his vanity in his foresaid rigorous exacting of
plain Scripture, and great promises to bring plain Scripture, conferring
place with place so evidently. All the Scriptures that he alleges are
examined, and answered.
ALL the Scriptures that he alleges against us throughout his two books, I do
sort and distribute into four parts. The first, concerning the question of
only Scripture: the second, concerning the question of the Church: the third,
concerning the question of Purgatory: the fourth, concerning al other
questions that he mentions.

The first part. Concerning the question of Only Scripture.
And as touching the first: In the last Chapter we saw, how to make exception
against all our other euide^ces, he evermore said, that in all matters Only
evident Scripture must be brought and heard: confessing those other evidences
to be so evident for us, that they can not otherwise be avoided. Now then, this
being his only refuge, how many and how evident Scriptures has he alleged
for it, as you think? Surely in all his first book to D. Allens Articles,
they being altogether our foresaid Evidences, he alleges but one place only:
and not many mo neither in his other book of Purgatory. And what manner of
place also, think you, that it is? specially considering how much he craketh
of it, as where he says: Thus I have declared, Ar. 11.15
etc. that the true Church of Christ has convicted all Heretics, only by the
Scripture. Again, it has been already proved sufficiently, Ar. 16.
that the true Catholic Church which is led only by the word of God, the
only weapon by which heresies are cut down, counting it to be sufficient for
that purpose, has overthrown heresies of all sorts. And again: Doctrine is
to be sought out and tried only by the Scriptures, Ar. 82.
as we have declared at large in the answer to the fourth Article, first
Demand. And once again: Ar. 86.
As for doubts that arise by difficulty of Scripture, or contention of
heresy, they must be resolved and determined, as it is abundauntly declared
before, only by the Scriptures. With that place of Scripture he alleged
certain Fathers, as Hilarious, Basilius, Chrysostom, Saint Augustine, Leo the
first, and the Council of Constantinople the sixte. To whom I must answer in
the next Chapter. Infra page
But he grants pardie, that the Fathers authority is no warrant to him so
to crake: as another where also expressly he says, Pur. 383.
It is not for confirmation of the truth, that we allege the authority of
the Doctors and old Councels. Then must all these crakes be only in respect
of the Scripture that you there alleged. Let us therefore now hear So did
Paul overcome the Jews, Act. 18. that is to say, Ar. 11.
only by the Scripture. That he often disputed against the Jews, proving Jesus
to be Christ, I there find, but that his arguments were none but Scriptures,
I find not. But read you Acts.13. and you shall find, that he used also
other arguments against them, to wit, the testimony of certain men, as of
S. John Baptist, and of his own Disciples, that saw him many days together
after his resurrection, qui vsque nunc sunt testes eius ad plebem, Who to this
day are witnesses for him to the people. Read likewise Act. 4. for the
argument of Miracles, specially where it is said, Hominem quoque videntes
stantem cum eis qui curatus fierat, nihil poterant contradicere, Seeing the man
also standing with Peter and John, whom they had healed, the Governors of the
Jews were quite put to silence. And therefore also if S. Paul had in your
place overcome them only by Scriptures, it would not follow thereof, that no
other arguments are good enough against Jews and Heretics.

Other persuasion (say you) then such as is grounded upon the hearing of Gods
word, Pur. 6.
will never of Christians be counted for true belief, so long as the tenth
Chapter to the Romans remains in the Canon of the Bible. S. Paul there
says, that hearing is presupposed to believing, and again to hearing is
presupposed the word of God. But in what sort, the word of God? only in
writing? does he not there express, that by the word of God he means
preaching, and preaching of such as be Sent? for that which he says in one
place, Hearing is of Gods word, the same he says before, How shall they hear
without preachers? 1. These. 2.
And what is more common in the New Testament, then to call the preaching of
Gods messengers, the word of God? Even as we to this day count it the word of
God, which we hear of the Church of God, either in her Councels, or in her
Doctors, or any other way, for so said God to them, He that hears you, Luc.
10.
hears me.

And so S. Paul said to the Galathians, If any man preach unto Gal. 1.
then that which we have preached unto you, and which you have received, hold
him for accursed He speaks of preaching, and you allege it as spoken of
writing, and of only writing. For thus you say to us: It vexes you at the
very heart, Pur. 449.163.
that we require the authority of the holy Scriptures, to confirm your
doctrine, having a plain commandment out of the word of God, that if any man
teach otherwise then the word of God allows, he is to be accursed. No sir,
it rather rejoices us at the heart, to see that this very same text which you
Falsification by changing.
corrupt, is so plain a warrant to our brethren the Romans accursing your
masters Luther and Calvin, for preaching an other Gospel, Act. 28.
then that which S. Paul preached to the said Romans, and which they
received of him, the Scripture also testifying in other places, Mat. 28. Act.
20. Romans 15.
that S. Paul and the other Apostles taught the Romans and other Churches,
all things: but not likewise that he or they wrote all which they taught:
neither again, that in such things as they wrote, the Churches always should
be required to bring forth their writing, and not otherwise to be credited,
although they alleged their preaching or tradition by word of mouth.

Whereby you perceive that your conclusion follows not, All good works are
taught by the Scriptures: Pur. 410.
it is S Paul's 2. Tim. 3. the holy Scriptures are hable to make the man of God
perfect and prepared to all good works. Suppose this to be S. Paul's saying:
will you conclude thereof, that Timothy himself commending any thing for a
good work, and saying that he had it of S. Paul's own mouth, where he had all
things, should not be credited, but needs he must prove the same by Scripture?
We say, all good works were taught the Church by the Apostles speaking, and
that saying does not take away the Apostles writing. Even so, if all good
works were taught in the Apostles writing, that takes not away such
arguments as are made upon their speaking. As again, if a certain article be
confessed to be taught in S. Paul's Epistles, or also if all Articles (for so
your words pretend here in the last Chapter) will it not suffice for all that,
to prove any article out of some other book of Scripture? What a fond
reasoning is this, that because one evidence proves all, therefore I can not
have any other evidence but that only? And this I say, supposing that S. Paul
had said, as you make him, All good works are taught by the Scriptures, etc.
But now I say further, that he does not say so: but being now at the point of
martyrdom, he exhorts his Disciple not to faint, but to fulfill his office
to the end, as he had done, the office (I say) of an Evangelist or Preacher,
2. Tim. 4.
saying, that although he should now be deprived of his master, yet he had
still the holy Scriptures with him, which be profitable, says he, to teaching
of truth, 2. Tim. 3.
to disprouing of falsehood, to correcting of vices, to instructing in
righteousness, that the man of God (that is, the Evangelist, be perfect, that is
to say, furnished to every good work, meaning thereby those foresaid works of
an Evangelist, as he also there had said, 1. Tim. 3.
he that desires a Bishops office, desires a good work. Now it is one thing,
the Scripture to be profitable to this, and another thing, to be able, or
sufficient unto it. Again it is one thing, the Scripture to be profitable to
every part of preaching, and another thing, the Scripture to teach (expressly)
all good works, in every particular, as Oblations for the dead, (for of that
you speak) and so forth.

Pur. 434.
Moreover you allege these two places, Search the Scriptures, and, Try the
spirits: and these you allege for Only Scripture to be required both in all
questions, and also in exposition of Scripture, declaring thereby, that you
either know not or care not, what nor how you allege. For where our Savior
says to the Jews, John. 5.
Search the Scriptures, for they it are which bear witness of me, in the very
same place he says also unto them, And John did bear witness to the truth.
And again, My works, Who ever alleged Scripture more blindly.
or Miracles, do bear witness of me, that my Father sent me, and that, a
greater witness then John. And again, Also my Father who sent me, he has
given witness of me.

Likewise upon your other place, Try the Spirits, you say, And the Spirits
are not tried but by the Scriptures. So you say, 1. John. 4. Ar. 4.
but your text does not so say: yea the Apostle S. John says there straight
after, By this we know a spirit (or Prophet, or teacher) of truth, and a
spirit of error. Look in the text, man, and see what is that whereof he
says, by this, whether it be by Only Scripture, or by some thing else.
Briefly, Believe not every spirit (says he, but try the spirits whether they
be of God, for then you may be bold to believe them. By this is known a
spirit of God first in one particular, which I pass over, then in general,
after this manner: You my children (you Romans and other Catholics) be of God.
We (Apostles and other Catholic teachers) be of God. And therefore, He that
knows God, hears us: and he that is not of God, does not hear us. By this
we know a spirit of truth, and a spirit of error, or a false Prophet: to
wit, by considering whether he agree with them that are of God, with them that
received and keep the unction or spirit of truth which was sent to the Church
for ever, with them that depart not after any Seducers, but continue in that
which they heard in the beginning, as the Romans do most manifestly, no
Antichrist nor Heretic being able to name the time, the novelty, the Seducer,
that ever they went after, so as Wittenberge, Geneua, England and all other
that we charge with it, have done most notoriously. This is the effect (in
general) of S. John's Epistles.

Again you allege, and say: The word of the Lord is a light Pur. 285.364.
Psalm. 118.18.
Therefore we will not walk in the darkness of men's traditions. Item* The
faithful testimony of Gods word only gives true light unto the eyes, as the
Prophet says. And by and by after you call it, The only authority of Gods
word written. But the Prophet neither has the word only, neither says, that
Gods word is not but in writing, but rather most evidently by Gods word there
he means the preaching of his Apostles, Romans 10.
S. Paul also him self referring that verse of the same Psalm unto them
accordingly, Into all the earth their sound is gone forth, and their words to
the ends of the world. And so you may see, the light of Gods word to be not
only in writing, but also in tradition by mouth.

Pur. 210.
Last of all you allege and say against Judas Machabeus: In the Law not so much
as one pin of the Tabernacle was omitted, lest any thing might be left to the
will of man, to devise in the worship of God. Deuteronomy. 12. ver. 8. and 32.
You shall not do ( says the Lord) what seems good in your own eyes, but
that which I command you, that only shall you do, without adding any thing to
it, or taking away any thing from it. You are very dayntie of your quotations,
in manner none at all in your margin, because you allege so few places, and
commonly omitted in your text also, because you allege your places without
book. This is my conjecture, let the Reader look in the places, as I do quote
them, because for brevity sake I omit many things that were worth the
noting. Well in this place, Moises says not, That only which I do write, but,
That only which I command you. And so our Savior said long after to the Jews
accordingly: Mat. 23.
The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moises chair: and therefore whatsoever they
command you, observe it and do it. As for the Pinnes of the Tabernacle, they
are so mentioned for other causes, as you may see in the Doctors Commentaries,
and not for the cause that you imagine, that is, to leave nothing to any man
afterward in the worship of God, for how say you then by David and Salamon,
who changed not only a pin yea all the pinnes, but also that whole
Tabernacle, building in steed of it, a Temple in Jerusalem, and there
ordeining musical instruments, and many other things, for the worship of God,
that the law did not mention. You always err, because you do not distinguish
between men that have only their own humane spirit, and men that have the
spirit of God, as Moses, the Prophets, the Apostles, and the Catholic Church.

And so having answered al your places, I would your Unlearned Brother to know
of it, him that every year sends out the Newyeres gifts, and what else I know
not, and to tell me now, why I might not in my last Motive call this your
Castle of Only Scripture, Only Scripture.
Your weak and false Castle: Weak, because you have no defense at all for it,
neither of Srripture, as I have here declared, neither of Doctor, as in the
next chapter I will declare. False, because not so much as one word of
Scripture, from the beginning of Genesis to the end of the Apocalipse, makes
for you in any thing, nor against us in any thing, as in this Chapter I do
enough to persuade therein any reasonable man, and therefore it is but a false
sleight of you Heretics, and a mere deception of the simple, when you be
overthrown by Apostolic traditions, by ancient Fathers, and so by many other
our weapons in Christ, as in the last Chapter your self have confessed, to
set a bold face upon it, and vaunte, that yet for all that the Scriptures be
plainelye for you, and plainly against us. In which boldness your impudency
cries even to heaven, when you dare yet vaunt thereof so far, to say, that
the Church of God is feign therefore, to blaspheme the holy Scriptures, seeing
them to make so plainly for you. When you here in the last Chapter, and your
Masters and Scholefelowes commonly in their writings fear not to open your
mouths thus against Gods holy Tabernacle in earth: I that am nothing, and in
very deed nothing, and less then nothing, may not disdain the like opening
at me by the foresaid Unlearned, but contenting me with mine own conscience,
and the conscience of God him self and his Angels, and all his Servants that
know me by my person, or by my writings, being most certain how always in
heart and word I have honored the most holy Scriptures, even as gods own
lively and infallible word, I submit my self with David in an humble and
contrite heart, to all that Semei has or shall utter against me, if
peradventure my Lord God most merciful will accept it to forgeuenes of my
manifold and heinous sins: desiring of him no other revenge, but the parties
conversion and reconciliation to him and his sweet spouse my lieue Mother the
Catholic Church. And so much in this place to that man.

In which place you also, Fellow Fulke, Arg. ab authoritate negative.
may be admonished to look better to your Logic, concerning your argument ab
authoritate negative, that you oppose it no more to our so many arguments ab
authoritate affirmative. I gave you a little before two causes thereof: consider
them well I pray you. All knowledge that Christian men have of heavenly things
(you say, Pur. 449.
to maintain your argument) is grounded upon the authority of Gods word,
meaning the Scripture. Therefore as it is no good Logic, to conclude
negatiuely of one place or book of Scripture, This is not contained in it,
therefore it is not true: So of the whole doctrine of God, wherein all truth
necessary to salvation is contained, the argument is most invincible that
concludes negatiuely thus: All true doctrine is taught in the Scripture,
Purgatory is not taught in the Scripture, therefore Purgatory is no true
doctrine. Letting Purgatory alone till anon, there are two faults, I say, in
this reasoning. One, because the Mayor is false, as to all your textes alleged
for it, I have answered. The other, because although the Mayor were true, yet
can not the argument be opposed to our arguments, as you oppose it in the last
Chapter. You might, if the Mayor were true, labor to the purpose (I grant) in
proving the Minor. But you might not, I say, for all that, make of it an
opposition or exception, when we make arguments out of Traditions, Councels,
Fathers, etc. as in the like I show unto you: I prove a doctrine unto you out
of the Old Testament, you oppose thereunto your negative argument, and say to
me: All true doctrine is taught in the New Testament (for so you do hold, and
must hold) that doctrine is not taught in the New Testament: therefore that
doctrine is no true doctrine. Is this well opposed of you? May not I say to you
notwithstanding, Yea sir, but for all that, what say you to my place alleged
out of the Old Testament? unless you have any thing against the Old Testament
it self. Even so, unless you have any thing directly against Traditions them
selves, Councels, Fathers, and such others, our arguments do prevail, and
you in vain do flee to Only Scripture, although all true doctrine were taught
in Scripture. Now to the second question concerning the Church.

The second part. Concerning the question of the Church.
About the Church, his contradictions are very many and very palpable, as I
will declare in the eleventh Chapter. Here I have to examine, what he alleges
first indefinitely, That the Church may err, That it may be divorced, That it
is a base and contemptible company, That it may, and also should become
invisible: and then by name, That the Protestants have the true Church, or,
That the Papists have it not.

j Of the Church indefinitely.
That the whole Church may err, he alleges and says, According Ar. 86.
Wherefore the whole Church militant consisting of men, which are all liars, may
err altogether. Why do you say, The church militant? Does not the Church
triumphant also consist of men? If therefore all men be liars, why may not they
also err? No doubt, because although all men are liars of them selves, yet
some men may notwithstanding by the gift of God be veraces, true. And so where
you conclude thus upon us: God only is not true, Pur. 451.
for the Pope can not err, you might conclude as well, God only is not true,
for the Apostles can not err.

Again you allege and say: The true and only Church of God Ar. 88.
but that she may be deceived in some things. For her knowledge is imperfect,
and her prophesying is imperfect. 1. Cor. 13. Where you, her, S. Paul says,
our, including him self also in that speech: Ex part enim cognoscimus, etc.
For our knowledge is imperfect, and our prophesying is imperfect, so long as we
be in this life, whether we speak or write. And yet you will not say, I trow,
that S. Paul therefore might be deceived in his writings and Epistles. So
then, the Churches privilege, knowledge, prophesying may be imperfect, and yet
she withal so free from erring, that she may be bold in her determinations to
say, Visum est spiritui sancto and nobis, Act. 15.
It has been thought good of the holy Ghost, and of us.

Again you say, And it is true that S. Augustine says: Even the Ar 88. Pur.
393. Aug. Retra. li. 2. ca. 18.
Forgive us our trespasses. But why so? because the whole Church does err in
her determinations every day? It were ridiculous so to say. Why the^? Propter
quasdam ignorantias and infirmitates membrorum suorum, Because of certain
venial sins of her members, proceeding of ignorance and frayltie, says S.
Augustine. In which members the Apostles also in their time were, and therefore
they also accordingly were taught to say every day, Forgive us our trespasses,
and did say accordingly, Iac 3. 1. Io. 1.
We do all offend in many things. And yet (I trow) they did not err, nor could
err in their Canonical writings, and determinations.

Pur. 224.456.
David transgressed the law of God, to carry the Arc upon a new chariotte,
which should have been borne upon men's shoulders, ^y blindness.
1. Chron. 13. wherein not only David but so many priests and Levites, so good
a Bishop, and the whole General Council of Israel did err. So say you: but
so says not the text, yea it utterly confounds both you, and all these
profane innouations made by your ley heads and Parliamentes. David took
counsel (says the text) with his Tribunes and Centurions, 1. Par. 13. and
1^.
and all his Nobles.He did not so much as consulte, no not with the inferior
sort of the Priests: but only, If you please ( quoth he to his temporal
Lords) and if the motion be of God, let us send to the rest of our brethern
in all the land of Israel, and to the priests and Levites in their Suburbs (
as you would say, the hedge Priests) that they gather unto us, and we fetch
again to us the Ark of God. And so they began in such manner as you
report, until God killed Oza the Leuite, in the procession, and so made David
afraid to carry it any further. But three months after having found his
error, he gathered not only, all Israel into Jerusalem, but also filios
Aaron, Sadoc et Abiathar Sacerdotes, The Successors of Aaron, Sadoc and
Abiathar the ( high) priests, and Leuitas, and the Levites, with the heads of
them, being these six, Vriel, Asaias, Joel, Semeias, Eliel, and Aminadab: These
two Bishops and these six Archedeacons (that I may so term them) he called,
and said unto them: You that are the heads of the Leuiticall families,
prepare your selves together with your brethren, and bring the Arc of our
Lord God of Israel to the place which is dressed for it: least that, as
before, because you were not present, our Lord did smite us, so now also it
happen, for our unlawful doing. A notable ensample for all Princes and for all
nobles, to remember how they have offended, and to amend it accordingly, and
all A maiori, in every respect, above the highest degree.

One more of your places I think good here to examine, though Ar. 86.
The true and only Church of Christ (you say) can never be void of Gods
spirit, and yet she may err from the truth, and be deceived, in some
things: even as there is no true Christian man, that is void of Gods spirit,
for he that has not the spirit of Christ, is none of his, Romans 8. yet may
every true Christian err, and be deceived in some things. This your sophisme
consists in speaking confusely of Gods spirit, as though the gift of it
were always but one, whereas it is one in the whole Church, and another in
every particular true Christian man. For neither do we argue simply of Gods
spirit, but of Gods spirit so as it is the spirit of truth, and of all
truth. Joan. 14.
My Father (says our Comforter, at the instante of his departure) will give
you another Comforter, to remain with you for ever, the Spirit of truth. And
after in the same Sermon: I have yet many things to say unto you, but you can
not now carry them: but when the Spirit of truth comes, he will teach you
all truth. This place (we say) must needs be understood of the whole
Church, 1. Tim. 3.
and of a gift convenient to make her (as she is said to be) the Pillar of
truth: because it is evident, that every one member of the Church by him
self may err, and in that case needs no more but the Spirit of obedience,
to hear her which has such a Spirit or gift that she can not err. And
this is enough to make that no damnation be by erring to them that are in Jesus
Christ, that is, which have his spirit, Romans 8.
so that (says he) they walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, and
namely, in this case, after this spirit of obedience, as I have said. Thus
much by occasion, though my purpose is not here neither to allege places, nor
to defend the alleged, but only to answer the enemies allegations.

The visible Church, Ar 79.
by Idolatry and superstition may separate her self from Christ, and be
refused of him, as God speaks by Esaias to the Church of Jerusalem. Cap. 1. How
is the faithful City become an harlot? It was full of judgment, and justice
lodged therein, but now they are murderers. Thy silver is become dross, and
thy wine is mixed with water. Thy princes are rebellious and companions of
thieves, etc. Even so may he say to the Church of Rome. May he, forsooth? but
whether does he say so unto it? or does the Prophet say that he may? you are
too too ignorant in the Scriptures, if you know not the difference herein
between the Synagoge of the Jews, and the Church of Christ: to wit, that the
Synagoge with her Jerusalem might be and should be divorced: but that the
Church of Christ with her Jerusalem (which is Rome, if you have any sight in
the Acts of the Apostles) should never, nor never might, nor may be divorced,
but contrariwise should begin in the faithful Jews, being a very small
number in respect, and so call in all nations, even Plenitudinem gentium, Romans
11. Mat. 13.
The fulness of al nations, fishing for that purpose in the wide Sea of this
world continually without any intermission, in so much that immediately after
that all Nations or Gentiles be entered in, Omnis Israel saluus fiet, All the
Jews, even their fulness also, shall be Christened in the end of the world.

the pillar of truth) from time to time accursed and commanded us to accurse
all the heresies that have been, yea, and with due animaduersion noted unto us
al errors whatsoever of her own Doctors also, who them selves sometime and in
some things, some of them have erred as men. Therefore against this most
certain and clear truth, what alleges these Heretics for their most fond
and most absurd imagination aforesaid? Divinity without Scripture.
It is the total sum of all their new Divinity: yet no warrant at all have
they for it out of Scripture. Ar. 35.
Many abuses and corruptions (says Fulke) were entered into the Church of
Christ, immediately after the Apostles time, which the devil planted as a
preparatiue for his eldest son Antichrist. But let us hear your Scripture
for it: Ar. 38.
The Scripture tells us (says he) that the mystery of iniquity preparing
for the General, is your vv^rd, no^ S. Paul's.
General defection, and Revelation of Antichrist, wrought even in S. Paul's
time. 2. These. 2. But does the Scripture tell you that it wrought in the Church
of Christ? No word so. It wrought in the Persecutors of the Church of Christ,
and in the sundry Seducers that arose against the doctrine of Christ's Church:
as now it works in your Heresy, being (as it shall appear anon) the very
next and vltima, or at the least penultima, Mystical working, before the
Revelation it self.

Next of all, what have you for this, that the Church of Christ Ar. 8^.
[Let the adversary show, that Christ's only kingdom should become so
contemptible.] You allege certain places for answer, and conclude upon them,
saying: So that the Church in the sight of the world has always been most
base and contemptible, though in the sight of God and his Saints, 1. Cor. 1.
Gal. 6. Romans 1.
most glorious and honorable. Always you say: but your places import not
always. Some of them contain, that her Cross, and her Crucifixus, are
condemned of the world, that is, of the Infidels. But that may be, and yet the
Church not be in their sight a contemptible company. Even as we Christians
contemn the Turks Mahometane Religion, and the old Romans Pagane religion,
(for one of their gods was a goose) yet no man, I trow, will say, they were,
or these are now a base and contemptible company.

An other of your places is this: You shall be hated of all men for my names
sake. Mat. 10.
As though it must needs be always a base and contemptible company, which is
hated of all sorts of men: or even then also, when it is so hated. Does it
seem unto you, that it was of contempt, that the Roman tyrants so persecuted
the Roman Bishops and their Christian flock so vehemently all the first 300.
years? Cyp. epist. 52. n. 3.
Have you not read what S. Cyprian writes of Decius the Emperor, Multo
patientius and tolerabilius audiebat, leuari aduersus se aemulum principem,
quam constitui Romae Dei Sacerdotem, To hear that an Emperor was set up
against him, that sought his Crown, he was much more patient, then that ( in
Fabianus place whom he had martyred) another should be ordained at Rome as the
Priest of God. And therefore, Infestus Sacerdotibus Dei fanda atque infanda
comminabatur, The Tyrant being mad at the Priests of God for that fact,
threatened as the Devil. Which he speaks in exceeding praise of Cornelius,
qui sedit intrepidus Romae, etc. Because he sat boldly at Rome in the priestly
Chair even at that time. Whereby you see in what dread the tyrants stood of
the Church, though they so hated, and so persecuted it. Who ever more hated the
same Priest and the Church with him, then you your selves, who at every word
do blaspheme and call him Antichrist? and yet, I think, you will not say, that
they are, and have been these thousand years, a base and a contemptible
company.

Another place you allege blindly against your self, saying: And S. Paul
bids us look on our calling, 1. Cor. 1.
not many wise men according to the flesh, not many mighty men, and not many
noble men: but God has chosen the foolish things of this world to confound the
wise, and the weak of this world to confound the strong. So was the beginning
of the Church: What? ergo always? Does not your text say, that the wise also
the^ selves, and the strong, at length were confounded, that is to say,
converted? Do you not see, how it follows against you, If the Church were then
a base and contemptible company (as you say) because it had not many wise,
mighty, noble: ergo afterward it was otherwise, when it had gotten in also the
Princes, Kings, and Emperors of ye world, and as Esaias speaks, Esai. 60.
The multitude of the Sea, the fortitude of the Gentiles? Was it then also a
contemptible company? yea or shall it, according to the Scriptures, ever after
be? no verily, not so much as in the time or revelation of Antichrist, whereof I
shall say more anon. In so much that in another place your self also,
alleging to the clean contrary, Ar. 73.
do say: And Esaias declares, when the people should be almost all destroyed,
yet a remnant should be saved, which though it seemed to be small, yet it should
ouerflow and fill all the world with righteousness, Esaias. 10. But this I must
reserve to the Chapter of your gross contradictions.

Pur. 450.
I think, no sober man would: One while, that the universal Church is not
seen at all of men: So we believe (you say) because it is in heaven. Gal. 4.
Why do you say, The universal Church? Is not also every good member of it in
heaven, as the Apostle says, Our conversation is in heaven? Philip 3.
And yet you believe not, I trow, that the Apostle was not seen at all of men.

Another while you say, Ar. 80.
It suffices that the Church be known to Christ the head, As he says, My
sheep hear my voice, and I know them, John. 10. Adding for all that text,
immediately, And to them that be of the members of the same body. If your text
import, that it suffices to be known to the head, why do you iumble in the
members afterward? Chrestes knowing of his sheep, is his loving of them, as
contrariwise to the goats he will say, Mat. 25.
I know you not: Whereupon if it follow not necessarily, forsooth, that the
Church may be invisible, I report me to you.

Another while you allege, that although not alwais, yet at one certain time
it should become invisible, to wit, at the coming of Antichrist. And what
Scriptures have you for that? thus you say: It was prophesied that the Church
should fly into the wilderness, Ar. 27.
that is, be driven out of the sight and knowledge of the wicked. So you
expound that text of your own head. Again, Ar. 77.
If the Church should stand always in the sight of the world, then the
defection which S. Paul speaks of, could not have come, neither should the
Church fly into the wilderness, as was declared to S. John. Substantial
arguments. That defection is your heresy, as I shall straightway declare, and
yet notwithstanding, the Pope and the church stands at this time in the sight
of the world, The Church in the time of Antichrist, both visible and universal.
as it has always done. Yea in the time that is to come, when your great lord
Antichrist shall appear in person, even then also the Church shall stand still in
the sight of the world, as it did in all the former persecutions in the first
300. years. For there shall be preaching al ye time of the persecution, even
1260. days, Apoc. 11.
as the persecution shall last 42. months, which both comes to three years
and a half, and the preaching shall be as general as the persecution, to the^
that sit upon the earth, Apo.. 14.
and upon every nation, and tribe, and language, and people, exhorting the^
mightily, that they fear not ye Beast, nor adore him, but that they fear the
Lord, and give honor to him, because the honor of his judgment is come. As
when it is said again, that the persecutors being in number as the sand of
the sea, Apoc. 2^
shall flow over the wide world, super latitudinem terrae, and so compass the
camp of the faithful, and the beloved City: is it not thereby plainly
signified, that the Church shall at the same time together with her enemies be
universal and super latitudinem terrae? And therefore her flying then into the
wilderness, cannot be understood, as you expound it, that she shall be driven out
of the sight and knowledge of the wicked, but the meaning of it is this, that
she shall then abandon, more then ever before, all worldly pleasures, being
content to be turned out of all she has, and nevertheless sustained by Gods
provision, and fed both in body and soul, during all the time of that
strait necessity, Apoc. 12.
to wit, 1260. days.

ij Namely of their Church, and of ours: by conference of places that are about
Antichrist.
And so having answered all that you allege about the Church indefinitely, I
am now come to that you allege of your Church, and of our Church by name.
Which is nothing in effect, but only your own fond and voluntary applying of
the two textes last rehearsed, whither the spirit of your error moved you.

That neither Antichrist, nor the Apostasy agrees to Bonifacius the third.
Of the Churches fleing into the wilderness.
For so you said in the second Chapter, that the Religion of the Papists came
in, and prevailed An. Dom. 607. when Boniface the third, for a great sum of
money, first obtained of Phocas the Emperor, his Antichristian exaltation,
that the Bishop of Rome should be called and counted the head of all the
Church. And now we shall hear what Scripture warranteth you so to say: Ar 16.
When Antichrist the Pope, in the West, seduced the world with most detestable
heresy, then was fulfilled that which was revealed to S. John in the twelfth
of the Apocalipse, The woman clothed with the sun, which you your self
confess to be the Church, was so persecuted by the Dragon, that she fled
into the wilderness, there to remain Idem etiam, Ar. xxvij. narrovvly
persecuted of the Romish Antichrist for a long season.
a long season. So far printed by you in the letter of the Scripture.

A world to see your bold blindness. You do so apply this prophecy only
because of the Popes Primacie, which yet is a truth of the Gospel, practiced
also notoriously in all ages as well before Bonifacius the third as after him,
(which two points the Reader may see evidently in the Seventh book of M. D.
Saunders Monarchy: yea by your self also confessed before the said
Bonifacius, and the Church the true Church notwithstanding (your words I
reported in the 3. Chapter: Supra. page
) yea moreover your own self do say Articulorum pagina 38, that All nations
never consented to the doctrine of the Papists, for the Greek Church, and
other oriental Churches, never received the Popish Religion, in many chief
points, and especially in acknowledging the Popes authority, clean contrary
to that which both the Scripture and also your self do hold of Antichrist and
of his universal exaltation, as I shall lay your words together in the 11.
Chapter amongst your other gross contradictions. And therefore you can not,
for the Popes authority, so expound this prophecy. As for that Sum of
money, you tell us not what author you follow therein, neither is the thing
material, unless you will condemn your own side also of Antichristianisme,
for their infinite contributions to maintain these Rebellions every where,
which you call your Gospel.

But O Sir, I pray you, I thought, seeing your goodly promises in the last
Chapter, that to find out the meaning of a text of Scripture, you would have
brought us nothing but Scripture, and so clear Scripture, that by no suttletie
it might be avoided. How is it then, that now you bring nothing but your own
conceits.

Yea furthermore, how is it, that to make a show of a text, which you saw,
not to be with you, but plain against you, you corrupt the text? For by your
opinion, Antichrist reigned in the world, and the Church continued in the
wilderness, Ar. 36.79. The time of the Churches being in the wilderness.
the space of 807. years, from the year.607. the time of Bonifacius the third,
to the year 1414. being the time of the Constance Council, and of John Hus
your supposed great Grandfather. All this while (you say) Christ has preserved
her now to bring her out of her secret place in the wilderness, into the open
sight of the world again. And therefore you make the text to say here before,
that being persecuted by the Dragon, she fled into the wilderness, Falsification
most detestable.
there to remain a long season. But the text has the clean contrary, a very
short season, to wit, but three years and a half. These are the words truly
reported, as Catholics are wout to do: And the woman fugiebat, Apoc. 12.
fled into the wilderness, where she had a place prepared of God, that they may
there feed her 1260. days. And the same again a little after: And to the
woman were given two wings of a great Eagle, Vt volaret, that she might fly (
whether this be flying in body, as you say, or in mind, as I say) into the
wilderness unto her place, where she is fed one time, and two times, and half
a time, from the face of the Serpent. Where is now your long season, your 807.
years?

Whether Antichrist should come An. 607. Apoc. 12.
Your folly will again be manifest, if I report the truth of the Dragons
persecution, because you make it to have been in the time of Bonifacius An.
607. But what says the Scripture? First that great Dragon is the old Serpent,
called the Devil and Satan, the Seducer of the whole world. But Christ in
consideration of his passion then at hand, and the conversion of the world
immediately ensuing thereupon, said of him: Now is the judgment of the world:
Joan. 12. Mat. 12.
now shall the prince of this world be expelled. And the same in the
Apocalypse in these most evident words: Apoc. 12.
And he took the Dragon, and he bound him the space of a thousand years, and
he cast him into the bottomless pit, and he shut and sealed upon him, that
he should no more deceive the Nations, or the Gentiles, until the thousand
years were consummate. So expressly to confound you utterly with your impious
Gospel of Caluenisme (who set the loosing of the Dragon, the coming of
Antichrist, his persecution, and the Churches desolation, (which all do go
together) at the year 607.

The time of Antichrists reigning.
It follows as expressly: And after this he must be loosed, modico tempore, for
a little season. And the same again: And when the thousand years be
consummate, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison, and he shall go forth,
and shall seduce the Nations which are upon the four corners of the earth, Gog
and Magog, and shall gather them unto battle, whose number is as the sand of
the sea. And they ascended upon the latitude of the earth, and compassed round
the camp of the Holy ones, and the City beloved. But all in vain, and to
their own destruction: for Fire descended from God out of heaven, and devoured
them: and the devil who seduced them, was cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone, where also the Beast, ( that is, Antichrist) and his notable
falseprophet shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever.

That which the Apocalypse here calls, Consummation.
The consummation of the thousand years, the Gospel (that no man be deceived)
calls it, Consummatione^ seculi, The consummation of the world, Mat. 24. Mar.
13.
and means thereby that Modicum tempus, little season aforesaid. For so the
Apostles asking our Savior, What sign shall there be of thy coming, and the
consummation of the world? He answers and tells them of sundry things which
must be, Sed nondum est finis, but the consummation notwithstanding is not yet.
What then? Mary, This Gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in the
universal world, for witness to all Nations. Et tunc veniet consummatio, and
then shall come the consummation. And in the short season of the consummation,
what shall be? Tribulatio magna, and, Seductio magna: So great a persecution,
and so great a Seducing, that the Elect also would not be saved, but that for
their sakes Breuiabuntur dies illi, Those days shall be shorter, then any man
would think it possible, seeing the Persecutors greatness: only three years
and a half. Statim autem post tribulationem dierum illorum, And straight after
the persecution of those ( short) days, there shall be maruailous alterations
in the heavens, and they shall see the son of man coming in the clouds of
heaven with passing power and majesty. He exhorts also there to the flight
spoken of in the Apocalipse: Cum ergo videritis Abominationem desolationis,
quae dicta est a Daniele propheta, stante^ in loco sancto, The consummation
being now come, you shall see the Abomination of desolation which was spoken of
by Daniel the Prophet, standing in the holy place, vbi non debet, where ( alas)
it should not: Mar. 13.
And before that time, Videte ne turbemini, Look that you be not disquieted.
But when you see this, tunc qui in Iudaea sunt, fugeant ad montes, Then to
prevent the horrible persecution imminent, let all sorts of good people flee,
and with all have flee, not standing to consult, but renouncing at once all
that they have, and committing them selves roundly and wholly to the help of
God from above. Which the Elect then shall do with all alacrity, even as
willing to be martyred, as the Dragon and Antichrist shall be to martyr the^.
And that is it that ye Apocalypse has in these words: And the earth ( the
elect over all the world) did help the woman, when the Serpent did pour out of
his mouth, after her now fleing into the wilderness, water like a flood, and the
earth opened his mouth, and supped up the flood.

Abomination.
The Abomination of Desolation standing in the Holy place, and that to be seen
so universally, which is here given for the watchworde to the woman to flee in
such manner, the same of S. Paul is said to be Antichrist him self, so proud
above all measure, 2. These. 2.
Ita vt in templo Dei sedeat, That he will sit in the temple of God, setting
out him self as if he were God. To know what Daniel means by Desolation of
the Temple, Desolation.
we must look in him, Pa. 11. and 12.
what occupied the temple daily before: and we find it to be called of him
Inge Sacrificium, The continual Sacrifice. By the which S. Paul also
prophesied, 1. Cor. 11.
that we should announce our Lords death, Hippo. Martyr. ^rat. de Antich. and
Consumma. mundi. Hier in Da. xij.
Donec veniat, Until his coming. And the ancient Fathers do say thereupon
accordingly, The preciouse body and blood of Christ, non extabit, shall not be
extant, to be openly seen, in those days of Antichrist, The Liturgy, or
Mass, shall be extinguished, The Psalmodie of the Canonical hours shall
cease. So then, the taking away of this daily Sacrifice out of all Churches, is
the Desolation: And the Abomination set there in stead thereof, is that man
of Sin, that son of perdition, Antichrist him self, partly in his own
person, partly in his Image whereof the Apocalypse speaks, Apo. 13.14.16.19.
as it does also of his Characters or Marks both in men's hands, and in their
foreheades. And for the time when this shall be, Daniel agrees with the
Gospel and Apocalypse. for he says: And from the time when the daily
Sacrifice shall be taken away, and the Abomination set up for Desolation:
days 1290. Blessed is he that exspecteth and comes to days 1335. Likewise
S. Paul agrees upon the same time. Mat. 24.
For as the Apostles would learn of our Lord a sign of his coming, and of
the consummation of the world, so the Thessalonians likewise being troubled, 2.
These. 2.
quasi instet dies Domini, As though the day of our Lord had then been
instant, the Apostle teaches them the contrary, and says, Nequis vos seducat
vllo modo, Let not any seduce you in any case: for Antichrist must first be
revealed, and then in deed the day of our Lord is instant, for our Lord
Jesus will kill him with the breath of his mouth, so easily him that seems so
mighty, and will make frustrate all his proceedings by the manifestation of
his own coming.

Another thing also he there names, Defection.
which must be before our Lords coming be instant, saying, Nisi venerit
discessio primum, That same Apostasy must come before. Which thing he so
distinguishes from the other thing, that is, from the revelation of
Antichrist, that for this he remembers them of a certain token thereof, which
he had more plainly told them, as also all the rest, by word of mouth, and it
is commonly taken to be the utter abolishing of the Roman Emperor, Donec de
medio fiat qui tenet nunc: and tunc, And then shall be revealed that impious
man. But to the coming of the Apostasy he gives not that token: signifying
that although it also shall be at the instant of our Lords coming, yet
nevertheless while the Roman Emperor is in a sort remaining.

Whether Antichrist or the Apostasy agree to the Protestants.
So that by the time it is evident, that neither Antichrist, Antichrist and the
Protestante
nor the Apostasy agrees to Bonifacius the third, neither do I say, that
Antichrist agrees to Luther, or Calvin, or any other of you: He shall be
another manner of fellow, Iwis: also the time of his reign in persecution, iumpe
three years and a half, according to the foresaid Scriptures. Howbeit this is
certain, that you amongst you have done Antichrist most notable and worthy
service, to make the fools that hear you, not think of his coming, nor to
think that he shall be One certain person, Si patrem f. Beelzebub vocauerunt,
quanto magis domemesticos eius?
as the Scripture is evident: but rather take Christ's Vicar, and so many his
Vicares, to be the man: that so when he comes, he may go away withal more
smoothly. Yet the Elect will be, we know, better advised.

But this I will boldly say, The Apostasy and the Protestants.
that your Heresy is so like to the foresaid Apostasy, that but for one place
in ye Apocalipse I would boldly pronounce (with my Mother and Mystresse the
Churches leave) that it is even the self same. The place is in the first Vae,
Apoc. 8.9.10.11.
under the first Angel trumpeter. For the second Vae, under the sixth Angel, is
plainly of Antichrist. And ye third or last Vae, under the seventh and last
Angel, is plainly of Domesday. Therefore the first vae must be the next thing
immediately before Antichrist: And it is of marvelous Locustes by a certain
falling star let out of hell: Apo..9. Locusies.
Their king is the Angel of hell, called in Hebrew, Abaddon, in Greek
Apollyon, in Latin Exterminans, in English Destroyer. Their power is not to
kill the faithful, but to torment them five months, yet that in so miserable
a manner, that they shall desire rather to be killed. All this, and more in that
place. Now the time of their persecution comes to short of yours: Also the
universality, item, the vehemency thereof ouerreacheth yours, though your
will be as good as theirs, as by Elmers Rackes some Catholics have had
experience. But otherwise manifold and passing similitude between you and them,
in the smoke, in the horses, in the whole Anatomy of the Locustes, and above
all, in the like destroying and sacrilegious wast of Gods Churches and their
sacred vessel and holy ornaments, which they shall make in all places, as
unto you is permitted of God only in some places.

The desolation.
The like is seen in the Desolation made by you, and to be made hereafter by
Antichrist him self: it is even al one and the same: but that he shall do
universally, that which you may not do but here and there: he in all the
Churches of the world, casting out the holy Sacrifice of the Mass, with all
divine service thereunto belonging, as you have done in all the Churches of
England, and wheresoever else you are permitted to set Sedem Satanae, your
Satanicall seat. As he also shall in place of the foresaid daily Sacrifice
bring in his Abomination, Abomination.
even him self and his Image to be in all Churches adored above all Divinity,
(O most abominable desolation.) So have you likewise not only made desolation
of the Sacrifice, but also in stead thereof set up every where your abomination
of Luthers and Caluines invention, the Images also of kings arms in the very
place of the most sweet and most glorious Roode, yea the Image of a vile
Grasshopper in a Church that is well known, in the very place where before did
stand Gods Crucifixe. I say not that this is the very self Abomination of
Antichrist: but I say, and I say boldly, that none other of the old figures
thereof was ever more lively, more nigh, more like unto it, not the Idols or
Statuees of Jupiter set up in the Temple by Antiochus in the vmbraticall
desolation of that time being ye time of the Machabees, nor the like of
certain Roman Emperors in the vmbratical desolation of their time, nor any
thing in the sundry vmbraticall desolations by diverse heresies, which S. Basil
and other of the holy Fathers, have, as it were Ieremies lamentation again,
pitifully recorded. You have I say, in this your vmbraticall desolation pricked
beyond them al, approaching in the very kind of desolation so much nearer then
any to the desolation of Antichrist, as you do in time, so jointly, so
identically, that you have represented unto us a plain example, how a thing it
self may be a shadow or a figure of the same thing it self, only differing
in some manner. And therefore seeing it has been Prophesied, that one certain
heresy, and that toward the end, should so far prick beyond all other
heresies, Apoc. 8.
according also to the fourth Trumpet being compared with the third, that it
should be not only an heresy, but also a plain Apostasy: whether the same
be not this present heresy of yours, let the world judge. I do not charge you,
as you do us, by bare words, vain crakes, yea and falsifications of the text,
but I allege plain Scriptures, and I allege them truly, and I confer
diverse places together that one may expound another, which you are wont to
talk so much of, but you in talk only, and we in deed. Besides much more
that I have (if I were the opponent here, and not the answerer) to prove your
Apostasy, and that in all the three species of Apostasy, being these,
Apostasy from Religion Monastical, Apostasy from holy Orders, Apostasy from
our Christian faith: Chalenging you otherwise to join with me upon my last
Demand (in my book of 51. Demaundes, which concerns your said Apostasy.

Therefore such being your Newinuented Gospel, in this time of the fourth
Trumpet, no doubt they that embrace the same, A Gospel paedagogue to
Antichrist.
will as readily embrace the next in the time of the fifth Trumpet, and again
as readily, and much more readily embrace Antichrist him self in the time of
the Churches sixth Trumpet Angelical. For, whom, and what will not they
believe, which without all proof, yea against so evident Scriptures, only
upon your bold and impudent asseuerations, being men so impotent, so unlearned,
even in the Scriptures also, and so notorious and confessed wicked livers, have
believed that Christ's Vicar, and therefore in effect that Christ himself is
Antichrist, and that Christ's Church, the woman clothed with the sun, the new
and glorious city of Jerusalem coming down from heaven is the Fulke Ar.
33.38.57.100.102.106. and Pur. 287.298.336.391.409.460.
Synagogue of Antichrist, the great whore, and city of Babylon? No, my
masters, no, it will never be: Gods elect do to well know the pillar that alwais
has, and still must hold them up in truth, even against the mighty seductions
of Antichrist himself, of his Apo. 13.16.
singular falseprophet, and of his three lesser, and all his other inferior
falseprophetes, much more against you. And therefore it is not your ignorant
and absurd detorting and deprauing (as the 2. Pet. 3.
first of Christ's Vicars did term it, when he gave us warning of such
fellows) of the woman's gorgeous garments, nor of the seven hills, that can
deceive them, no more then the false deprauing of the woman's flight, whereof I
have already spoken: for they know to distinguish the Gorgeous garments used
always in Gods divine service, which your king Abaddon makes wast and havoc
of, The gorgeous garments.
from the gorgeous profane garments and infinite vain pomp that the world
of the wicked triumphs in. Infra. ca. 10 Dema. 21.
They know also by the commentary which the Scripture it self makes, what
are both the Seven heads, Apo..17.
or Seven hills, and also the Ten horns, to wit, that they all be kings
(not the Catholic kings which have and do so humbly adore our Sion, and lick
the very dust of her feet, knowing that the nation and kingdom, which serves
not her, shall surely perish. Esaias 49. and 60. but) the kings that are with the
world against the said Church and people of God. So says the Scripture: The
seven heads and hills.
The Seven heads, are seven hills, upon which the woman sits, and they
are seven Kings. And mark the division of them: quinque ceciderunt, Five of
them are fallen: Who therefore are all the persecuting kings in the time of the
Old Testament, before the coming of Christ, before the time when this was
spoken. Vnus est, One presently is. Who therefore is meant of the Roman
Emperors and al other kings persecuting with them. Alius nondum venit, etc.
The other is not yet come: and when he comes he must remain (not a long
season, as ye five, and as the one, but) a short season, only three years and
a half: Who evidently is Antichrist in proper person. There have you plainly
the Seven. Now touching the other Ten, this says the Scripture: The ten
horns
And the ten horns, are ten kings, which, like as has been said of
Antichrist, have not yet taken kingdom, but they shall take power as kings, vna
hora post Bestiam, even within one hour after the Beast, that is, together
with Antichrist, The whore Babylon.
to serve him as his feed knights. And so you see evidently by these Seven
hills thus expounded, that the woman which sits upon them, is not so little a
one, as you do make her, but that she is Mundus impiorum, the whole multitude
of the wicked, even from the first beginning of the world, to the last end
thereof, even al in effect that at the later day shall be drowned in hell, either
for being of her, Apo. 14.15* 16.17.18. 2. Pet. 2.
or conforming them selves unto her (which in the Apocalypse is most manifest)
as the world of the wicked it was, which was in the time of Noe drowned in the
vmbraticall deluge. So that Rome with the Emperor of it, while it was against
the Church, was a member, yet but a member of that woman: As England
contrariwise, which was before, so long together, a notable member of the woman
clothed with the Sun, is now become a member most miserable of the contrary
woman, and for reward of her mutation and Apostasy thus plagued of God, that
now she must hear the Scriptures so perniciously detorted in all pulpits at
large, and may not hear them, truly, sincerely, healthfully reported, so
much as in poor papers: which if she might freely, and much more in pulpits,
down, down, god wot, full soon, would this lying and absurd new Gospel
come, as by this little which has been here said, any man of reason will not
deny. And now to our third question, which is of Purgatory.

The third part. Concerning the question of Purgatory.
D. Allen in the end of his book of Purgatory, made two chapters of answer to
their Scriptures: yet says Fulke at the first of the two: This Chapter is but,
Pro forma tantum, Pur. 437.
To make a show of a confutation, where the tenth part of our arguments are not
rehearsed: notwithstanding, there, and other where up and down he said enough
to answer all. But I shall endeavor therefore to satisfy the man better in
this behalf, collecting together not only the tenth part, but even al his
scriptures, not omitting as much as one, by my will, though such collecting and
disposing of things so dispersed, cost me in every Chapter of this book, as
much or more labor, then to answer the same afterward.

Well sir then, you reason against Purgatory by authority of Scripture, in
part negatiuely, in part affirmatively. And your negative reasoning, is
sometimes of a piece only, sometimes of the whole Scripture. Again, when it
is out of a piece only, it is partly out of some one place, partly out of some
one book.

j Ab authoritate Scripturae, negative.
First therefore, whatsoever you say negatiuely out of a piece, whether it be
one place, or one book, you have your self answered it for me, Pur. 449.
whatsoever it be, in these words: It is no good Logike, to conclude negatiuely
of one place or book of Scripture, This is not contained in it, therefore it
is not true. These be your own words, even also speaking there of this self
same matter, even of Purgatory. Nevertheless (to deal more substantially) I
will not stick to rehearse those places also, and to answer them particulerly.

Pur. 236.
How happens it, that in so necessary a place S. Paul finds no other comfort
to moderate the mourning of the faithful, but only the quiet rest of the^ that
are asleep in the Lord, and the hope of their glorious resurrection? Sruely if
S. Paul had been of Chrysostomes mind, he would have prescribed other manner of
comfortes, Against the Fathers also.
as Chrysostom does, to wit, exhorting them to prayers and alms for their
friends departed, rather then to mourn so immoderatly. Seeing you so reason
out of this place, I pray you let me ask you: Have you, whenever in Sermon
or otherwise you would moderate the mourning of the faithful, no other comfort
but only these two? yea I say more, If you have no mo comforts in that case,
and if there be no more then S. Paul there prescribes, surely there is but
only one, to wit, the hope of resurrection. For although he name them that are
asleep in the Lord, yet of their quiet rest after that sleeping, that is to
say, after their death, he says nothing, it is but your own addition.

Pur. 362.
that Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine, Ieronym, and many more, are witness that
the solemn prayer for the dead in celebration of the Sacrament, is the
tradition of the Apostles: you pose the Papists notwithstanding, and ask, Why
then the same is not set forth by Matthew, Mark, Luke, or Paul, where they
set forth the institution of the Sacrament? Your words at large, and my
answer, go before in the last Chapter, page ^. saving that piece of your
words, which contains your negative reason most clearly, and most boldly,
saying: But against this feigned tradition S. Paul cries with open mouth 1.
Corin. 11. That which I delivered unto you, I received of the Lord, etc. This
is the only true substance of the Sacrament, and only right order of
ministration, and only right use and proper end thereof. So you make as though
the Apostle there prescribes the whole order of ministration, in so much that
it only and no other may be the right order thereof: contrary to that which
follows in the same place, Infra. ca. 11. contr. 44.
The rest I will set in order when I come. You declare your great skill in the
Scripture, when here so far you miss of the Apostles purpose, which was
only against unworthy receiving. The greatness of that sin he shows,
because of the Real presence of Christ, yea and that in the same manner as he
was in his death. Look better upon the place, and see whether it be not as I
say, or rather as S. Augustine says: Au. ep. 118. ad Ian. ca. 3
Inde enim and Apostolus indigne dicit acceptum ab eis, qui non discernebant a
ceteris cibis veneratione singulariter debita. quod satis toto ipso loco in
Epistola ad Corinthios prima, si diligenter attendatur, apparet: For that
respect the Apostle also does say, that they receive it unworthily, who do not
by due and singularlye due worship discern it from the rest of meats: as
sufficiently appears through that same whole place in the first Epistle to
the Corinthians, if it be diligently considered. So then, where the Apostle
intended no more but to correct the sin of unworthy receiving, there to
require of us to show that he prescribes it to be offered for the dead, yea
and the whole order of ministration, have not you forsooth great reason?

And even as great you have, where you argue out of particular Pur. 455.
What law was appointed touching lamenting for the dead, you may read Leuit.
21. how the Priest was forbidden to lament for any, but special persons. Also
Number. 19. Diverse ordinances concerning the dead. yet never any sacrifice or
prayer for the dead. With like reason you might conclude upon the same places,
that the dead should not be buried, because in these places no mention is made
thereof: and again of sundry other places, Leuit. 15.
where the people are bid to keep them selves warily from diverse
contaminations of them selves by towching certain persons alive, that
therefore in the same places they are forbidden to pray for the said persons
alive, and namely during the cause of such contamination, as for a man or woman
whose seed or flowers runs. You suppose ignorantly that in those places
orders are given what shall be done for the dead, but it is not so: only it is
decreed, that whosoever enters the tabernacle or house of him that is there
departed, shall be contaminate or unclean after the Mosaicall manner: and that
the high priest shall not enter to any such at all, nor other priests but to
certain. What makes this against doing ought for the soul of the dead, in
other places, and specially in the holy place? As when again you say: Pur. 456.
When Nadab and Abihu were slain, their father and brethren were forbidden to
mourn for them, the people were permitted. By all which it appears that no
Sacrifice for the dead was offered. As though holy Sacrificing were as unfit
for the Priest as profane mourning: And as though this special case were a
general rule, whereas Leuit. 21. it is expressly said to the Priests, that
they may be contaminated (which with you is mourning) upon their brother,
notwithstanding that for the plague of their two brethren Nadab and Abihu they
might not in some manner mourn.

From the particular places of the Law, I come now with you to the whole Law
thus, according to your good Logike, you conclude negatiuely thereupon: Pur.
455.
All lawful sacrifices were prescribed by the Law: Sacrifice for the dead was
not prescribed by the Law, Therefore it was no lawful Sacrifice. A seely
argument was made by Grindall, which D. Allen there returns upon him, and in
this form here rehearsed you go about to better it. The answer still is,
Infra ca. 12. number.
as it was before, by returning it upon your self: All lawful Sacrifices, to
wit, these four in general, Holocaustum, pro peccato, hostia, oblatio (as the
Psalmist and the Apostle do gather the sum) were prescribed by the Law:
Sacrifice for the dead is one of those four, to wit, pro peccato, for sin:
Therefore Sacrifice for the dead was prescribed by the law. To this you would
make a reply, and therefore you correct your Mayor with an addition, and say,
that not only all lawful Sacrifices were prescribed by the law, but also with
peculiar mentioning and plain rehearsing of all such persons for whom
Sacrifice was to be offered, both men and women, the princes and the private
persons, the priest and the whole congregation, yea and special regard of the
oblations of the poor, as may be seen Leuit. 4.5.12.15. But because all these
persons are found in the dead, as well as in the living, your addition
reaches yet farther, saying, And in the peculiar rehearsing of diverse kind of
persons, and the form of the Sacrifice, named according to every particular
state, it is so far off that the dead shall be reckned, that such things are
enjoined every of these particular persons to do, as it is plain that none but
the living could offer, or have Sacrifice offered for them. And in confidence
of this addition, Jesus, how you befoole D. Allen: And yet it contains this
gross absurdity, which you saw not, that none could offer or have Sacrifice
offered for them, but only such as were both living and also present in the
place, yea also able to do by the^ selves those things enjoined, and moreover
that none might offer for their friends, or for any other, but for them selves
only. And what place is then left for offering for their children, for the
sick at home, for their brethren in other countries captive or pilgrims, for
the kings and cities of the world, uncircumcised, and for diverse other sorts,
for which there was offering, as partly in other places is expressed, partly
may easily be proved? And therefore all this ado concludes nothing against
Sacrifice for the dead, although it could not be proved: much less,
considering that it is in an other place so plainly expressed. For the fact of
Judas Machabeus puts all out of doubt, say we: though you say that he
therein transgressed the law. But your proof thereof is yet to be made,
unless this prove it that you say, It is like, that Judas Machabeus, Pur. 456.
if he devised not that Sacrifice of his own head, yet took by imitation of
the Gentiles, whose studies and practices, the Author of that Story confesses
were more frequented in those days among the Jews, then the preaching or
keeping of the Law. Why sir, does the Story say that Judas Macabeus was one of
those gentilicall Jews, or that he joined with those Apostaticall priests:
Yea does it not plainly say, that all his fighting was against the gentiles
and against gentilizing, and that he made his reformation by no Priests but
such as were Unspotted in the law? But of your ignorance in that Story (if no
worse) I must speak more in another place. Infra ca. 12.


Now to end this part, Let us hear how you conclude of the whole Scripture:
Pur. 449.
As it is no good Logike (you say) to conclude negatiuely of one place or book
of Scripture, this is not contained in it, therefore it is not true, (as you
have hitherunto concluded:) So of the whole, the argument is most invincible
that concludes negatiuely thus: All true doctrine is taught in the Scripture:
Purgatory is not taught in the Scripture, therefore Purgatory is no true
doctrine. O invincible argument. The Mayor is false, and to all your textes for
it, I have answered above. Ca. isto. p. 1
The Minor likewise is false. for Purgatory is taught in the Machabees, which
is in the Canon of the true Church which you also confess to be the true
Church (you know the Infra page
third Council of Carthage:) and therefore it is Canonical, if any other
Scripture be Canonical. It is taught likewise 1. John. 5. so plainly, that
you could not avoid the place but by falling into this horrible absurdity,
That we may not pray for all men living, as anon I shall report your words.
It is also taught, specially against you Sir, Joan. 11. for you say after your
manner passing confidently, Pur. 236.
that Martha and Mary (as the Scripture is manifest) did not hope for any
restitution of their brother Lazarus to his body before the general
Resurrection. If that be so manifest, what else was it then, but the rest of his
soul, that Martha would have Christ to pray for, when she said thus unto him:
But also now I know, that whatsoever things thou shall ask of God, God will
grant thee. To which purpose also some ancient writers expound that place.
But to allege places is not my intent here, it is only to answer your
allegations. And now having done with all your negatiues, we are come to your
affirmatiues.

ij Ab authoritate Scripturae, affirmative. First, about certain foundations
of Purgatory, and prayer for the dead.
For brevity, to speak jointly of Purgatory, and of relieuing ye souls that
be there: your affirmative allegations against both, are levied by you, partly
at the foundation of them, partly at the two them selves. And the foundations
being diverse, you have both several shot against the seuerals, and also one
common shot against all or many of them in common. To each sort I shall with
the help of God, whose cause it is, make answer most easily and most truly.

The distinction of Venial and Mortal sin.
And first, D. Allen declares out of ye Doctors, Pur. 126.127.128.
what sins may be purged in Purgatory, to wit, not only such as are Venial
of their own nature, but also such as are mortal of their own nature, so
that they were in Gods Church remitted before. Fulke says, that This is
manifestly overthrown by the word of God, even from the foundations. For the
foundation of this doctrine, is the distinction of venial and mortal sins.
Not so sir: the doctrine is, that mortal sins by the Churches remission
become as venial: and you grant it your self, saying, All sins (except
certain, of which your good exceptions I shall say more anon) by Gods mercy
are pardonable or venial. Thus you grant the doctrine, and yet you grant not
the foresaid distinction, therefore the distinction is not the foundation of
that doctrine, but the doctrine may stand well without it.

But yet for other causes we must be content to see what you allege against
the distinction: The word of God plainly determines, that every sin is
mortal and deserves eternal death, seem it never so small. So you say, and
you allege three places for it. The first: Cursed is every one that abides
not in all things that are written in the Law to fulfill them, Deuteronomy. 27. I
sir, but find you in the Scripture no other Curse, that is to say, pain for
sin, but eternal death? Is it not written, Cursed is every one that hangs
on tree? yet ha^ging on tree, or crucifying, Deuteronomy. 21. Gal. 3.
is not eternal death. Again every one in that saying, is meant (by the
Apostles exposition) not of Christians, but of them only which trust in the
law for it self, who in deed can never attain to no remission neither of
their mortal nor of their venial sins. But we that hold of Christ, and of
his spirit, are in case always to receive remission whenever we sin
venially: 1. Joan. 1.3.
for so we can. But we can not sin mortally, holding (I say) Christ and his
spirit. And therefore if we do sin mortally at any time, depriving our
selves thereby of Christ's spirit, the remedy is to seek for the same again
by the Sacrament of penance, and then are we in good case again as before.

Your other two places are these: The soul that sins shall dye, Ezech. 18.
and, The reward of sin, is death. Romans 6. S. James gives us the meaning of
these and such like places, where he says, Peccatum vero cum consummatum
fuerit, generat mortem, Iac. 1.
Sin, when it is consummate, gendreth death: But not so soon as it is
gendred, and yet it is sin as soon as it is gendred. Therefore some sin
there is, which yet gendreth not death. Mark the order: Deinde concupiscentia
cum conceperit, parit peccatum: peccatum vero cum consummatu^ fuerit, generat
mortem: First comes the temptation of our concupiscence, as it were of a
lewd woman: Secondly, concupiscence when she has conceived (by obteining some
light consent) bears sin, venial sin. Mary thirdly, Sin, when it is
consummate (by our full and perfect consent yielded unto it) gendreth or
brings forth death, if the matter be of weight accordingly. For else that the
lightness of the matter, as an idle word, brings not death, he sufficiently
signifies, in saying, that in a weighty matter the lightness or imperfection
of consent does it not.

Whether after sin remitted, pain may remain.
Now to another foundation, to wit, That culpa, the fault, both in Venial and
in Mortal sin, may be forgiven of God and of his Church, and yet some pain
(though not eternal) be owing for it sometime, so that the same must in such
case be in this life either paid or pardoned, or else in Purgatory it will be
exacted.

Pur. 45.
This is against Ezechiel, says Fulke, What time soever a man does truly
repent, the Lord does put al his sins out of his remembrance. You might have
done well to quote the place where Ezechiel so says ad verbum. The truth is,
that in a moment the repentance may be so great, that there is no more
remembrance at all. But Ezechiel (if you mean the 18. Chapter) speaks of a
longer time, so that The wicked man must repent him of all his sins, and
keep all Gods commandments, and do right and justice, and then vita viuit,
and non morietur, when the day comes to reward every one according to his
works here, He shall live, and not dye. All his iniquities that he worked, I
will not remember (says God:) for his justice that he wrought, he shall live.
For otherwise, who knows not those voices, Psalm. 24.78
Lord remember not the sins of my youth: and, Lord remember not our old
sins? Are they not the words of men which had already repented them?
acknowledging nevertheless that God may yet remember them.

Again you say, It is against David, Pur. 45.46 Psalm. 102.
The Lord has removed our sins from us as far as the east is from the
west. Who may not say this, for being removed from eternal damnation,
although he have yet to abide never so much temporal punishment? Howbeit those
words, as the whole Psalm, are not spoken of the time of our first receiving
again into the favor of God by absolution, but to magnify his mercy in our
final restitution which shall be at the later day. For which cause the Church
very aptly sings that Psalm upon the feast of Christ's Ascension.

Also out of the New Testament you say: The Publicane, Pur. 43.
the Prodigal child, the Debtors, all clearly remitted, do plainly prove,
that God freely forgiueth, justifies, rewards, the penitent sinners, without
exacting any punishment of them for answering of the debt, satisfying for the
sins, abusing his fatherly cleme^cie, Luke 7.15.18. You speak here very
indefinitely, as though God never exacteth no punishment neither aforehand.
Which to be always (specially in adultis) clean contrary, any may perceive,
that considers this punishment whereof we speak, to be the work of
penance, chiefly the internal works, and secondarily the external also. But
to let go this vantage, and howsoever you speak to take it, yet that you mean
not but of the punishment which we now entreat of, to wit, which is owing
sometime after forgiveness: what make those ensamples against the same?

Of the Publicane no more is said, but that he went home from the Temple
justified more then ye Pharisee. How prove you now, Luke 18.
that he which is justified, may not withal be in some debt? Is it not the
justified or children of God that are taught to say unto the Father, Forgive us
our debtes? Debt not only of temporal punishment, but also of the fault it
self being venial, may stand well enough with justification.

Luc. 15.
The prodigal child, is the Gentile received by Baptism, as the Elder son,
is the Jew that will not now come in. In Baptism we hold the forgiveness to be
such, that neither any temporal punishment is owing afterward: But if he play
the prodigal child again after that most ample grace, then, returning yet
again, and to be now received no more by the Sacrament of Baptism (for we are
not Anabaptists) but by the Sacrament of Penance (for we are not Nouatians,
Infra ca. 12.
) that then also we must deal with him like liberally in his person whose
ministers we are, and inioyne him no more then at the other receiving, that you
have not yet proved.

Luc. 7.
The two debtors are in the texts Mary Magdalen owing 500. pence, and Simon the
Pharisee, owing 50. pence. And they not having to pay, as no sinner of himself
has, donauit vtrisque, Christ forgave both. And yet they both had to be
forgiven after, according to the proportion of their love: in so much that both
of Mary Magdalen he says, Much sins are forgiven her, because she has loved
much, as he there reckneth up the works of her love, far above the works of
Simons love: and also to her he says, so long after her hearts conversion, and
therefore after her first forgiveness, Thy sins are forgiven thee. Again of
Simon and to Simon he says, But to whom less is forgiven, he loves less:
giving him to understand, that he owed more yet the^ he was ware of, wherefore
that he had to imitate her whom he did set so light by, and to increase, as she
did, in penitential love.

Whether Purgatory follow upon this last foundation.
Upon this second foundation is set the third foundation by D. Allen, Pur.
44.46.
in these words: If any debt or recompense remain to be discharged by the
offender after his reconcilement, it must of necessity be induced, because
every man can not have time (either for the hugenes of his sins past, or his
late repentance, or his careless negligence) to repay all in his life, that
there is all, or some part answerable in the world to come. Against this Fulke
alleges, that otherwise says the spirit of God in the person of the
faithful: He has not dealt with us according to our sins, Psalm. 103. or 102.
neither rewarded us after our iniquities. But as heaven is above the earth, so
great is his mercy: as a father has compassion on his children, so has the
Lord compassion on them that fear him. I said before, these words to be spoken
in the person of the faithful in deed, but for the time of the final most
merciful reward, and not for the time when they dye, whereof now we speak.
And therefore they make nothing (as you pretend they do) against the
necessity of the foresaid conclusion.

Again you say against it, that It rises of devilish envy, Pur. 51.
that God should be more liberal to them that repent at the hour of death,
then to them that were but small offenders, converted long before. And
therefore (M. Allen) I will answer you, as the householder answered those
murmurers, which grudged that they which wrought but an hour, were made equal
in reward with those that had borne the burden and heat of the day. Is thy
eye evil, because God is good? Is it not lawful for him to do what he will
with his own? Mat. 20. But this is that which always deceives the Papists,
because they measure the reward by justice, and not by mercy. Nay it is this
that deceives you, that you can not see any justice in mercy. And therefore
upon your ground, the Origenistes might as well have said to our Catholic
forefathers, that it rose of envy that God should be more liberal to them that
repent, then to them that repent not at all: and might urge them thereupon, and
say: Is thy eye evil, because God is good? Is it not lawful for him to do
what he will with his own? But the Catholic might answer the Origenist,
saying: I sir: but how prove you that mercy, that God (I say) is good to them
that repent not? that he will give his own so freely to them, to whom was not
applied at all the Satisfaction of his justice made by Christ? Even so we
answer you, and say: I sir, but how prove you, that God is alike good to all,
that he has once showed mercy unto for Christ, that is to say, to all the
baptized, although they in their works afterward which they work through
Christ, be not like? The spirit of God says otherwise to the baptized: And
all Churches shall know, Apoc. 2.
that I am a searcher of the very raynes and hearts: and will give to every
one of you according to his works.

The meaning of the Parable then is this: The Jews did murmr at the
promotio^ of the Gentiles, because to their own works as their own, they
ascribed their salvation, thinking that they needed not any mercy at al. But we
must not do so, we must ascribe all to Gods mercy: it is his mercy that he
calls us being idle before, yea sinfully occupied, into the vineyard of his
Catholic Church, there to work for the penny of everlasting life: it is his
mercy, whatsoever we do work in the said vineyard, one more and in short time,
as Mary Magdalen, another less, though in longer time, as Simon the Pharisee,
but all is of his mercy, of his grace, according to the measure as Christ (he
also being his Christ) by his merits requires for every one, of his justice:
and therefore both the works with all their variety, and the pence in the end
with all their variety, are both of Gods giving, though the pence be the
merces, wages for the working, and that also by bargayne.

Seeing therefore that the mercy of God, even within his vineyard, within his
Churches, is with such variety, and with such justice, you have not to accuse
us of envy, for holding that (ceteris paribus) he is not so liberal where
penance is imperfect, as where it is full. Nor yet to say as you do in the same
place, I think M. Allen is angry with Christ, that he did not send the
penitent thief into Purgatory, but even that day promised to be with him in
Paradise. You rather might be angry with that penitent, for thinking it enough,
if he might be remembered when Christ should come in his kingdom, though in the
mean time he did among such as he, abide for his sins in another place. But
to think that D. Allen would be angry with Christ our high priest, for giving
a pardon, and that a plenary, how could you, knowing that the Vicar of Christ
g^uing a plenary, offends him not? for the merciful justice of God in which
he governs us that are his family, is as thoroughly answered by Christ our
Lord, when by him self or by his Ministers he gives us full pardon, as when
he gives us full penance.

And in this I have at once answered your like obiecting to D. Allen in another
place, Pur. 64.
that He will not suffer God to show mercy upon whom he will show mercy, Romans
9. without his blasphemous and envious murmuring. I have told you where God
will show full mercy, comparing his elect and just together (howbeit that
sentence is not in comparison of them among them selves, but comparing them
with the reprobate) to wit, where he sees full penance, or full pardon by
Christ. If you can prove that he will show as full mercy also where he finds
not that fulness of Christ's grace, then call us hardly enemies for not
suffering God to show mercy upon whom he will.

Whether in Christ, the works of one may help another?
The fourth and last foundation concerns the relief of them in Purgatory,
and it is this, that within the Church or body of Christ one member may help
another by virtue of the Communion of Saints. Against this Fulke says: Pur.
198. Infra ca. 12.
I have learned in the Scripture, that there is no name given under heaven, by
which they may be helped, which are not helped by Christ's death. Act. 4. Who
doubts of that? But sir have you learned in the Scripture, that they which
are helped by the death of Christ, can not through his grace help and be
helped, one of another? Surely I learn in the Scripture, that, as the rich of
this world may help the poor with their substance, so the rich in good works
may spiritually help the poor of that kind. 2. Cor. 8.
Let your abundance in this present time (says the Apostle to the wealthy
Corinthians) supply their (the poor Hebrews) lack, Act. 2.4.
that also their abundance (spiritual (as in the Acts it is passing singular)
may supplye your lack.

But at the least, Pur. 199.
It is not possible that other men's works alive should profit them that are
dead, you say. And why so? For as much as without Faith it is not possible to
please God, Heb. 13. That is most true, as you and all other Heretics shall
one day find it. Therefore without faith it is not possible that they should
profit them. Be it so? What then? We alive, and our brethren in Purgatory,
both have faith. Yea, but D. Allen grants, that they which are in Purgatory,
can not by any motion of mind, attain more mercy, then their life past
deserved. That is true. Therefore their faith profits them nothing, for that
is a notable motion of the mind. And what more? Then the merits of other men
must profit without faith. Two iron co^clusions. Although by their faith they
can not attain mercy, or profit them selves, yet by their faith they are in
case to be profited by the prayers and works of their fellow members alive. And
so are these two iron bars at once broken with so little a do. Example of a
child newborn: without life it were not possible to feed him, nor to
baptize him: and though he be alive, he can not procure himself food, nor
baptism: yet because he is alive, he is in case to be helped by others
thereunto.

Fulkes common argument of the omnisufficiencie of Christ's Passion.
Infra ca. 12.
Now remains in this part, but only your common argument of Christ's
Passion, by it you think to overthrow the foundations that stand even upon
it, such is your folly. D. Allen in his book reported the said argument of
yours, in these words: [Their extreme and only refuge is, that the pain of
Christ's passion, Pur. 152.
and his sufficient payment for our sins, stands not with our satisfaction
or penance in this life, nor with pain or Purgatory in the next.] Whereunto he
there answers, as the Reader may see. the effect is, that an Origenist, or
one worse then an Origenist, might likewise say, The passion of Christ, because
it is omnisufficient, stands not with hell neither. But a Catholic would
answer him, and the Protestants at once, that we must not consider only the
omnisufficiencie of it, but rather the will of Christ that suffered it, whether
he would have it to work^ upon all and every where, because it is
omnisufficient, or only upon his members within his Church: and upon them also
whether always and straightwayes to the very full, and without all working of
any thing or person with it, or rather by degrees and proportions, by means
and instruments.

Which being considered, all Fulkes allegations will be quickly answered. And
first whether it follow, because it is so sufficient, that therefore it works
always at full. If any man sin after baptism (says he, Pur. 45. 1. Ioh. 2.
alleging S. John) Jesus Christ is our advocate with the father, and
propitiation for our sins. That is true. But that in playing the advocate for
sins after baptism, he requesteth the like and equal grace, as he did in
baptism for sins before baptism, where have you that?

Pur. 95. 1. Io. 1.
In another place you allege, yt the blood of Christ does purge us from all our
sins. It is taken out of the same place, and has the same answer, to wit,
that his blood does work more graciously in the Sacrament of baptism, then in
the Sacrament of penance.

And being washed by him, we are thoroughly clean, Ioh. 13. So you allege
immediately in the same place, adding also: So that although our sins were as
red as skarlet, they are made as white as snow, Esaias. 1. These two places
are evident of baptism (read the text) and therefore we admit willingly
that which you infer there, saying, Then being thoroughly purged washed and
cleansed as white as snow, we are made capable (without delay) of the heavenly
inheritance and the fruitio^ of eternal glory. Nevertheless I must put you in
mind that your former place John. 13. truly alleged, were thus: He that is
washed (in baptism,) needs not but to wash his fete (that is, his venial
sins, which he commits afterward, although he continue withal in the
cleannes of his baptism) but he is all clean. I ask you then, what if he
dye before he wash his feet? He is clean, and therefore he shall not to hell,
as the unclean Judas. Yet he is not so clean, but that he needed more
washing: shall that then be quite omitted which so needed, and he to heaven
before he be all clean?

Well, by all this you have not yet proved, that Christ's blood whenever it
washes, washes continually and at once to the full. Yea the saying of David
is manifest for the contrary: He was washed from his sin by Christ, and yet
he prays for the same sin, saying, Amplius laua me, wash me more from my
iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. In answering unto it, Psalm. 50. Pur.
97.78
you have nothing to say, but that it was at Gods hands, and by the means of
Christ's blood, that he prayed to be cleansed. Yea sir, but the place teaches
us, that God and that blood do not at every time wash one so fully, but that
they reserve yet to wash him more, when it is thought good.

Now let us hear also whether it follow that in such washing nothing works
with the blood of Christ, because the blood is of it self omnisufficient. The
sufficiency of Christ's Passion (says he) is counted a light argument to M.
Allen. Pur. 154.
Too light in deed, to bear down any doctrine of Christ. But (says he)
thus we reason: Christ has paid the full price of our sins, has fully
satisfied for them, therefore there is no part of the price left to be paid
by us, there remains no satisfaction for us. And yet says he again, We
neither exclude repentance, nor good works. For Christ has paid the price of
their sins, that repent and believe in him, that follow his steps, that
walk in his precepts. So then, he misliketh not, that our works should be
with the passion of Christ, but that they should work with the passion of
Christ: and therefore he says, the absurdity of our doctrine is this, that we
say: [ Christ by his suffering is become a cause of salvation to all that
believe in him, yet every man by good works must procure his own salvation.]
These (he says) are the enemies of the Cross of Christ. And yet it is ye
Scripture that says, Philip. 2.
Work your own salvation. Neither will he, I trow, call the Apostle an enemy
of God, because he there says, It is God that works in you, and yet work
your own salvation. Much less will he reason thus: God is sufficient and able
to work our salvation, therefore there is no part of our salvation left to be
wrought by the Passion of Christ. For he sees, the reason to be a false
reason: and his reason is even of the same fashion, as both he and every body
beside may see.

Therefore to agree al these Scriptures and Truethes together, what could be
more apt, then (as we be taught in the Schools) that there be three sorts of
working causes, Agens principale, Instrumentum coniunctum, Instrumentum
separatum, as in one writing, I do write as the principal, my hand does write
as the instrument united unto my person, and my pen does write as the
instrument separated from my person: Each of these working the whole work, and
not parting it between them. It is so in the working of our Salvation: The
Godhead works it principally: The Manhood of Christ, and the works of it,
namely his Passion, works it, as the arm of God: The Sacraments work it,
as his instruments divided from his person: And so likewise his mystical
members, the faithful, with their works, do work it, as it were means and
agents personally separated from him, though mystically united unto him. And
they part it not between them, but each after his manner works the whole. And
that is it which the Scripture means by helping, Pur. 241.
(the word that your ignorance so much abhors, when it so often says, yt
God helps both Christ, Psa. 17. and us, 2. Cor. 2. Heb. 13. And also that
Christ helps us. Heb. 2.

But yet there is a difference in this similitude. For God were sufficient to
save without the passion of Christ, and that by baptism, yea and without
baptism also and other such instruments. Likewise the passion of Christ were
sufficient to save, though not without God, yet without baptime and all other
like. But I can not write without my hand, nor without a pen.

If then the Godhead, (or to use your words, the infinite and only cause of our
salvation, the mere mercy of God) although it be so singularly omnisufficient,
does not exclude neither Christ's passion, nor the working of it, or merits of
that man: how does the omnisufficiencie of Christ's passion enforce you to
exclude either his baptism and his good works in his members, or also the
working of his baptism and the working or efficacy of those good works?
specially considering the Scripture is plain for all.

For as it is written, Pur. 97.
That he has washed us from our sins by his blood, Apoc. 1. So likewise,
that he has saved us by the lauer of Regeneration, Tit. 3. He cleanses his
Church by the lauer of water, Ephe. 5. Baptism does save you. 1. Pet. 3. So
again, He has made us kings and priests to God, Apoc. 1. If (spiritual)
priests, ergo to offer our spiritual Sacrifices, (as our mortification, Romans
12. our almesdeedes, Hebr. 13.) both for our own sins, and for the sins of
other: because the external Priest is ordained to offer external Sacrifices
for sins, both for him self, and for the people, Heb. 5.

Which places I allege rather then other as plain or playner, because you
were so blind to allege the self same for the contrary, to prove, that
Christ saves us by his blood alone, as though the grace thereof might not work
in his Sacraments, and in his members works. Whereupon also, upon the Angels
saying, Apo. 7. These are they that came out of great affliction, Pur. 95.
and have washed their stoles and made them white in the blood of the Lamb:
therefore they are in the presence of the throne of God: you make this clarkly
note, and say: Mark here, that they which came out of this great affliction,
were not purged thereby, but that they washed and made white their garments,
in the blood of the Lamb: by whose righteousness being clothed, they may
appear in innocence before the throne of God. The text says plainly, that
therefore they are before the throne, to wit, because they came out of such
affliction, and so whited their stoles: and yet this gloser takes it away
from the affliction, whereas that whiting was nothing else but that affliction.
He forgate to do himself that which he so loftily would seacute;eme to teach
us, To confer other places when there is a doubt. for in another place of
that book it is expressly written thus: Who so overcomes, shall be clothed
with white garments. Apoc. 3. And if you yet doubt, by what they overcome,
whether by the Lambs blood alone, or also by their own patient confession or
affliction unto death, it is written there again: And they overcame the devil
by the blood of the Lamb, and by their own martyrdom ( dia ^on logo^ ^es
martyri^s au^on,) and loved not their life even unto death, Apoc. 12. And S.
Paul accordingly calls it, 2. Cor. 4.
the mortification of Jesus, when the Apostles were mortified for Jesus: and
says, they carried the same about continually in their bodies, that also the
life of Jesus might be manifested in their self same bodies at the latter day,
which is ye same thing, that the Apocalipse calls to appear before the
throne in white stoles. Whereby you see, that as ye blood of Christ, so by it
martyrdom also, works such glory. For so it follows there again: This our
affliction, although it is but short and light, operatur, works us
everlasting weight of glory exceeding measure above measure. Because affliction
here for Jesus does so wash our stoles or bodies, therefore it procures that
they shall be so glorious in the Resurrection. this say these Scriptures. And so
much of the foundations, and by occasion of them. Now to Purgatory it self,
and prayer for the dead.

Secondly: directly of Purgatory it self and prayer for the dead. whether all
the elect go straight to Heaven: Before Christ's coming. Limbus patrum.
Directly against Purgatory, and prayer for the dead, you shoot diverse
arrows, or rather cockshotles, so deadly are the wounds that your shot does
make. First you will prove by many and evident Scriptures, that all the Elect
do go, yea and always from the beginning of the world have gone straight to
heaven, and therefore never no Purgatory, never no Limbus Patrum. Which if you
can do, your skill in the Scripture no doubt far passes all the ancient
Doctors, were they never so well studied therein. For they all could not find so
much as one text, that all or any one also went to heaven before Christ: yea
and not many textes, Vide Sander. monar. li. 7. page 518.520. Pur. 57.
that any one after him also, goes thither before the general Resurrection,
but rather very many textes, that until ye Church within these 300. years
defined the contrary, made it very probable, that none are there till then.

Well thus you begin, That the Fathers of the Old law before Christ, were not
in hell, it is to be proved with manifest arguments, and authorities out of
holy Scriptures. But first you think necessary to answer one text that stood
in your way, saying: Although they were not, nor yet are in perfect
blessedness, God providing a better thing for us, that they without us should
not be made perfect. Heb. 11. By that they of the old Testament were not made
perfect or consummate, without us of the new Testament, S. Paul there does
mean evidently that their Souls were not yet admitted into heaven: As in that
whole Epistle he shows, that the Old Testament did consummate nothing, but
contrariwise, Heb. 7. Heb. 10. Heb. 9.
that it made continually every year a commemoration of their sins, because
they remained still and were not perfectly remitted, and therefore that Christ
dyed In Redemptionem earum praeuaricationum quae erant sub priore Testamento,
To buy out the preuarications that were all that while, that so at length the
heirs might attain the everlasting inheritance which was promised. Heb. 9.
Nondum enim propalatam esse Sanctorum viam, adhuc priore tabernaculo habente
statum, For the way into Sancta or heaven, was not yet opened, until the high
Priest Jesus entered first thereinto: Heb. 10.
qui initiauit nobis viam nouam, It was he that began this new way unto us,
who now therefore have fiduciam in introitu Sanctorum, Confidence to enter in
after him being our forerunner, into the same Sancta. And all this is spoken
of our Souls: As for our bodies, neither yet is the way open, unless Sancta
were open when only the High priest entered into them. This was the providence
of God for us that we should not think we come to late, if the Fathers souls
had been admitted in before us. Confer the end of your own text with the
beginning of it, Heb. 11.
vt non consummarentur, and, non acceperunt repromissionem. See how plainly he
expounds, their not consummating to be their not attayning of the promise.
And what promise? Heb. 9.
Confer this other place, vt repromissione^ accipiant aeternae haereditatis,
That the heirs might attain the promise of everlasting inheritance. I might
at large declare ye same by the whole course of Scripture, as D. Allen says
very well, but that I am not here to allege, Pur. 439.
but only to answer. Well then against these most manifest Scriptures let us
hear the manifest authorities of Scripture which you pretend.

Pur. 57.58.
For you say, Seeing they all believed in Christ, they had everlasting life, and
entered not into condemnation, but passed from death to life, Io. 5. To what
life, but ye life or resurrection of their bodies? for until the last day, all
the dead are in death, but then some shall come forth into resurrection of
life, some others into resurrection of damnation, but he that believes in me,
has (that is, most certainly shall then have, John. 11.) life everlasting, and
comes not into damnation, but passes from death, (wherein he has so long
been) to life. This is the plain text of that place: As likewise in all the
New Testament, lightly every where, life after corporal death, signifies the
resurrection of the bodies, where the souls be in the mean time, here is
never a word: no nor of the Saints of the old Testament before the institution
of Baptism: whereunto belief in him gives now access, Ioa. 1. and 3, that
believing in him, they may have life, Io. 20. But their state we must gather
out of other places of holy Scripture.

And to what end (again you say) was Christ called the Lamb that was slain
from the beginning of the world, but that the benefit of his passion extends
unto the godly of all ages alike? This is your expounding of Scripture by
Scripture: you are a true man of your word. The place is Apo. 13. Whose names
were not written in the book of life of the Lambs that was slain from the
beginning of the world. Co^ferring it with this place, Apo. 17. Whose names
were not written in the book of life from the beginning of the world, you
perceive the error of your co^struction. It is not said, that the Lamb was
slain from the beginning of the world, but that all the reprobate shall adore
Antichrist when he comes, as the Gospel also says, Mat. 24.
that the Elect also should be then deceived, if it were possible.
Nevertheless, that ye Lamb was slain from the beginning of the world, is
true, though not in your fond sense, but because his death was so long before
preordeined of God and prefigured, as the Apostles do often say to stop the
mouths of them that objected newness to our Religion of salvation by a dead
man. As the like would be a justification of your new Gospel, if you could
show out of Scripture, that Luther was preordeined for that purpose.

Again in the same place you allege, that Esaias speaking of the righteous that
are departed out of this life, says that there is peace, and that they shall
rest in their beds, Esa. 57. Like as he affirms that Tophoth, which is
Gehinnone or hell, is prepared of old for the wicked, Esai. 30. Esai speaks
not of his own time, but (as a Prophet) of the time now since the coming of
Christ who is our peace. There is peace, say you: but he says, There shall come
peace, or as the Churches translation has no less agreably to the Hebrew, Let
peace come I pray. Moreover if it were granted, that then also they did rest
in their beds, because the death of the Just is but a sleep, for the assurance
of their resurrection, what were this to their souls? Also if their souls did
rest, must every rest needs be the bliss of heaven? We say not that Limbus
patrum was Purgatory, but yt it was a place of rest, because without poena
sensus, though not without poena damni for the time. Suppose a kings son and
heir, that by some crime deserved disheriting, but the king his father of
grace will let him inhirite, mary not at the time he otherwise should, but
certain years after, yet during those years also he shall be well and
honorably provided for: may we not say that this man is at ease, considering
his provision, and yet in punishment also, considering his loss for the time?
Such was their case in Limbo. It was not hell, you say, because it was not
Tophet or Gehenna. Why? our Creed and the Scripture says, that Christ's Soul
was in hell, Infra ca. 12.
and yet no man so wicked except it were Calvin him self (I think) to say,
it was in Gehenna. Therefore Gehenna or Tophet, the place for the wicked, was
not the only hell.

As vaynly, and more falsely you argue that it was not hell, because Luc. 16.
Lazarus was carried by Angels not down to hell, but up to Abraham's bosom.
Carried up? is that portari, or, apenechthinai? But the rich man is in hell,
you say, and he looks up, and sees a far of Lazarus in the bosom of
Abraham. The same wise argument again: In this place this is called hell,
therefore no other may be called hell, although the Scripture it self else where
names to us another hell. The places might in situation (at least in respect
of the heavenly mantions being so far distant from them both) be nigh together,
although one were upward, and also far of both in state and situation
(purgatory peradventure being between them.) Again if it were granted that
they were no way nigh together, yet it would not follow, that Abraham's bosom
was heaven. As neither, if Lazarus were carried upward. 4. Reg 2.
For so was Elias: who yet was not carried into heaven that now we speak of.

Another of your manifest arguments, being the last in that place: If
righteousness belongs to Abraham's children, the reward of righteousness also
pertains unto them. Therefore Abraham's bosom was open to receive all the
children of Abraham, even as Joan. 1.
the bosom of God was ready to receive Abraham, because he was his son
through faith. Nay you should have said, because he was That which is proper
to vnigenitus, he makes common to Abraham.
vnigenitus qui est in sinu patris, The only begotten son, who is in the
bosom of the Father, and then you had said somewhat. But these your gross
ignorances in the scripture, I must reserve to their own proper Chapter. To
your argument I say, Infra ca. 12.
that the reward of righteousness may belong to one, and yet not paid him as
soon as he dies. S. Paul naming both Abraham him self and many children of
his, says expressly: According to faith all these departed, Heb. 11.
not receiving the promises, but beholding them a far of. And again, And all
these renowned by faith, received not the promise, that is, the inheritance,
the reward of righteousness.

Pur. 441.451.
In two other places also you prate against Limbus, but you allege no other
Scripture against it. Well then, you have not proved, that before Christ's
coming any one went to heaven: nor that all went straight to Limbus, and
therefore none to Purgatory. Now whether since Christ's coming they all go
straight to heaven, and therefore none to Purgatory, let us likewise examine.

Whether since Christ all go straight to heaven.
There is no prayer for the dead nor Purgatory after this life (you say)
because they that live unto Christ, dye unto him, Pur. 451.
and being dissolved are with him. Ioa. 17. And in another place more
distinctly, Pur. 276.
We believe that the souls of the faithful and the repenta^t are where Christ
is, as he prays, Ioa. 17. Father I will that those whom thou have given me,
where I am they also may be with me, that they may see my glory. And even so he
says to the Thief no perfect just man, but a sinner repentant: This day thou
shall be with me in Paradise. Luc. 23. And S. Paul desires to be dissolved and
to be with Christ. Philip. 1. That to be with Christ, is to see his Godheades
glory, and not only his manheades glory, would hardly be proved out of the
Scripture. Yet because it makes with the foresaid definition of the Church, I
grant it. So then, the example of the Apostle S. Paul declares, that a
perfect just man goes straight to Christ: The example of the Thief declares,
that likewise a penitent sinner, goes straight to Christ, if either his
penance be full and perfect, or his pardon, which is a remission of his
penance, be a plenary. And the saying, Joan. 17. specially being illustrate
with these two examples, declares as much: howbeit by it self alone it
declares no more, but that they which are Christ's, may and shall be with
Christ, but when, it says not. You allude there to one place more, which is
Romans 14. We live to our Lord, and we dye to our Lord. Whereby he means not,
that we be with our Lord when we dye, no more then he means that we be with
our Lord when we live: but that both in our life and at our death, from the
beginning to the end, we be not our own men, but servants to another, and
that he therefore is my Judge if I do not well, and not thou: also to him I my
self must make my count, and not thou for me. This being the sense of that
place, you had forsooth great reason to confer it with Apoc. 14. to control
S. Augustines sense, Pur. 436.446.
who expounds it of Martyrs, which is there said, Blessed are the dead that
dye in our Lord: now after that the spirit says that they shall rest from
their labors. You reply, saying, that D. Allen understanding it only of
Martyrs, Aug. ca. 9. li. 20. de Ci.
calls Augustine to witness thereof: but that it is spoken of all the
faithful, and therefore overthrows Purgatory, witness hereof I will not
take of flesh and blood, say you, (see what he makes of S. Augustine,) but of
the holy Ghost. Romans 14. we all dye unto the Lord. Your skill in the
Scripture is great, that make it all one, to dye in the Lord, and, to dye to
the Lord. All that dye to the Lord, have (as the Apostle there says) to make
their accompt^ to him, which may and will to some fall out to their damnation.
but blessed are al they that dye in the Lord. Wherefore these two are not all
one. True it is, that all, which dye well and in the Churches peace, dye in
our Lord, as they are called also dormientes in Christo. 1. Cor. 15. and mortui
in Christo. 1. These. 14. they that sleep in Christ, the dead in Christ,
wheresoever their Souls be after that sleeping and dying, in heaven or in
purgatory. But yet the place Apoc. 14. is very well said of D. Allen to be
spoken not of all that so dye, but only of martirs, neither of al martirs, but
of them only that shall suffer in the time and rage of Antichrist, for so the
circumstance of the letter plainly gives. You therefore that will have one
place always conferred with another, consider the circumstance, see what goes
before, what comes after, and you shall find, that he speaks of the last
time, exhorting the faithful then not for any fear to adore the beast, but to
dye constantly in our Lord, for now the Resurrection is even at hand, and
therefore their labors all at an end. Fear the Lord (says one Angel,
preaching to all the world at that time) and give honor to him: because the
very hour of his Judgment is come: and adore him, adore not Antichrist. And
another Angel follows, saying: Cecidit, cecidit, down down is fallen
Babylon. And another Angel: If any adore the beast, he shall be tormented in
fire and brimstone for ever and ever. Then a voice from heaven: Blessed are the
dead that (will not adore the beast, but) dye in the Lord. Now after this the
Spirit says, that they shall rest from their labors. For their works (that
is, their reward) do follow them now at hand. And immediately there after
comes forth the Judge upon a white cloud, and the Siethes, and down goes
all the world. Lo this is the circumstance. Whereby you see, the place says not
so much as those Martyrs to be at rest so soon as they dye, but only within a
very short time after. This is the place that quite overthrows Purgatory.

And so I have examined all that you allege for going straight to heaven.
Another way you proceed against Purgatory and prayer for the dead, by the
Judgment which is after this life.

Whether the Judgment may stand with Purgatory.
The tree, whether it fall to the South or the North, Pur. 436.439.441.
it lies ever where it lights. Eccl. 11. Your co^mentary upon this place is,
that the fall of the tree to the south or to the north, is the judgment of God
concerning every man, either of reward or of punishment, which can not be
altered after a man's death: and therefore by this place prayers be not
profitable. Why? who says that prayers shall so alter their judgment? Some be
judged to heaven, but differred, as they in Limbo at the very same time when
this was written, and others not so good both then and now in Purgatory. To
bring these to heaven whereunto they be so judged, prayers do serve. And this
differring is signified by ye Wiseman even in the same place, quia post tempora
multa inuenies illum. He exhorts them to do almesdeedes and all other good
works that they can, because a great while after thou shall find it. The tree
that fell in the South, it may be a good while after before he be all trimmed.
For not the soul only, but also the body falls to be rewarded or punished.
And who sees not how long after the fall it is, before the body have
accordingly? Only before his fall let every one look to his works: for after
the fall, Luc. 16.
he shall find Chaos magnum, a huge distance between the north and the south,
and therefore no possibility of removing from the one to the other. This is
the sense of that place, as D. Allen told you before, and your reply against it
is tootoo frivolous. For you say, that then they should always lie in
Purgatory, because the certeintie of their salvation, is as great before they
were borne, as after they be dead. Certainty of their salvation, that by him
the Wiseman speaks of, rises after their dying in grace, of the unalterable
judgment, that by your self the Wiseman speaks of, and it is the
impossibility of removing to the north or to damnation. What makes this
against removing out of Purgatory into heaven, which is not removing out of the
south into ye north, but only further into the south, even into the final
place that straight after his fall both his soul and body were judged unto.

You argue again of the Judgment, saying, Pur. 281.
Immediately after death follows Judgment, but prayers either need not or
boot not when the party is either acquitted or condemned by the sentence of the
Judge, which (as S. Augustine says) can not be indifferent between reward and
punishment, De lib. arb. li. 3. cap. 23. S. Augustine says there the contrary
rather, as you shall see if you read the place. And to your argument I say: In
that judgment, some be condemned to hell, for whom prayers boot not. Others
be acquitted from hell: and of these, some straight rewarded in their souls, and
so prayers need not, but not yet rewarded in their bodies, and for that
therefore they pray, Apoc. 6. until they be heard, Apoc. 11. Others not
straight rewarded neither in their souls. And of these again, some, without
poena sensus, punishment of sense, only differred, as they in Limbo, who prayed
accordingly, no less then the foresaid for the redemption of their bodies.
Others first to be punished temporally, according to their debtes, Mat. 5.
to wit, for being angry, or saying Raca, and them to be not only let out of
their prison, because it is not Gehenna ignis, for they said not Fatue, but
also rewarded for their merits. And for these again, while they be in prison,
prayers, as they need, so also they boot, because the Judge is merciful. And
so you see no less then three sorts, which your division lacks.

Pur. 436.444.
And thereby at once is answered your other objection of the wide way, and the
narrow way, Mat. 7. If there be but two ways in this life (you say) there are
but two abiding places after this life. In the wide way of breaking Gods
commandments, some go wider then some, with infinite variety, yet al in the
wide way: and these after death go to damnation, namely their souls, and
straight to damnation, because they have nothing to stay the^ out of it, so
much as a minute of an hour. In the narrow way of keeping Gods commandments,
some go narrower then some, with infinite variety likewise, yet all in the
narrow way: and these after death go to life, though not straight in body, none
of them, neither in soul also many of them, because they have somewhat to stay
them out of it for a time, to wit, temporal debt of venial sin, and also of
mortal sin forgiven but the due penance not fully paid nor fully pardoned.
And so you see, that the two ways of this life stand well enough with
Purgatory.

Pur. 436.444.
Again you allege that it is written of ye Judgment, 2. Cor. 5. we shall all
stand before the Judgment seat of Christ, to receive each of us the own of his
body, according as he did, either good or evil. Not D. Allen, but (as he
alleges) S. Augustine, Aug. Ench. cap. 100. Dion, Ec. Hier. ca. 7.
as also S. Dionisius Areopagita, answers, that the Churches praying for the
dead, is nothing repugnant hereunto, because the dead in our Lord, in his life
deserved, that these works after his death might be profitable unto him. And
to this answer you have no reply, to maintain that Scripture against such
prayer. Only you oppose a saying of S. Hierom, very fondly, as in ye next
chap. I will show.

Once again you reason of the Judgment: If Purgatory be so necessary to
satisfy Gods justice by temporal pains of sinners, Pur. 85.
according to the time, etc. and Purgatory shall cease at the day of Judgment,
as you affirm out of Augustine: how shall the same be satisfied in such as dye
immediately before the day of Judgment, so that they have not had time enough
there to be sufficiently purged? The like may be demanded of all them which in
a moment shall be changed from mortality to immortality, at the very coming
of Jesus Christ to Judgment. These questions, M. Allen, will trouble your head
to answer and retain your former principles. Two doughtie questions. Where
did D. Allen set down that principle, that Purgatory is necessary to satisfy
according to the time? I find where he says, Pur. 44.
[ If any debt or recompense remain to be discharged by the offender after his
reconcilement, it must needs rise by proportion, weight, continuance, number,
and quantity of the faults committed before. Whereby it must of necessity be
induced, that because every man can not have time to repay all in his life,
that there is all, or some part, answerable in the world to come.] Here we
have continuannce of the faults, and time of his life: but time of Purgatory,
that you have to tell us where you had it. The truth is, that a short time in
Purgatory will so pay the sinner, that it had been better for him to spend
much longer time in penance, as in this life also a little while in fire
passes, I trow, the pain of longer time, in fasting, etc. Neither is it hard
for god to punish one in the shortest time, as grievously as an other in 1000.
years. Nor again repugnant to his mercy, to remit such punishment at the
request of his glorious Saints (which is S. Augustines answer to your
objection) as he now does to the like, for the Churches prayers. Aug. de Ci.
li. 21. ca. 24.27
Lo what a hard thing it was to answer your Demaundes.

Whether Faith, Hope, and Gods Will, may stand with Purgatory.
After these two assaylings of Purgatory, by going straight to heaven, and by
the judgment, there remains your third and last assault, Pur. 421.
wherein you say to us: We learn by Scripture, that your doctrine is contrary
to the faith, and hope of Christians. And how show you that? Pur. 382.
If it be against the hope of Christians to mourn for the dead, much more it
is against the faith and hope of Christians to pray for them. For by our prayer
we suppose them to be in misery whom the word of God does testify to be in
happiness, to be at rest, to be with Christ, Io. 17. Apoc. 14. Neither those
Scriptures, nor any other by you alleged, as I have showed, do testify, that
all straight after death be so, and therefore to suppose some of them to be in
misery, and so to pray for them, is not proved to be against the word of God.
Neither to mourn for some, yea and for all, is said to be against Hope. I
would have you know that they shall rise again, says the Apostle, to the end
that you mourn not for them, 1. These. 4.
sicut et ceteri qui spem non habent, in such sort as others that have not
hope of their Resurrection. So then, there is one manner of mourning without
hope, and there is another manner of mourning with hope, and such is our
mourneing with prayer. When Christ prayed for his own Resurrection, Psalm. 15.
Act. 2. did that argue him to be void of hope, or rather to have hope? When
also we all pray for the general Resurrection, Thy kingdom come, and mourn
and groan for the dilation, do we against hope, do we not rather most
manifestly declare our hope thereby?

Moreover you say there: To that which is required of the express word of
God, forbidding prayers for the dead, we answer that all places of the
Scripture that forbid prayers without faith, forbid prayers for the dead. For
faith is not every man's vain persuasion, but an assurance out of the word of
God. Which because we can not have in praying for the dead, therefore we are
forbidden to pray for them This argument supposes, Cap. eode^, part. 1.
that the word of God is only Scripture, which you can not prove, as in the
one place here above I have declared. Again it supposes, that prayer for the
dead is not assured by Scripture, which besides the most express place of the
Machabees, and diverse others, now shall another evident place control even the
same place that you allege against us. Thus you say: Pur. 281.
We learn out of Gods word, that whatsoever we do pray for according to Gods
will, we shall obtain. 1. Io. 5. Therefore this one Hatchet shall cut a sunder
al: Prayers for the dead are not according to the will of God, and therefore
they are not heard at all. I deny the Minor: you have not, nor can not prove
it. Yea I say further, It is against that which the Apostle there both
inte^deth and expresses, to wit, that we should pray for our brethren after
they be dead, if they ended not their life in sin, because that praying is
according to Gods will. For it follows there immediately: Who so knows his
brother to sin (he uses the present tense, and not the preterfect tense, to
have sinned, because his intent is to exhort also the sinner to leave by time)
a sin not to death, (as one that lived in Schism, but yet was reconciled
before he dyed) let him (after his death) request of Christ, and life shall be
given unto him, to one, I say, sinning not unto death. Sin there is unto
death: I say not that any pray for that, (because it is not according to
Christ's will to pray for them that be in hell.) All iniquity is sin, and
therefore to be diligently avoided, and not so much as one moment to be
incurred: And there is sin unto death: As if he would say, if you avoid not
that, no hope after your death, your brethren can not help you by praying for
you. This is the plain and smooth sense of that whole place: and so must
needs be, because there is no man nor no sin in this life, but we may pray
for him and it, as neither the Nouatians (as bad as they were) did deny. Only
the Protestants deny it, because they have no other shift to avoid this
place: And thereby let any indifferent, any Christian man judge, whether this be
not a plain place for praying for the dead. Fulkes words of sins in this
life, and men in this life not to be prayed for, and that to be this sin, and
sinner unto death, I shall recite in the twelfth Chapter amongst his grossest
errors and absurdities.

Thus I have answered (thanks be to God) al his Scriptures against Purgatory,
and all his arguments made out of the Authority thereof, both negatiuely and
affirmatively. Cap. 7. part. 4.
Whereby appears to the full the vanity of his bragges in the last Chapter
against the church of God, that he could and would produce against the doctrine
thereof, such plain testimonies of Scripture, such Scripture also for the
meaning of each place, as by no means might be avoided. Whereas amongst all his
testimonies, you see there is not one, but it has been clearly answered. As
now in this fourth and last part shall be answered likewise, with the like
help of god, all other Scriptures that in these two most insolent Libelles in
any place up and down he alleges against any other point of the Churches
doctrine.

The fourth part. Concerning all other questions that he mentions.
And first to put all the same in some order, for the more utility of the
Reader: I conceive all the differences that are between us and the Protestants
in this division: Some are about the witnesses of Gods word, the principles of
Divinity, or grounds of all truth: which by them is only Scripture, by us
not only Scripture but also the Church, and certain others: whereupon we frame
our Motives to all men, to believe us and not the Heretics, showing them, that
such and such are the principles which they must believe, and withal, that the
said principles, every one of them, stand for us, and not for the Protestants.
Some are about other particular or private controversies: Which may be reduced
unto these two heads, Good-workes, and the Sacraments, the doctrine of which
both, they corrupt with their new inue^tion of Only faith, Only Scripture* and
Only Faith
as they do the foresaid with their toye of Only Scripture.

What Scripture he alleges about the first sort, I have in the two first
parts of this chapter reported them al, and answered the^, saving a very few,
which I reserve to ye tenth chapter which shall be of every Motive or Demand
apart by it self. There in these five Motives, of Churches, Service,
Priesthood with Sacrifice, Monks and Pope, I will answer his few Scriptures
thereunto belonging.

Now then, concerning the second sort, and first Good-workes, what he alleges
about them, concerns them partly in general, partly in special, that is to
say, prayer, fasting, or alms.

About Good-works in general.
Justification.
Good works in general it concerns, that he says, They do not justify:
whereunto he alleges two places, one of S. Paul, Pur. 450.
the other of Esaias, We believe (says he) that a man is not justified by works,
but by faith only, Romans 3. And yet we believe that good works are necessary to
be in every man that is justified, A fa^sarie.
Iac. 5. The words of S. James be not as he says, but expressly against
him: A man is justified by works, and not by faith only. Where you see also,
that it is in all one sense, that works do justify and faith. The words of S.
Paul likewise be not as he says, but thus: A man is justified by faith,
without the works of the law. That is to say, although he have not evermore
done the works which the law commands, to wit, good works, yea although he
have sometimes, yea and always done the clean contrary, to wit, all evil
works: yet let him come to the Catholic faith, and he shall there find a
remedy for all, and of a wicked and so wicked a man be made just, all his
sins and wickedness being remitted him. This says S Paul, and the same say
we. But after he is so justified, he must not do the like again, he must then
keep the commandments of the Law, being now by Christ made a new man, and
able thereunto, and by so doing he shall be more justified, as S. James says.
Confer these two places of S. Paul's also. The justice that is of the Law,
qui fecerit homo, the man that has done it, shall live by it, Romans 10. ex
Leuit. 18. Which is in effect that no man shall live by it, because no man has
done it, but all men have done against it, all being borne in sin, and
therefore not by the works of justice which we had done, but according to his
own great mercy he saved us by baptism. Tit. 3. Do you mark the tense? He
speaks of works before faith, where you should have alleged of works after
faith. And so withal is answered your other place, Ar. 102.
where you say, that the Popish Church is not content to be clothed in the
white shining silk, which is the justification of Saints, made white in the
blood of the Lamb, but with the filthy rags of man's righteousness, Esai. 64.
If God convert your heart, that you may return to your mother the Catholic
Church, you shall find that she will make nothing of all the good works
which you do now in Heresy, because it is but man's righteousness. But the
good works which afterward in the Church you should have of her husband
the Lamb, where learned you to call them The filthy rags of man's
righteousness? Apoc. 19.
He that doubts whether those Iustifications of the faithful in the
Apocalipse, be (as I say) just works, the same Apostle (if he will confer
places) in his first Epistle tells him: 1. Ioh. 3.
O my children let no man deceive you: he that works justice, is just.

Free Will.
You allege also two places against Free Will, which again concerns Good
works in general: Pur. 450.
We believe that man after his fall has not Free Will, no not aptnes of will
to think any thing that is good, 2. Cor. 3. S. Paul's words are these: We are
not sufficient of our selves to think any thing, as of our selves, but our
sufficiency is of God. This does not take away from us natural freewill, nor
natural aptnes of will, as it does not take away our selves from us; but only
it shows, from whence we have power to do as we do in matters of salvation,
to wit, of Gods gift, and not of our selves. If your scholar should upon
just cause commend him self for writing (as S. Paul there co^menmendeth him
self for converting hearts to God,) and then to avoid arrogancy should say,
that it is not of him self, but of his Masters instruction, that he can write
so well, the scholar, for all this (I trow) had understanding and aptnes to
understand. For else how could he have been taught to write? You know, the
Scripture likeneth the holy Ghost to a teacher, Joan. 6. Heb. 10. Psa. 118.
and the grace of God to teaching, and to teaching of our hearts or wills. Your
other place I find, Pur. 35. How shall Free Will be maintained, if Gods
Spirit have any place, that distributeth to every one according to the good
pleasure of his own will. 1. Cor. 12. You do not deny, but Man before his fall
had Freewill, and yet Gods spirit then also did distribute to every one
according to the good pleasure of his own will. And now likewise after the
fall, does not S. Paul in the very same Chapter give some place to men's wills
in the gifts of Gods spirit? saying to the Corinthians: Covet after the
better gifts, but specially after charity, because that passes all those
gifts, 1. Cor. 12.13 14.
yea and faith and hope also: therefore Sectamini, Labor all that you can for
Charity: mary covet also after those gifts, to speak with tongues, and to
prophecy, but of the two, rather for to prophecy. Again: He that speaks
with a tongue, let him pray to interpret. See how plainly he stirs their
minds or wills to seek for the gifts that God gives to every one according
to his own will. This deceives you, that you do not consider, that God can
work his own will upon our wills: and therefore you imagine that he is not
omnipotent, if we have wills of our own. Yes sir, be our wills never so
unwilling, he can (as you may see by the conversion of S. Paul, turn them to
his own will, and to the very bend of his own will, more or less, even as
much as he will. Howbeit I am not ignorant, that S. Paul there treats
specially of the gifts called Gratiae gratis datae, and not gratum facientes:
in the distribution whereof, Gods will may and did commonly work, without
cooperation of man's will, although man's will may in such also, and did
sometimes concur, as in them that prayed for the gift to interpret tongues.

About Good-workes, in special.
I come with you now to the species of Good-workes, Prayer to Saints.
and first to prayer. And of prayer for the dead I have already dispatched.
Then against prayer to Saints, what have you? Pur. 451.
We call not upon Saints, because we believe not in them, for how should we
call upon them, in whom we believe not? Romans 10. Again: Pur. 310.
Touching Ambrose, and some other also about his time, their Invocation of
Saints, was not agreeable to the doctrine of S. Paul, who shows that we can
invoke none but him in whom we believe, which to al true Christians is God
only And yet if you remember since the second Chapter) S. Ambrose and his
fellows of that time, were true Christians. But I must keep that to your
contradictions in the eleventh Chapter. Heb. 13. Ephesians. 6.
And again S. Paul him self was (I trow) agreeable to his own doctrine: who
yet so often inuocateth and calls upon the faithful, beseeching them to pray
for him. Well then, to your objection: where is your scripture (for you will
not, if you be a man of your word, run to Doctors) that we must believe in
God only, and that we may not believe Exo. 14. in Heb. 2. Par. 20. in Heb.
Philem.
in his Saints also? The Scripture in your own place and in sundry other
places teaches me to believe also John. 14 Romans 3.
in Christ according to his humanity, and namely in his blood. Also the Creed
of the first Nicene Council teaches me to believe Ar. 83. Epi. in fine
Aucorat.
In the one holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, as you may see also in the
end of the New Testament set forth by your own master, Hier contr. Lucif.
Infra ca. 10 them. 34.
Beza. And S. Hierome says, that it was solenne, the custom in Baptism,
after confession of the Trinity, to ask, Credis in Sanctam Ecclesiam? Do
thou believe in holy Church? And immediately he adds: In what Church believed
the Arrian? In the Arrians Church? But they have not the Church. In our Church?
sed extra hanc baptizatus, but being baptized out of her, he could not believe
in her that he knew not. Even as S. Paul says of Christ in the place that you
allege, How shall they believe (in him) whom they have not heard of? His intent
there is, that the Apostles preaching to the Gentiles is of God.
Whereby you perceive, that S. Hierome remembered the place well enough. Briefly
therefore, we believe not in the Arrians Church, nor in the Arrians Saints,
nor in your Church, nor in your Saints: but we believe in the Catholic
Church, and in her Saints, because it is God and Christ his Church, God and
Christ his Saints. And so we do not invoke Arius, nor Hus, nor Luther, nor
Calvin, nor any other falsenamed Saints of Heretics, but after God we
invoke Christ the man our Lord, and his most glorious mother our Lady, and
S. Peter, S. Paul, with the rest of the Catholic Saints: both believing in
God, in Christ, in his Saints, and also inuocating God, and Christ, and his
Saints, not all alike, but every one in his degree, the degree of the Saints
being so far different from the degree of God, as it is incomparable. You
deceived your self with this distinction, Credo in deum, Credo deo, Credo
deum, I believe in God, I believe (to) God, Aug. in Io. tr. 29. Theoph. in Io.
12.
I believe God, having heard that some Authors do (in a certain sense) make it
be God alone in whom we believe: and not knowing, that other authors, and also
the Scriptures will (in another sense) have us to believe in such as be of God.
As of a stone falling from an high, although it be most properly said, tendit
in centrum terrae, yet is it well said also, tendit in superficiem terrae, as
in order to the center, whereupon in saying it tends to the superficies, we
do in deed say, it tends to the center. I know some Catholics in answering
to this objection, do say, that the Apostle means such invocation as tends
immediately to ye last end, that is, to god, and so do grant accordingly, yt it
is believing in God alone, whereof he speaks, which is a sufficient answer to
the objection. But I considering that he speaks of Christ as mediator, and
therefore as man* have said what I think most agreeable to ye text.

As for your iangling there without allegations, that if Saints be inuocated,
then God alone knows not the hearts of al men, Pur. 451.
and God only is not to be worshipped (and served,) and Christ is not our only
Mediator and advocate: Where you say this to us now whom you deny to be the
true Church, and to S. Ambrose with others of old who^ you confess to have
been ye true Church notwithstanding: so you must say it likewise to S. John,
for inuocating the holy Angels, Apoc. 1. and to God himself for making an
Angel to be worshipped, Apo. 3. (as more at large I told you in the 6.
chapter, to the Angel also that in his golden censer offers our prayers,
making such a perfume of them before God, Supra page 42.
by means of his incense mingled with them Apo. 8. To the 24. Seniors also,
which semblably have phialas adoramentorum quae sunt orationes Sanctoru^,
sweet odours, that is to say, our prayers in boules for the purpose, singing
accordingly praises to Christ in the person of all tribes, and tongues, and
people, and nations. Apoc. 5. Finally to all which in the holy Scripturs
recommend others to God, or desire to be reco^mended of others. If you will not
quarrel with these likewise, you must let fall your suite against the former,
and confess that it is nothing against one mediator to god, though we are and
have never so many mediators, so yt al make suite to God by him. Nothing also
against god alone to be worshipped, so yt we worship none but for him. Nothing
finally against God alone to know our hearts, so that all others know them by
him. For otherwise your argument proceeds as well against Chirst the man, that
neither he is to be worshipped, 1.Tim. 2.
nor knows the hearts of men. For as he has it by the gift of God, so his
Saints likewise by gift have it in their degree.

So much of prayer: now to fasting. Fasting.
About which you have again two textes. Thus you say to D. Allen: You are they
that attend to spirits of error and doctrines of devils, forbidding to marry,
Pur. 391.20 22. Ar. 20.93.
and absteining (or, commanding to abstain) from meats which God has created
to be received with thanks giving. 1. Tim. 4. There is the brande mark of
Romish religion, that all the water in Tiberis, nor in the Ocean sea, shall not
be able to wash out. Well and lustily crowed. But soft a little, and you shall
see me straight draw enough and enough again, even out of your own puddle, to
wash al sufficiently. In the third chapter I have recorded your own words,
Supra page 10.
how Aerius taught that Fasting-daies are not to be observed. And how Iouinian
taught that fasting and abstinence from certain meats profit little or
nothing at all. Ar. 45.46
And that for this cause S. Epiphanius and S. Augustine counted Aerius for an
Heretic, as S. Augustine counts Iouinian likewise for no better, for that he
said, Au. Her. 82 and de Ec. dog. ca. 68.
Nec aliquid prodesse, That fastes and abstinence from certain meats do not
profit any thing: or as we have in another place, for that he did believe, nil
meriti accrescere, That it is no increase of merit, to them, that for love to
chastise their bodies, do abstain from wine or flesh. Of that judgment were
these Fathers, and yet they were (if you remember your own confession since
the second Chapter) of the true Church, and in high favor with God. And
therefore this is not such a mark in Romish religion, but that it may be
current enough. How much more, considering that you confess further, Pur. 75.
1. Cor. 9.
and say: In deed S. Paul commands, and by his example commends
christian chastiseme^t of men's bodies, by abstinence and fasting, and that for
danger of eternal damnation. Is not here then great need of all Tiberis, yea
and of all the Occean sea: Well then, whom and what does S. Paul mean there?
The Manichees, the Tacianistes, and other such Heretics (of who^ I noted more
in the sixth Chapter) which said, that certain meats were the creatures of the
devil. Mark the words, and confer them together: To abstain from the
meats, which God has created: And why is that an error and a doctrine of the
devils? because every creature of God is good, and nothing is to be rejected.
And therefore S. Augustine answering the Manichees, (as I do now the
Protestants) noted in like manner upon the very words, Aug. co^tra Faust. li. 30
ca. 6.
that there is much difference between them that abstein from meats for a
sacred signification (as they in the old Testament,) or for chastising of the
body (as now the Catholics:) and them that abstain from meats which God has
created, dicendo quod eos deus non creauit, saying, that God did not create
them. Therefore the former is the doctrine of the Prophets and of the
Apostles, the later, of the lying devils.

Your other text is for Iouinian, against the merit of fasting: If Iouinian
taught, Ar. 46.
that fasting, abstinence from certain meats, and other bodily exercise, of
them selves profit little, his doctrine agrees with S. Paul. 1. Tim. 4. but
if he taught (as he is charged) that such things profit nothing at all, we
agree not with him in that opinion. You would feign wipe your hands of
Iouinians heresy, but it will not be, the brandmarke is imprinted to deep, it
will not out. For his heresy was (as you heard even now) that Fasting and
abstinence is not more meritorious, then eating with thanks giving. So S.
Augustine means, Merits.
when he charge him to have taught, Nec aliquid prodesse, That they profit
nothing, as by another place I have told you more plainly: And as in the same
place, in the very next article of his heresy, he charge him, that Meritis
adaequabat, To the merits of chaste and faithful matrimonies he made equal (
and not more meritorious, as the Catholics did, and do) the virginity of
Nuns, and the continence of the mansexe in holy persons that choose the
single life. S. Paul's words to Timothee, are these: Exercise thy self unto
Religion, or godliness. For bodily exercise is profitable unto little: but
religion is profitable unto all things, having promise of this present life,
and of the life to come. Now what Scripture confer you, to show that by
bodily exercise he means fasting and abstinence from wine or flesh? The thing
is plain, if we mark and confer no more but the words of this place it
self: that bodily exercise is that, which is done for the body, to preserve it
in health, and in this present life. to the which most men, yea priests and
bishops sometimes are too much given, mispe^ding much time in walking, riding,
hunting, hawking, and such like, for the preservation of their bodies: and
little or no time at all in spiritual exercise, that is to say, for the
preservation and increase of their souls in godliness and religion, whereas the
same notwithstanding is (as we know by Gods promise in diverse places of holy
Scripture) profitable both to that little, which they seek for by such bodily
exercise, that is, to this present life (in so much that many holy Ermites and
Monks, living continually in such exercise, have passed the age of a hundred
years) and also which is incomparable to the life to come. And therefore S.
Paul absteined and fasted him self, to avoid eternal damnation, as your
self confessed a little before, Ne reprobus efficiar, least I become a
reprobate, 1. Cor. 9.
says he, and not only that, but also to get coronam incorruptam, a crown
incorruptible. And the place is much to be noted for conference with this place
which we have in hand, because he there calls it his running, and fighting,
that he did so sharply use his own body, saying that he did therein imitate
the scholars of bodily exercise, to wit, the runners in gole, and fighters at
barriers, who, to make them selves more nimble and active, abstain from all
things, and yet no more but to win a corruptible crown, being as little a
thing as that little that he speaks of to Timothy, or rather much less,
though of some esteemed much more, such present glory (I say) compared with
this present life and health thereof. Thus you see by conference most
manifestly, what is bodily exercise, and that you clean contrary, not knowing
white from black, take it for fasting and abstinence, for that exercise (I
say) which the Apostle there opposes to it, and counts spiritual, or
exercise unto Godward. Which spiritual exercise, as S. Paul, so his disciple
also S. Timothy used in like champion manner: Amongst other points of it, to
keep him self chaste, he absteined wholly from wine, and drunk nothing but
water, though being marvelous weak of body. Whereupon the Apostle, like a
tender father, writes unto him: 1. Tim. 5.
Keep thy self chaste, by other exercise: but do not yet drink water: but use
a little wine for thy stomach and thy often sicknings. Which place again you
deprave, and say, that the Apostle writes this unto him, assuring him that
such bodily exercise profits but a little. Pur. 76.
No sir, I have showed you what the Apostle calls bodily exercise, and that
he counts this to be exercise unto godliness, and that it profits so much as
imports, besides this life, which is but little, the avoiding of damnation,
and the winning of a crown in heaven. Howbeit for all that, they which are weak
of body, must run and wrestle as they may: Timothy must consider that he is
exceeding feeble, and therefore not always to drink water only, and yet
withal, that he is young, and therefore not to be very bold of wine, but use a
little only. The measure of al is, as S. Paul has taught us, 1. Cor. 9.
to tame the pride of the body, to subdue it, to bring it under, that it be not
our master, that it be our servant, neither rebelling against our
commandment, nor fainting in our necessary work. Which measure is set and
prescribed, so as it might in general, by his Spirit, and by his Spouse, who
prophesied of such prescript fasting, like to ye fastes prescribed by S. John
to his disciples, Mat. 9.
as also of the Pharisees, and Filij sponsi, the children of the Bridegroom, do
fast them, howsoever the children of Aerius and of Iouinianus, do break them,
contemn them, blaspheme them. So much of Good-works: now to the Sacraments.

About the Sacraments, in general.
Of the Sacraments in general, first you say: Pur. 450.
We believe that there are but two Sacraments of the New Testament, Baptism
and the Lords Supper, instituted by Christ. 1. Cor. 10. You mean belike the
beginning of that chapter, where it is said that ye Israelites were in Moses
baptized in the Cloud and in the Sea, and did eat and drink of Manna and of
the Rock. Are those the sacraments of the new Testament instituted by Christ?
Again suppose they are: what a reason is this, In that place we read of two,
Supra page
ergo there are but two? It is no good Logike (you said your self in this
chapter above) to conclude negatiuely of one place of Scripture, This is not
contained in it, therefore it is not true. For we read as plainly, yea more
plainly, of the other five sacraments in other places, as of Confirmation,
Ioa. 7. of Penance, Io. 20. of Extreme unction, Iac. 5. of Orders, Mat. 26. of
Matrimony, Mat. 19, and of most of them, in many other places also. That they
be Sacraments I confess we read not there: no more do we 1. Cor. 10. or any
where else read that the other two be Sacraments, but that we gather of that
which we read, and as well in the five as in the two. This is enough: yet for
further satisfaction, the studious may consider that S. Paul, 1. Cor. 10. had
just cause to mention those two or three figures only. For his purpose there
is, 1. Cor. 9.10
to warn us, that it is not enough that we be entered within the bars, but
that we must afterward run and fight coragiously, to win ye prise. Therefore
he names these Mosaical mysteries, that were figures of the Sacraments which
we began withal, to wit, Baptism and the complement of Baptism which is
Confirmation, and the Eucharist: which three were then commonly, and yet be at
once ministered adultis, at their first entering into the Church, as it is
manifest in antiquity, Infra ca..12
and may be gathered Heb. 6. Now then what reason is it to try the number of
the Sacraments by that place: as though because those be at the first*
entrance, therefore there be no more in the whole course, nor in the end, nor
to govern the knights, nor to increase them, nor to saulue them.

Pur. 450.
Moreover you say of the Sacraments in general: We believe that they give not
grace (ex opere operato) of the work wrought, but after the faith of the
receiver, and according to the election of God. 1 Cor. 10. Again, And how
should the Sacrament give grace of the work wrought, if faith were requisite
in them that receive them? You quote for this also 1. Cor. 10. but you have no
such thing there. And touching your argument, it holds as well against the
working of Christ's passion. For how should that work of his give grace, if
faith be requisite in us? Is not this a witty demand, trow you? I have above
alleged manifest Scripture, Cap. eode^. page
that Christ washes us both by his blood, and also by baptism. Those are the
instruments which his mercy (Tit. 3.) uses in this work. As for our faith
and all other actions, they are not instruments, they are not workers, they
are only dispositions, though necessary dispositions: as the drines of the
wood is a disposition, but it is the fire that works. True it is, and the
Scripture says it, that by believing and by other good actions we work our
own salvation. Philip. 2. as by way of meriting: but it says not, that we
work the effect of any Sacrament, as our regeneration when we are baptized,
our Corroboration when we are confirmed, our cibation when we are housled:
though our faith and other virtues be necessary therein, that by our
indisposition we do not put obicem. Christ's passion as it did both merit and
work all, so to our deeds it gives virtue to merit, to the Sacraments it
gives virtue to work. Thus the Scripture teaches, and thus the Catholic
Church believes, what soever you mean by your Church, Pur. 241.
when being told by D. Allen, that the blood of Christ makes men's works
meritorious, you tell him again, that the Church of Christ abhors that
blasphemy.

By all which is revealed your manyfold ignorance, in that you say, Pu. 35.155
The mean on Gods behalf, by which we are made partakers of the fruits of
Christ's passion, and so grafted into his body, is his holy spirit of promise,
which is the earnest and assurance of our inheritance: who works in us faith,
as the only mean by which the righteousness of Christ is applied unto us.
Ephe. 1. And as for the Sacraments (which you seem to make the only condites
of Gods mercy) we are taught in the holy Scriptures, that they are the Seals
of Gods promises, given for the confirmation of our faith, as was Circumcision
to Abraham, when he was justified before through faith. Romans 4. Here are diverse
points of Caluinisme boldly affirmed, and two places of Scripture quoted for
them, but how falsely and fondly, I shall easily declare.

S. Paul Romans 4. declares, that it was a seal or confirmation on Gods part,
that also the uncircumcised, shall be justified by faith, because with Abraham
being so justified Genesis 15. he entered afterward, Genesis 17. such a bargayne. As
we may likewise say, Mat. 16.
that it was a Seal, that we are blessed by confessing, Thou art Christ the
son of the living God, because S. Peter being for the same confession
blessed, had also the keys of heaven given him in reward. And as this would
serve us well, if they which have the keys after Peter, should say that none
are blessed but they: so the other served well, when they which were
Circumcised in flesh after Abraham, did say, that none were justified but they.
Is this to say, that all men are justified before they come to the Sacraments,
and that all Sacraments be Seals of such a matter? yea or so much, as that
all Jews were justified before they came to Circumcision, and that
Circumcision it self was to them a Seal of such a matter? This is your
evident Scripture, this is your necessary concluding upon it. Goodly gear
forsooth, that for it we must leave the Catholic Church and her guide the holy
Ghost, and go to schole to Calvin.

Other points of your ignorance are about the Holy spirit of promise. You
say, it is the mean to make us partakers of the fruits of Christ's passion,
Item, the mean to graffe us into his body, Item, that it works in us faith.
By all which you declare that you know not what the Spirit of promise is, and
that you are no conferrer of Scriptures together, how much soever you brag
thereof. Variety of matter breeds prolixitie against my will, though of every
one I say never so little: which I beseech the gentle Reader to consider.
Otherwise in this matter I might lay together so many Scriptures as would fill
the most greedy that is. Briefly, Christ the day he ascended (as often before
both he, The Spirit of promise. Sac. of Confirmation.
and S. John Baptist, and the Prophets, namely Joel) said: And I send the
promise of my Father upon you. Luc. 24. And he commanded them not to return
home into Galilee, but to exspect in Jerusalem his fathers promise, which you
have hard (quoth he) of my mouth: for John baptized with water, but you shall
be baptized with the holy Ghost, not many days hence, to wit, the tenth day
off, being Whitsonday. They had faith before, and they were baptized before, and
therefore graffed into his body before, (though not fully baptized, not fully
graffed:) and yet they were to receive this spirit, this promise, as being
(not the mean, etc. but) the very greatest fruit of Christ's passion, the
complement of baptism, the full ingraffing into his body which is his church,
yea the very inheritance it self. For the inheritance is the Fathers promise,
Romans 4. and so in Genesis, and in all the Old Testament: And this spirit is)
as you hear) the Fathers promise, called therefore of S. Paul, the earnest of
our inheritance, because it is the full first fruits thereof. And therefore so
far as the Gospel goes, so far always goes this spirit together with
it: to the Jews, Act. 2. to the Samaritanes, Act. 8. to the Gentiles, Act. 10.
As to this day in the Catholic Church, where the same Gospel continues, it
is still given to all the baptized, by imposition of the Bishops hands.
Mark it well: it quite overthrows your new invented Gospel, wherein after
faith, and after baptism, you give not this spirit: even also your own place
to the Ephesians Cap. 1. condemns you: for there it is said to the Ephesians,
that first they heard the word of truth, the Gospel of their salvation, then
that they believed in Christ,, and then after believing, you were sealed with
the holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance. If this
be not plain enough, confer Acts. 19. where the very story of it is
reported, concerning twelve Ephesians, who were baptized with John's Baptism,
before S. Paul came unto them: and then were taught by S. Paul, that they must
believe in Jesus. Which when they heard, they were baptized (by some minister
of S. Paul's) in the name of our Lord Jesus. Et cum imposuisset, etc. And after
that Paul him self laying his hands over them, the holy spirit came upon
them. By this little the Reader may judge who finds out in deed the meaning
of Scripture by plain conference of other Scriptures, and who only talks
thereof. And also how far the Protestants err, Note their ignorance.
when they hold, this spirit promised to be nothing else but the gift of
tongues: that is to say, Christ's greatest gift (for so it is clear by these
places) to be his least gift of al^, for so were tongues, witness S. Paul 1.
Cor. 14.

Your last error in that place, is, that faith is the only mean to apply
Christ unto us. Whereof I said enough before. Neither is it the only mean, nor
any mean at all, in this sense, as ye Sacraments are means, that is to say,
instruments. Why faith so much in the Scriptures.
It is a disposition to receiving of the Sacraments, and otherwise also a
merit of salvation, yea the first of all dispositions, and the first of al
merits, and that is the cause why it is so much spoken of in the Scriptures.
They then had to do with unbelievers, that is, with Jews and Gentiles, as we
now likewise have to do with unbelievers, that is, with Heretics. Therefore
both they and we are evermore in commending of faith, of the Catholic faith,
(for other faith there is not) and namely of these articles thereof which each
time and place requires, because they which are without, must first of all be
gotten in, if we can, for until then, although we be never so rich within, yet
we have nothing to relieve their need.

About the Sacraments, in special. The necessity, and effect of Baptism.
After the Sacraments in general, Baptism. Pur. 450.
as touching particular Sacraments, thus you say: Baptism is necessary for
all Christians to receive* that are not by necessity excluded from it. 1. Pe.
3. For all Christians? Baptism makes Christians, being therefore called
Christening, and it is necessary for all men to receive it. But when it can
not be actually had, the effectual desire of it supplieth the want. Which
desire Infantes have not, and therefore only the actual having of Baptism,
Romans 5.
does quicken them in Christ, being dead in Adam. I know your master Calvin
teaches you otherwise, to wit, that some infants be saved, although they be
not baptized (wherein he is a Pelagian,) and again, that some others be not
saved, although they be baptized, Supra. page
whereupon you said erewhile (for I did mark it well enough) that the
Sacraments give grace according to the election of God: as though all Infantes
baptized, and so dying, be not of Gods elect. What Scripture have you for this
gear? Surely 1. Peter 3. has no such thing, but rather the contrary. For he
says plainly, that Baptism saves us now, us that be baptized. And you
say, that it saves not some of us, some (I say) which most certainly depart
hence with it, even so as they received it. Again he does liken it to the
water which saved them in the Ark of Noah. Were any of them saved or borne up
from drowning, without the water? How then find you there some saved without
Baptism?

Real presence.
Eucharist. Pur. 450.
Touching another Sacrament, thus you say: Christ is present at his Supper, but
not after a gross and a Capernaical manner, but as he was present in Manna to
the Fathers, 1. Cor. 10. S. Paul's purpose there is (as I said also before) to
warn us, Supra page
that we be not secure and careless, leaning upon this only, that we have
begone well, as with Faith, and with Baptism, Confirmation, and Eucharist. For
(says he) our fathers, all of them, were under the cloud, and all of them
went through the sea, yea and it was a spiritual or mystical thing, that
being (I say) in the Cloud and in the sea, it was a figure of Baptism, It
was baptizing in Moses. Moreover all of them did eat of the same Manna, and
all of them did drink of the same water, yea and it was a mystical, a
spiritual meat, a spiritual drink, for it signified Christ. All of them
were partakers of all these mystical benefits. But what followed for all
that? All of them did not afterward so as they should do, but some of them
sinned, and offended God, and therefore they were laid along in the desert,
they came not into the land of promise. So you therefore (says the Apostle)
must beware all sin hereafter, beware of falling, and not think it enough
that you are now in the race, yea and running in the race, but run so that
you may catch the garland. This is the effect of that place. No word of that
you say. For it is one thing, that they all, as well they that sinned
afterward, as they that sinned not, did eat one and the same meat: and
another thing, that they and we eat one and the same meat. As likewise they
al had one baptism, but not they and we have one baptism.

As for the Capharnaites, you understand not the Chapter: their grosnesse was,
that they did not believe him to have descended from heaven, Joan. 6.
to be the son of God, and able therefore to do that he said, to give his
flesh in deed for meat. But he proves that he descended from thence, and
that he was there before, because they shall see him ascend thither again:
granting them in deed, that flesh (that is to say, man) is not able so to
do, but that he is spirit, that is to say, God, and therefore the words that
he speaks, to be effectual. And so they departing like Apostates, the true
disciples do there confess the foundation, saying: Thou have the words of
everlasting life, and we believe and know that thou art Christ the son of
God. And so the whole drift of that chapter (considering that most evidently it
is, to buyld in this manner upon his omnipotency, his Real presence in the
Sacrament, and divine virtue thereof to raise the dead) proves most clearly,
you, my masters, to be no better then ye Capharnaites, Protestants be
Caphernaites.
who will no more then they, believe his omnipotency to that effect, but
rather depart from him, that is, from his Church, saying as they said: Durus
est hic sermo, et quis potest eu^ audire: This doctrine is against all reason,
and who can endure to hear it.

Transubstantiation.
Again you say of the same Sacrament: Pur. 295.
But of all follies this is the greatest, that when the Papists have prated
never so long of the Sacrifice of (Melchisedeches) bread and wine, at the last
they will have no bread nor wine at all in their Sacrifice. That Melchisedeches
Sacrifice consisted in bread and wine, Them. 24.
I shall declare in the 10. chapter, for those of the old writers that you
confess so to have said. Now only to your wise argument, that proves the
Papists and their Fathers the old writers to be such fools. Your self
confess (as before it is manifest) and the truth it is, that the drink of the
water of the Rock was a figure of our drink in Christ's Chalice, although that
were water, and this is no water, no nor made of water: How much more then
might Melchisedeches bread and wine be a figure of it, although there be no
bread nor wine in it, considering that yet of bread and wine it is made, yea
and so reteineth still the same forms of bread and wine, that he could say
unto us, Take eat it, and drink it. O most sweet Jesus, in deed thou have
ye words of life everlasting, omnipotent son of God omnipotent. Whosoever go
to Calvin, it is good for us to stick to thee who give us such a meat, and
in so usual, so natural, so sweet a manner.

Marriage of Votaries: of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.
One Sacrament more, and then an end of this long Chapter. Marriage.
For marriage of Votaries, as Friar Luther and Catharine his Nun, with such
like, because we say it is sin, and no Marriage, Pur. 391. and 20.22.
he says, that we are the forbidders of Marriage that S. Paul speaks of 1.
Tim. 4. You are they (says he) that attend to spirits of error, and doctrines
of devils, forbidding to marry, and absteining from meats, and so forth, as I
recited a little before about Abstinence: where I showed, that the Apostle there
notes the Eucratites, Manichees, and such other heretics, that taught,
fleshmeat and wine to come of the devil, and not of God. And likewise, that they
condemned Marriage in it self, for they said that our bodies also are of the
devil, and therefore the propagation of them by Marriage to be his service. And
yet they durst (such is the impudency of Heretics) charge the Catholics for
their Nuns, to be prohibentes nubere, those forbidders of Marriage that S.
Paul speaks of. Aug. cont. Faustum Manich. li. 30. ca. 6.4
But S. Augustine answers them, and Fulke at once, saying: Ille prohibet
nubere, qui hoc malum esse dicit, He forbids to marry that says it is a
naughty thing (as did those Heretics) non qui huic bono aliud melius
anteponit, and not he which to this good thing prefers another better thing,
that is, virginity to Marriage, as the Catholics now do, and also then did,
and that so peremptorily, that they counted Iouinian an heretic (as we do the
Protestants) for the contrary. A Iouiniano quodam Monacho ista haeresis orta
est, Aug Haer. 82. and Retr. li. 2. ca. 22.
says S. Augustine, This heresy did spring of one Iouinian being a Monk.
Virginitatem Sanctimonialium, the virginity of Nuns, and the continence of
the mansex in holy persons choosing the single life, he said, to be no more
meritorious, then chaste and faithful Matrimonies. In so much that certain
sacred Virgins, of good years, in the City of Rome, where he taught this
gear, hearing him, are said to have married, but no Priest could he deceive.
For the holy Church which is there, did most faithfully and most manly
withstand this monster, and quickly oppressed and extincted his heresy.

Yet comes Fulke so long after, raketh the ashes, thinks he has found a
sparkle, Ar. 45.
and says: If Iouinian taught that such as could not contain, though they
had vowed virginity, should nevertheless be married, this was the doctrine of
S. Paul, It is better to marry then to burn. Pur. 22.32. Am. ad Vir Laps.
ca. 5.
Again, where D. Allen says, [ How can they for sin and shame honor that
with the name of holy marriage, that S. Ambrose terms Aduoutrie, S. Augustine
worse then Aduoutry, and they with all the residue of Doctors, horrible
incest?] He replyeth, Aug. de bono vid. c. 8.
The holy Ghost has taught us to call marriage honorable in all men, and the
bed undefiled, whatsoever any man has said to the contrary, and to allow
marriage in them that cannot contain, although they have vowed virginity,
because It is better to mary then to burn. Thus he alleges Scriptures for
heretics against Gods Church (as he confesses it was) and against the fathers
thereof. But how does he prove his interpretations of those Scriptures: out of
other Scriptures as he promised? No I warrant you, he is alwais like him self,
a cloud without water. Let us then (following our fathers steps) confer a
little to find the true sense.

First, what is to burn? To be troubled with the pricking of the flesh, say
the heretics. Not so, say we: for S. Paul him self was troubled much with
such pricking, 2. Cor. 12. and yet he was not bid to marry, when he prayed so
instantly against it, but it was said unto him by Christ: My grace is
sufficient for thee: for my strength is perfited in infirmity, that is, where
one acknowlegeth his infirmity, and seeks to me for strength, there do I
most strongly work. A notable ensample thereof is S. Augustine, read his
confessions, how impossible he thought it before to live without a woman, Aug.
conf. li. 6. ca. 15. and. li. 8. c. 12
and how perfitly he was afterward changed by grace. As also millions of
millions in the Catholic Church have experience in them selves, needing
therefore no other argument against you al, but their own conscience, to
condemn your brutish assertion of such impossibility. What is it then to
burn, or to be burned? we need not to seek far, S. Paul himself tells
us, it is non continere, not to conteyne. Mark the words: If they do not
contain them, let them marry, for (of the two) it is better to marry, then
(not to contain, or) to be burned. And the same as plain in your other place
Heb. 13. Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed (that is matrimonial
copulation) undefiled, for fornicators and aduowters God will judge. Confer
all this, and what says he else, but, Let the married ^olke use their own
bed, have their own wives, rather then defile another man's bed, commit
aduowtrie with another man's wife. And let the unmarried folk enter into
marriage, rather then not to contain, to burn, to commit fornication.

Now to what unmarried folk he says this, let us also try by conference, as
the Fathers have done before us. To them also which have vowed virginity, say
the Heretics. Not so, says S. Augustine, Aug. de bono vid. ca. 8 De aedul.
con. li. 1. ca. 15. 1. Tim. 5.
but, quae se non continent. etc. They which do not contain them, let them
marry before they profess continency, before they vow it to God, for after
they have vowed, unless they perform it, they be justly damned. And what other
place does he co^ferre, to prove this? Alio quippe, etc. For in another place
he says of such, Cum enim in delitijs egerint in Christo, When the young
widows have lived delicately in ( or against) Christ, upon the Churches
charges, they will marry, having ( thereof) damnation, quoniam primam fidem
irritam fecerunt, Because they have made frustrate their first faith, or troth:
that is ( says S. Austine) from the purpose of continency they have deflected
their will to marriage. For frustrate they made that faith, and troth, wherewith
they had vowed before the thing which they would not fulfill with perseverance.
So smoothly and gently does the text follow this co^struction: as yet also more
plainly you shall see, if you confer nubere volunt, with this that follows,
Iam enim quaedam conuer^ae sunt retro satanam. As if he had said: but what do I
say, They will marry, They will play the Apostates: Yea already some are turned
back after Satan. Therefore I say of these young widows, admit them not to vow.
Does he not hereby evidently expound him self, that in such widows, to
marry, he calls to turn back after Satan. Again in saying, Let a widow be
admitted no less then three score year old, and refuse the younger ones, I
will that they marry: Does he not plainly signify, that the admitted may not
marry, and therefore the young ones, because they will marry after their
admission, do incur damnation? This is our conference of the text it self
with it self. But in comes Fulke, and will needs for all that have it
meante of the faith of Baptism and Christianity, Pur. 147.
because S. Paul in the same Chapter says of another matter, that, who so
neglects to provide for his own family, has denied the faith, meaning ye
faith of a Christian man. Specially because he calls this that we speak of,
the first faith. Neither is pist^s in the Scripture used for a vow o^ promise.
Why? do not you say your self, that both there, and once before in the same
Chapter it is used for the vow or promise made in Baptism? And can you
remember never a place, where the faith of God is the promise of God? look
Romans 3. Who has not heard of the three good things in marriage, that S.
Augustine talks so much of, Fides, Proles, Sacramentum, faith or troth,
issue, and Sacrament? And where you triumph in your own conceit against S.
Augustines most natural and most certain exposition, as though by it the
first faith is expounded for the last vow: now sir, thus the text runs, They
will marry (that is, fidem dare, make promise, betroth them selves to another
husband, to a mortal man) and therefore to be damned, because in so doing they
have broken their first faith, that is, the promise that they made, the troth
that they plighted before to their husband Christ, in their admission among
these widows. What absurdity, what inconsequence is in this? let any man
judge, whether hangs better together, it, or the exposition of your
companions, that D. Allen charge them with, to wit, She that breaks her
faith of Baptism, shall be damned for marriage, which you say, is a cavil, and
not worth a rush. What then is your exposition? That belike hangs exactly.
Thus you say: S. Paul says not she shall be damned for marriage, but because
she has rejected the first faith: that is, such wanton young huswifes
proceed so far, that at length they forsake widowhood, Chritianitie, and
all. Lo, Fulke it goes hard with you.
your self are compelled to grant that which you denied, to wit, that they
shall be damned because they forsake widowhood? and how forsake they widowhood,
but by marrying? Ergo S. Paul says, they shall be damned for marrying. So
invincible is the text in our exposition.

One text more you allege about marriage, Pur. 17.25.
to salve your Bishops ytching lust, who, as though it were annexum ordini
(says D. Allen very aptely) must out of hand, for the most part, have a wife:
whereas yet never from the Apostles time to this day, Not one. Mark it well.
any one Bishop or priest, that is confessed to have been a good one, did marry
afterward, neither for all Iouinians plausible arguments: no not Iouinian him
self. What have you then to defend yours withal, that are so contrary to all
others? A Bishop is not perfect with Fulke unless he have a vvi^e
Belike (say you) S. Paul takes marriage to be so annexed to the order of an
Ecclesiastical minister, that he never descrbeth the perfect pattern of a
Bishop or Deacon, but one of the first points is, that he be the husband of
one wife. Belike you know not, nor care not what you say, for you should have
gathered the clean contrary, if you had looked what he meneth by the husband
of one wife. A Bishop (says he) must be the husband of one wife, 1. Tim. 3. A
Priest, the husband of one wife. 1. Tim. 3. The meaning thereof you might have
learned, 1. Tim. 5. where he commands about the choosing of a professed
widow, and says, quae fuit vnius viri vxor, Let her be such a one, as has
been the wife of one husband. So then he requires in a Bishop, Priest, or
Deacon to be made, that he have had only one wife: How much better then if he
have had none, but is a virgin? This you should have gathered of his words, and
you gather the clean contrary, that needs he must have had a wife, or else if
he be a virgin, he swarueth from the perfect pattern: yea more absurdly, not
that he must have had one, but that he must presently have one, for of that D.
Allen did speak, and to that you allege S. Paul.

And thus (gentle Reader) I have with Gods assistance gone through all ye
Scriptures (reserving only a few to other places) which this Heretic
alleges in his two books for any matter against the Catholic Church: and
answered every one of them so clearly, that I trust thou art fully satisfied,
and do perceive plainly, that he had no cause to brag of Scripture, as in
the last Chapter he did most insolently, saying still an end, that he cared not
what was against him, seeing Scripture was so expressly with him. But he may
(and it please God who is most merciful) by this occasion better bethink him
self, and leave his kicking against the prick, that is, against our Lord
Jesus in his Church. Act. 9. specially understanding by this little (as he may
sufficiently) that much more, either he or any other of his side should be
thoroughly satisfied in all and every thing, if he were present here with us, to
see and hear our daily conference in the Scriptures: as very many of his side,
yea and Ministers above a dosen, diverse of them being also of no vulgar wits,
have come already, have heard our examining of the Bible (specially of the New
Testament) over and over, have asked, objected, replied, whatsoever they list,
and have to every thing been so well answered (the praise is Gods and his
Catholic truths) and on the other side so hardly posed, all (I say) out of
the holy Scripture it self, that ever after a few days they have had more
list to hear then to speak, specially seacute;eing us at every text to
allege sincerely for their side whatsoever they could, and more then they
could them selves: and now are, every one of them, become so firm, so sure,
so perfitte Catholics, as none can be more, and some of their suffering in
England for the Catholic faith, in prison, in yrons, and that after the most
terrible and most cruel manner, does most gloriously declare.

The ninth Chapter. To defend, that the Doctors, as they be confessed to be
ours in very many points, so they be ours in all points, and the Protestants
in no point: All the Doctors sayings that he aleageth are examined and answered.
The first part. Of his Doctors, generally.
j His chalenging words.
THat out of the old Doctors Church is no salvation, and that they make with
us in many things against ye Protestants, I declared in the three first
Chapters by Fulkes own confession. Now to declare further, that they be wholly
ours, with the Aug. sic inuocat Cyprianum, de Bapt. con. Don. lib. 5. ca. 17.
and. li. 7. cap. 1. Pur. 432. Pur. 383.
help of their prayers I will defend, that in nothing they make for the
Protestants against us: because he says unto D. Allen, speaking of the
ancient Doctors and Councels: Among whom as we will not deny, but you have
some patrons of some of your errors, so will we affirm, that you have more
enemies in the greatest. Again, The Papists offer to stand to their judgment
in all things: and yet in most things, yea in the chiefest points of
religion, they are contrary to the Doctors and old Councels. Again, Brag of
them as much as thou will, Pur. 406.
thou shall never be able to prove, that of 20. errors which thou defendest,
Rusticus es Corridon.
they did hold one. If they have spoken otherwise then truth in any matter,
they must be In the zeal of the Scribes against Christ.
told of it as well as other men. But thou must not think, that for one error
common with them, thou must hold an hundred contrary to them. He says, in
most things, and, Pur. 238.
in an hundred for one. Yea more then that, in another place: It may be a shame
to you Papists (says he) to leave and condemn for heresy, all that is true in
those men's writings, and agreeable to the Scripture: and to make such vaunt for
a few superstitious ceremonies, Pur. 407.
and vncincere opinions. And again: Nay M. Allen, though those Doctors buyld
some hay or stouble, upon the only foundation Christ, their case is ten
thousand times better then yours, which buyld nothing but dirt and dung
tempered with hay and stuble, upon no foundation at all, and seek by all
means to dig up the only true foundation of our faith Jesus Christ, making
him nothing better then a common person, except his bare name. Ar. 60.
And once again more particularly, The other writers of later years (he spoke
before of Justinius Martyr and Ireneus) we are not afraid to confess that they
have some corruption, whereby you may seem to have color of defense for
invocation of Saints, prayer for the dead, and diverse superstitious and
superfluous Ceremonies. But for the chief points of Christian religion, and
the foundation of our faith, that is, for the honor of God, the offices of
Christ, Redemption, justification, satisfaction, the fruits of Christ his
passion, Grace, faith, works, authority of Gods word, authority of the Pope,
Real presence, Transubstantiation, Communion in both kinds, Images, etc. the
most approved writers, Tertullian, Cyprian, Origin, Epiphanius, Hilarious,
Chrysostomus, Ieronymus, Ambrosius, Augustinus, etc. are utterly against you,
and therefore can not be of your Church. Lo, this he says of our differing
from the Doctors. First touching the number of the points, to wit, in most
things, in many hundreds, yea in all that is true in their writings: and
secondly, touching the weight of the points, to wit, in the greatest and
chiefest, even about God, and Christ him self, with those other that he named.

ij A general answer to his challenge, declaring that we need not to answer
his Doctors particularly.
Wherein, I think (Reader whatsoever thou art) thou do of thy self abhor
the mouth which so filthily runs over: and therefore desire not that I take
ye payns which I have promised, to join with him in this Chapter upon the
Doctors. As also other good causes there are why I might spare that labor.
Pur. 383 432.
First, because speaking of the old Doctors, and old Councels, and the most
ancient primative Church, he says: Pur. 383.432.
For which cause (that is, because the Papists do offer to stand to their
judgment in all things) and not for Confirmation of truth, we allege the
authority of men, we stand for authority only to the judgment of the holy
Scriptures. In which saying as he agrees well with himself above in the
seventh Chapter, where he did set at naught all but only Scripture: so I
having in the last Chapter answered all his Scriptures, have by this his own
judgment fully satisfied him, although I meddle not at all with his Doctors,
unless he require me to spend time, only to maintain their honor which
make the forsaid offer, being otherwise (as he here says) nothing to the
matter which is the Confirmation of truth.

Again, because he himself for me does answer all his own Doctors, if it be
rightly considered, See cap. 5. in the end.
in that he confesses them to have held with us the very same points, for
the which we must be condemned (no remedy) as differing from the Doctors in
the greatest points. For why does he say, that we are against the honor of
God, and against the Offices of Christ, but because we hold Invocation of
Saints, and worshipping of their Relikes? But the Doctors held the same, he
confesses both here, Sup. cap. 3. part. 2. Sup. cap. 7. par. 1. in Traditions
and more amply in the 3. chapter. Why does he say, that we are against the
authority of Gods word, but because we hold with Traditions? But the Doctors
held with the same, he confesses in the 7. Chapter. And so forth, in the
residue of those great points, as may easily be deduced in like manner, or at
the least so proved that he shall be feign to confess as much. In so much that
of one of those points he says thus expressly: I confess with M. Allen, Pur.
156.
that the old writers not only knew, but also have expressed the value of our
redemption by Christ in such words, as it is not possible that the Popish
Satisfaction can stand with them. And yet on the other side, see what
follows immediately: Against the value of which Redemption (says he) if they
have uttered any thing, by the word of Satisfaction, or any thing else, we may
lawfully reiecte their authority, not only though they be Doctors of the
Church, but also if they were Angels from heaven. So that now, we no more
need to defend against him, that we are not contrary to the Doctors in such
great points, then that the Doctors are not contrary to them selves in the
same, as also, that we are not contrary to our selves in the same. For in what
words the Doctors speak thereof, the same do we.

iij I join with him nevertheless, particularly.
For these causes, this Chapter might well perhaps be spared. Nevertheless for
more evident clearing of all, I think better to examine every particular of
his allegatio^s, reserving only a few to their more proper places in the next
Chapter. Ide^ in my 33. Them.
Well then, I offer (as he says the Papists do) to stand to the Doctors
judgment in all things that are in question between us and the Protestants.
part. 2.
Howbeit, as I said in the 6. Chapter, it is not every one Doctor, but only
the uniform consent of the Doctors, to the which we ascribe infallibility: to
one, or two, or a few we ascribe no more but probability, and that also no
longer then the matter is undefined of the Church. But yet I say, that the
Protestants have not against us, for any one article at all, not only the
Doctors consent (and there, I say, stands the point) but neither so much as
any one Doctor at all, and therefore they are destitute even of that
probability also, which some old Heretics could pretend, as the Donatistes in
the matter of S. Cyprians error. Let us therefore hear what Doctors Fulke
alleges, and for what matters. And first whether they interpret any
Scriptures against us, because the last Chapter was of Fulkes Scriptures.

The second part. Of his Doctors particularly. First, whether they expound any
Scripture against us.
I find that he alleges the Interpretors about three matters, which are
these, Antichrist, Only faith, and Purgatory.

j About Antichrist, and Babylon.
Pur. 249.
As touching Antichrist, he says: The Seat of Antichrist was appointed to be
set up in the Latin Church, according to the Revelation of S. John, and the
exposition of Ireneus, who judged that Lateinos was the number of the Beasts
name spoken of Apo. 13. See I pray you, what ragged wares are these. First,
these two conclusions how well they follow: Antichri^^ was appointed to be set
up in the Latin Church, Ergo, the Pope of Rome is Antichrist. Whereas it
follows as well, that Luther or Calvin is Antichrist, for they are in the
Latin Church in the same sense as you count the Pope to sit in the Latin
Church, that is, where the Latin Church was before, but now is not. The other
conclusion: Ireneus judged that Lateinos should be the name of Antichrist, (as
Jesus was and is the name of Christ) Ergo, he judged that Antichrist was
appointed to be set up in the Latin Church. These are his necessary
conclusions. Besides that, it is false that he says Ireneus judged Lateinos to
be the name. He says, Iren. lib. 5.
Valde verisimile est, It is very likely. But yet of all names that we find,
Teitan ( says he) magis fide dignum est, is most credible. Nos tamen non
periclitabimur in eo, nec asseuerantes pronuntiabimus, But yet neither that
name will I venture to affirm and pronounce, that he shall have it: knowing
that if his name should be manifestly preached in this time, ( to wit, before
his coming) no doubt it had been uttered by him who also saw the Apocalypse.
In so much that he there inueigheth against such as Definierint, Will define
the name that they invent, to be the name of him that is to come. Considering
also that there is no small danger therein. For if they pardie think one
name, and he come with another name, they shall be easily seduced of him, quasi
necdum adsit ille quem caueri conuenit, As though he that they should beware of
is not yet come. In which respect, you my Masters of this new Religion, have
deserved a special reward of Antichrist, (as I noted also before in ye last
Chapter (for casting this strange miste upon Christ's Vicar in the eyes of the
blind, Par. 2. diu. 2
that Antichrist when he comes may walk more boldly.

To that purpose you allege S. Hierome also, and say: Pur. 373.
He was not such a slave to the Church of Rome, that^whatsoeuer pleased the
Bishops of that Sea, he was ready to accept. For then he would not have been
so bold to call Rome the purple whore of Babylon. Praef. ad Paulin. in lib.
Didym. As though when he calls Rome so, or Pu. 409 Aug. de Ci. dei li. 16.
ca. 17. li. 18. ca. 22.27.
when S. Augustine calls it the Western Babylon, they mean the Ar. 10.
Church of Rome. No sir, S. Augustine means no more but the Empire which was
to be there set up, speaking of the beginning of Rome: and S. Hierom means
the Gentility or Paganism of Rome, which was there as yet in his time against
the Church of Rome: as it was much more, when S. Peter also called Rome
Babylon for ye same Paganes, and yet said of that Church for all that, 1. Pet.
5.
Ecclesia electa quae est in Babylone, The elect Church which is in Babylon. In
which manner S. Hierome him self distinguishes in another place, Hiero. ad
Marcel. ep. 16. tom. 1.
having called Rome Babylon there also, and says: Est quidem ibi Sancta
Ecclesia, I grant, there is the holy Church, there are the Triumphs of the
Apostles and Martyrs, there is the true confession of Christ, Romans 1.
there is the faith commended of S. Paul: and Gentilitate calcata, in sublime
se quotidie erigens vocabulum Christianum, And treading gentilitie under foot,
the name of Christians daily erecting it self a loft. So, that within two ages
after S. Hieromes time, there were no Gentiles leaft in Rome, but all converted
into Christians, and so Babylon fully and thoroughly become Jerusalem. And you
know, I think, if you read his preface that you allege, that he there does
say, that what time he was in Babylon, Damasus was the Bishop. Remember then,
what he writes to the same Damasus, by occasion of certain suspected fellows
in the East, Hier. tom. 2 ep. ad Dam.
which would needs have him to confess three Hypostases, not content with
three persons, and to communicate with them. I following none first but Christ (
whereas the Arrians followed Arrius, etc.) am joined in Communion to thy
beatitude, that is to say ( by reason of Damasus his lawful succeding) to the
Chair of Peter. Mat. 16. Exodus 12. Genesis 7.
Upon that Rock I know the Church to be builded. Whosoever eats the Lamb
without this house, he is a profane man. If any man be not in Noah's Ark, he
shall perish when the Deluge ouerfloweth: desyring him in the end most
instantly, and saying, That by your letters authority may be given me, whether
it be to refuse, or to use this word Hypostases, and withal to signify, with
whom I shall communicate at Antioch, because of the Schism which was there at
that time between Paulinus and others. By this you see, that in doubt both of
faith in time of Heresy, and also of communion in time of Schism, S. Hierome
was ready to be ruled by the B. of Rome, and that all others (by his judgment
and exposition of Scripture) must likewise do, in so much that he says
further to Damasus in the same Epistle: Whosoever gathers not with thee, he
scatters: hoc est, that is to say, Qui Christi non est, Leo Epist. 89. ad
Epis. vien. proui.
Antichristi est, Whosoever is not Christ's, he is Antichrists, because (as S. Leo
the great says) Petrum in consortium indiuiduae vnitatis assumpsit Christus,
Christ took Peter into the participation of undivided unity, so that it
should be all one, to be Peter's and to be Christ's, to be in unity with Peter
and his Successor, and to be in unity with Christ.

One more expositor yet, you allege saying: Pur. 320.
Which of your Prelates will follow Ambrose in his Commentary upon the
Apocalypse, where he interprets the whore of Babylon to be the city of Rome?
I will recite his words for you: Amdro. in Apoc. 17.
This whore does betoken, in some places, Rome in special, quae tunc ecclesiam
Dei persequebatur, which then, ( in S. John's time) did persecute the Church of
God: In some places, in general, the city of the Devil, that is to say, the
whole body of the Reprobate. Is not this now a perilous point with our
Prelates, so to touch the city of Rome in S. John's time, which did persecute
the Church of Rome, that is, the Clargie and other Christians of Rome? But of
the Church of Rome, the undoubted Ambrose says if you remember: Ambro. de
Sacramen. lib. 3. ca. 1.
In all things I covet to follow the Roman Church, so protesting, because he
had occasion there to defend a certain custom of his own Church at
Millaine, which the Roman Church had not, cuius typum in omnibus sequimur et
formam, whose pattern and samplar we follw in all things, which
notwithstanding, he there declares, that other Churches may upon good cause
have some ceremony that the Church of Rome has not. Likewise he calls Peter
primum and fundamentum, the first and the foundation, in ye very same place,
where (say you) he affirms, Pur. 320. Ambro. de Inc. d. c. 4.5.
that Peter is not the foundation. So faithfully you deal with your Reader. He
does there excellently confute by Peter's confession, the Heresies that were
against Christ's Divinity and Incarnation. While other men's opinions were in
rehearsing, Peter, though always most forward, held his peace. But when he
once heard, Vos aute^, now what do your selves say of me? statim loci non
immemor sui, Primatum egit, Immediately being not unmindful of his place, he
exercised the Primacie. The Primacie of confession pardie, not of ( worldly)
honor: the Primacie of faith, non ordinis, not of ( worldly) degree And
beneath: Faith is the foundation of the Church. Non enim de carne Petri, sed de
fide dictum est: For it was not said of Peter's flesh, but of his faith, Mat. 16.
that the gates of death shall not prevail against it, his confession
overcomes hell. Al which we say in the same manner: Heretics and other
ministers of the devil may prevail against the flesh of a Pope: but his faith,
but his confession (as well in the articles that be now in controversy, as in
those at that time) will stand when they shall all be sunk down into their
due place.

The rest of the Popes Supremacy. Ar. 36.37. Pur. 287.373.374.
And here by the way (because the place is most convenient, and because it is
sone done) to answer unto that you say, Ireneus, Polycrates, Dionysius
Alexandrinus, Cyprianus, the Council of Africa, and Socrates the
Historiographer, did preach or write against the Popes authority, when it
first began to advance it self in Victor, Cornelius, Stephanus, Anastasius,
Innoce^tius, Zozimus, Bonifacius, and Celestinus. I say, first, that all those
Popes were of the true Church by your own confession here cap. 2. and
therefore you are contrary to your self in making other Popes to be
Antichrist, for claiming such authority as these did. Secondly, that all
those writers did communicate with those Popes. And therefore your
Schismatic separation has no help of them. Thirdly, that no one of them
wrote against the Popes authority, as you pretend.

What did they then? of Ireneus, Polycrates, and Dionysius, touching S. Victor,
and of Cyprianus touching S. Stephanus, I report the truth here ca. 10. in the
28. demand.

Cyp. ep. 55 68. seu. li. 1. Ep. 3.4.
The same S. Cyprian does exhort S. Cornelius to be as stout in not loosing
certain Africane heretics under the degree of Bishops, as their own Bishop
had been in binding them. He also notes in S. Stephanus some little negligence,
but much more, wilful obreption in those two lapsed Bishops of Spain,
Basilides and Martialis, who had co^cealed from him the truth that in their
supplication they should have expressed, which because they did not, he says
well, that their restitution by the Pope, could not stand them in steed against
their former deposition by the Bishops of their own province. This which so
plainly makes for the Popes authority, you are so blind to bring against it.

As concerning the Councels of Africa and Milenis: the question between them
and those other five Popes was not about ye matters of the universal Church, as
for example, matters of the faith, quoties fidei ratio ventilatur, (for such
matters they also them selves did refer to the Apostolic judgment of those
Popes, antiquae scilicet regulae (et traditionis) formam secuti, quam toto
semper ab orb mecum nostis esse seruatam, Apud Aug Epi. 94.93. Innoce^. ad
Con. Cart. and Milenit. Aug. e. 106. Con. Iul. li. 1. cap. 2. De pec. ori. con.
Pelag. cap. 8.
following the form of the old (tradition and) Canon, which (says Pope
Innocentius unto them in those Epistles which S. Augustine being one of them
does often commend most highly as very answerable to the Sea Apostolic) you as
well as I do know to have been kept always of all the world) but about matters
of particular persons, as Appeals of Bishops.

And that question also was not about the Popes authority therein, but what
order the Nicene Council (which first was confirmed, and always afterward most
exactly observed of S. Peter's See, as Municipall laws are of good kings) had
taken therein.

And of the inferior Clergy there was no such question, but they should hold
them selves quiet with the judgment of their own province, if not of their
own Bishop, without appealing further, according to Con. Aphric. cap. 92.
which you allege, and according to Council. Sardicen. Can. 17. which is
alleged Council. Carthag. 6^ cap. 6. and 7.

But that Bishops might so appeal, ye Popes avouched both by the old continual
custom, Con. Cart. 6. ca. 2. ( whereof no man can deny but there are examples
of such appeals out of all provinces, and namely of the Patriarks of
Alexandria and Constantinople, and S. Austine himself Epi. 162. in ye cause of
Cecilianus. B. of Carthage deposed by the bishops that began the Schism of
Donatus, uses it as a plea ye Cecilianus was ready causam dicere apud
caeteras ecclesias extra Africam, To be judged by the other Churches out of
Affrike. Neque enim de presbyteris, aut diaconis, aut inferioris gradus
clericis agebatur, For the matter was not about any priests, or Deacons, or
inferiors of the Clergy, but about Bishops, qui possunt aliorum Collegarum
iudicio, praesertim Apostolicarum Ecclesiarum, causam suam integram reseruare,
Who may reserve their cause whole to the judgment of their felowbishops,
specially of the Apostolic Churches, where also he says, In Romana Ecclesia
semper Apostolicae Cathedrae viguit principatus, The Princedome of the Chair
Apostolic has always flourished in the Roman Church. Also by the Council
Sardice^se ca. 7. ( in the same Carthage Council, cap. 3. whose authority none
of those African Bishops did deny, for the same Bishops were of it that were
of the Nicen, and S. Austine (ca. 7.) did expressly admit in the cannon of the
Inferiors appealing from their own Bishop.

Thirdly by the Nicen Council also, whereupon you say, very insolently
trusting ouermuche your lying Lutherane friends the Magdeburgians in their
Centuries, that S. Augustine and his fellows took those Popes with plain
forgerie and falsification of the Canons of the Council of Nice, and fetched
them meetly well over the Coals for it. You imagine that their Catholic
grauities were as maleperte with the Popes of their time, as you and such other
skipiacks be at this time. Clean contrary to the whole storye of that time,
and the very words and deeds of those Affrike Councels them selves, where we
read no otherwise of those Popes, then of such as were honored of all for
their holiness both in their lives, and also after their death even to this day.
And if you of your heads will call all forgerers and falsifiers which aleaged
for Canons of the Nicene Council, more then are contained in those twenty, how
many of the Auntients shall you spare, yea or S. Augustine also himself? How
often does he aleage the Nicen Council against the Donatists about baptism?
How often do all aleage it about Easter day? and against the Arrians? and for
many other matters not once mentioned in those Canons?

And therefore as you had no cause to invent this forgerie, so also the African
fathers had small cause (as any man may perceive by this) to stand so much with
the Popes in those Appeals of Bishops from provincial Councels: by which
their doing for all that, can not be inferred any thing against the Popes
authority above provincial Counsels, no more then against a general
Councels authority above a prouincial. For at this day also Catholic Kings
and Bishops stand with the Popes by the Council of Trent, by his own
grauntes, pragmatical compositions, etc. in the right of giving benefices, of
Appealles, etc. with his own good leave, without any prejudice to his
Superiority: unless you think ye good kings be prejudicial to their own
Crowns, when they are content to try by law with their Nobles clayming some
privilege in the kings royalties.

Ar. 37. Soc. l. 7. c. 11 So. li. 6. c. 10
But most ridiculous of all you be, where you allege Socrates the Nouatian
speaking against P. and S. Celestinus for taking away the Nouatians Churches
in Rome, (as before he touched S. Chrysostom also for the like in Asia) and
counting it a point of foreine Lordship, not of Priesthood. Nouatians,
Secularem is not fo^rei^e, ^ you trans^a^^, but vvorldly
specially in their own cause, may not depose: Neither yet does he deny the
Popes Supremacy over all, in carping that fact, no more then he denies S.
Chrysostomes Superiority in the compass of his Patriarkship of Constantinople.

As little is it to your purpose, Ar. 37.
that the forsaid Aphrican Council, cap. 6. decrees, that any Primate of
Afrike shall not be called princeps Sacerdotum, aut Summus Sacerdos, prince of
priests, or highest Priest, but only thus, Primae sedis Episcopus, the Bishop
of such or such a first See. What perteinech this to the titles, and much less
to the Primacie (being the thing) of the Bishop of Rome? whom the Africans
them selves (as appears in S. Augustines works) never called Primae sedis
Episcopum, but, Aug. e. 157
Apostolicae Sedis Episcopum, the Bishop of the Sea Apostolic.

ij. About only faith.
For only faith thus you say: Pu. 320.
Which of your Prelates will follow Ambrose in his commentary upon the Epistle
to the Romans: where he so often affirms, that a man is justified before God
by faith only. And again: Cyprian taught, Pur. 287.
that faith only does profit to salvation. To. 2. ad Quirin. ca. 42. And that
he believes not in God at all, which places not the trust of all his felicity
in him only, de duplici martyrio. And once again: Pur. 81.
What Origens judgment was concerning Satisfaction for sins, he declares
sufficiently in his 3. book upon the Epist. to the Romans cap. 3. where often
times he repeateth, that a man is justified before God by faith only:
affirming that in forgiveness of sins, God respects no work but faith
only, as he proves by the parable that our Savior used to Simon the
Pharisee. Luke. 7. and answers also those objections, which even the Papists
at this day make against us for teaching that faith only does justify us in
the sight of God.

The same which in the last chapter I declared to be S. Paul's meaning, to wit,
that a man may be justified by faith, Ca. 8. pa. 4
although before his faith, that is, before he was a Christian, before he was a
Catholic, he did not good works, but evil works, the same (I say) does S.
Ambrose and also Origin expressly declare to be their meaning also, and it is
false that you say, Origin to answer our objections which we make against you
for teaching that the good works which after faith Christ works in us, do
not augment our justification. He that only believes (says Origin) is
justified, etiamsi nihil ab eo operis fuerit expletum, although no whit of
works have been done by him. S. Cyprians words in Latin are but these three,
Fidem tantum prodesse, faith only to profit: Cyp. Test. ad Quir. lib. 31.42.
meaning that faith profits, and, without faith nothing profits, alleging
his Testimonies for it accordingly, that Abraham believed God, and it was
reputed to him unto justice. Genesis 15. and, If you will not believe, you shall
not understand. Esaias. 7. according to the Septuaginta. The book de duplici
Martyrio is thought to be supposition, coined by Erasmus: though that saying
which you allege, is of it self Catholic enough. For, to trust in Gods
gifts, as in the Catholic faith, and good works that he works in us, also
to trust in his Saints: to trust in these, I say, as they be his, is to trust
in him only.

iij. About Purgatory. Touchin^ Scripture expounded against it.
Pur. 380.383.
Concerning the let of the three: where D. Allen having alleged for his part
the consent of all ancient Doctors, said boldly to his Reader: [Aske your new
teachers, whether they have any express words in Scripture that deny prayers
to be profitable for the dead, or at least (which is liberty enough) expounded
for that meaning by any one man of all the antiquity.] Fulke answering
thereunto, says: As for a place so expounded by an ancient writer, I will
seek no further, then the place of Hieronym even now alleged out of your
own Canon law, upon 2. Cor. 5. referring the Reader to many other places
alleged in this answer, as out of Cyprian, Origin, and others: by which,
the intolerable lying, and bragging, and railing of this miscreant, shall be
better confuted, then by any contradiction of words. So hot he takes that
which D. Allen with all mildnes and sweetenes speaks for salvation of Souls,
[to such as may for their simplicity be soon deceived by following other
men's errors, with whom the names of Doctors, or the only bare brag of
Scriptures, are as good as the alleagation of places.] And see whether he did
not worthily so say: for I assure thee Reader, Fulke taken in a vain brag.
it is yet bare names of Doctors, that this Answerer also says, out of
Ciprian, Origin, and others* He cannot show, that in his whole book, neither
before this place nor also after, he alleged any exposition of a text by
Cyprian, or Origin, for that purpose, no nor by any other at all (as thou shall
here perceive) excepting only S. Hierome.

And touching him also, what a coosining is it of the Reader, to pretend that
Hierome expounds Scripture against prayer for the dead, considering that you
confess your self, that Hierome allowed prayer for the dead, as in the third
chapter I noted: Cap. 3. pa. ^ diui. 1.
As if you would bear the simple in hand, that we also who now allow prayer
for the dead, do expound Scripture against prayer for the dead? Is this to show
that the Doctors be of your side in deed, or only to abuse their bare names?
The place of S. Hierome is not upon the 2. Cor. 5. but upon Gal. 6. And in the
Canon law (if Gratians book be Canon law) you have the meaning of it: Verum
hoc de impaenitentibus accipie^dum est, says Gratian, But this is to be
understood of the unpenitent: de mortuis damnatis, of the dead that are damned,
says the Sum over the head. Neither do the words enforce ought else, allege
you them never so often. These they are: Pur. 382.383.445.
In this present world we know that one of us may be helped of another,
either by prayers or by counselles, but when we shall come before the judgment
seat of Christ, neither Job, nor Daniell, nor Noe, can entreat for any man,
but every man must bear his own burden. For any man (you see) whose burden
weighs contrary to all entreaty of others, because he dyed impenitent. But
otherwise who so dies penitent, deserves thereby that the entreaty of others
may help him (as you heard S. Augustine say in the last Chapter, answering
the text, (2. Corinthians. 5. Cap. 8. par. 3. diui.
) and so he bears his own burden, and yet may be helped by others. For such
is the poise of his burden, that it weighs this way, and not the other way.

In an other place D. Allen rehearses four textes that they allege against
Purgatory, Pur. 436.437.438.
Eccle. 11. Mat. 7. 2. Cor. 5. Apoc. 14. (the aunsweres I have put down in the
last Chapter) and then says, [I ask them sincerely, and desire them to tell me
faithfully, what Doctor or wise learned man of the whole antiquity, ever
expounded these textes, or any one of them against Purgatory or practice for
the dead.] Hereunto Fulke answers: Before the heresy of purgatory was
planted in the world, how could the old Doctors interpret these places by name
against that which they never heard named? Cap. 3. pa. 2 diui. 1. Infra ca. 11.
contra. 45.
this poor shift he falls unto, not considering that it is contrary to his
bragges here a little before, of Cyprian, Origin, and others, nor remembering
that in the third Chapter he confessed, the old Doctors both heard and allowed,
both the name and the thing, both of purgatory and prayer for the dead.

Yet have they (he says) so interpreted some of them, that their
interpretation can not stand with Purgatory or prayer for the dead, as I will
show in their particular answers. So he promises: and yet whereas they are
four texts, only at one of them be brings the Doctors interpretation, and
that also none but S. Hieromes, whom also he confesses (as I have said) to
allow prayer for the dead. Let us see the^ how you show that his interpretation
is against his own belief. And because you crake of the exposition of the
Fathers (you say to D. Allen) Hieronym in his commentary upon this place,
Eccle. 11. expounds the north and the south not for the states of grace and
wrath (as diverse of the ancient Fathers do, says D. Allen) but for the places
of reward or punishment of them that dye. Why? what repugnance is between
those two expositions? They agree both so well, that S. Hierome has them both.
First, the two states of them that dye: Whersoeuer thou do fall, there shall
thou always remain, Sieve te rigidum, etc. Whether thy last time find thee
rigorous and cruel to the poor, or mild and merciful. Then the two places
of payment: The tree either did sin before while it was standing, and then it
is put afterward in the North cost: or if it did bear fruits worthy of the
South, it shall lie in the South cost. And immediately: Neither is there any
tree, but it is either in the North, or in the South. Understanding by the
North any place of punishment, not only eternal, but also temporal, in so
much that he there shows out of Esaias, that the North may bring to the South.
These are his two last expositions of that place: his first is this: Keep the
foresaid commandments. For wheresoever thou preparest thee a place,
futuramque sedem, and a seat for hereafter, whether it be in the South or in
the North, there when thou art dead thou shall continue. This exposition with
D. Allen I followed in ye last chapter, for it is nothing else to say, but that
no man after death can merit, either to change altogether, or so much as to
better his state.

Touching Scriptures for Purgatory, and prayer for the dead.
And touching Scriptures expounded by the Doctors against Purgatory and prayer
for the dead, these two places of S. Hieromes are all that he alleges. Now
touching Scriptures that we allege for Purgatory and prayer for the dead: it
is good, although it be not necessary, unless he can fortify his new castellet
of Only Scripture better then yet he has done) to examine whether the Doctors
do say (as he pretends) either generally that no Scripture at all makes for
Purgatory and prayer for the dead, or so much as namely this place or that
place does not.

Whether the Doctors say, no Scripture to make for it.
For the first: Tertullian speaking no more but of the Oblations for the dead
which we make upon their years mindday, says, Tertul. de corona Militis.
Huius disciplinae si legem expostules Scripturarum, nullam inuenies, For this
discipline if thou require a law out of the Scriptures, thou shall find none.
Traditio tibi praetendetur autrix, Consuetudo confirmatrix, and Fides
obseruatrix, Tradition shall be declared to be the author of it, Custom the
corfirmer, and Faith the obseruer. Now comes Fulke (which also I noted in
the third Chapter) and for this one particular is bold to say generally, Par.
2. diu. 3
that all offering and all praying for the dead is confessed of Tertullian to
be beside the Scripture. As where he says: Pur. 264.
They (that is S. Chrysostom with some other old Doctors, as also now their
Successors the Catholics) labor to wrest the Scriptures to find that which
Tertullian confesses is not to be found in them. Pur. 268.
Again: Tertullian has discharged you of authority of the Scripture already.
Again: Tertullian, as wise a man as M. Allen, Pur. 275.
affirms (as we heard before) that prayer for the dead has no foundation in
the Scriptures. Again: Pur. 286.
Never once mentioned in the Scripture, and so confessed by Tertullian, one
that leaned to some part of your cause. Again: Pur. 393.
He utterly denies that they came from the Scriptures. Therefore by Tertullians
judgment you do abuse the Scriptures. Again: Pur. 410.
Praying and offering for the dead, as Tertullian himself confesses, is not
taught by the Scriptures. Yet soon after, to show that Tertullian with
Montanus had in all points the opinion of the Papists, amongst other points
of his opinion he notes, Pur. 417.
that all small offenses must (as he thought) be punished after this life,
where the prison is, and the uttermost farthing to be paid. Mat. 5. But
reserving that to the eleventh chapter as one of his gross contradictions, I
will here note, how upon the foresaid particular of only Tertullian, he is
far more bold then yet we have heard. Pur. 363.
For thus he says: They them selves (that is, the old Doctors) for the most
part confess, that prayer and oblation for the dead, is not taken at all out
of the Scriptures, Pur. 435.
as Tertullian, Augustine, and other. Again: Of them (amongst the ancient
Fathers) that maintained prayers for the dead, the most confessed they had it
not out of the Scriptures, but of tradition of the Apostles, and custom of the
Church. They denied it to be received of the scriptures. This he says of S.
Augustine by name, and withal of the most part of the fathers, having in his
whole book no such saying of any other, neither even that of Tertullians
importing so much, but only as I have declared.

So then have I showed, that he fails in this that he braggeth of the Doctors
confessing against them selves and us, as though generally no Scripture at all
does make for Purgatory or prayer for the dead. Now let us come to particular
Scriptures. Thus he says:

Of certain particular textes.
Pu. 103.
S. Augustine, although otherwise inclining to the error of Purgatory, yet he
is clear, that this text (1. Cor. 3. of him that shall be saved through fire)
proves it not, neither ought to be expounded of it, and that he shows by
many reasons, Enchirid, ad Laur. ca 68. where he affirms, that by the fire is
meant the trial of tribulation in this life. You say that he affirms it: but
he says, that it is an hard place, and with doubtfulnesse speaks
accordingly, Non absurd accipi possunt, So may this and this be interpreted
not absurdly. And where you say, he is clear that this text proves not
Purgatory: and again, that it ought not to be expounded of it: and again,
that he shows the same by many reasons. All is false: No such matter. Only
he shows, that it ought not to be expounded after the Heresy of the
Origenistes, of hell fire, as though they that be in it may at the length be
saved, and that it may be expounded of the fire of tribulation in this life.
Yea moreover he says expressly, that it may be expounded also of some other
like fire after this life: clean contrary to that which you here report of
him: though in other places you also your self contrary to your self do
report the same. Whereof I shall anon have occasion to say more in the third
division of this chapter.

This is the only place, of all that D. Allen does allege for Purgatory and
prayer for the dead, which Fulke pretends any Doctor to say that it ought not
to be expounded thereof.

But where he says thus, speaking of D. Allen: Pur. 145.
For my part I will not refuse to satisfy his demand. He will know and have
us aposed, from whence we have that new meaning of our Saviors words, that
he which is cast into prison for neglecting of reconciliation while he is in
the way, Mat. 5.
is cast into hell, from whence he shall never come: and then alleges for
that sense Chrysostom, Augustine, Hierome, and Chromatius. This (I say) is
passing childishe, (although it were true, as it is not, that all those
Doctors have that sense,) for D. Allen demands no such thing, read his
words whosoever will. Yea straight after reciting the Protestants objection,
[That the places of the Old and New Testament, Pur. 148.151.
alleged for Purgatory, though they be thus expounded of the Doctors for
Purgatory, yet sometimes they be construed otherwise by the Fathers them
selves.] I answer to this (he says) [and freely confess it.] For that is not
the question between us, whether the Fathers have expounded those textes of
other points of our Catholic faith (for if they have, what makes that
against us?) but this, whether they have expounded those textes for Purgatory
(which if they have, that makes with us) and whether they have expounded them
or any other against Purgatory (which if they have, that makes with you.) As
for the diversity of true senses, the Church has ever given room (says D.
Allen) to the Expositors, according to every ones gift, only provided that no
man of singularity father any falsehood upon any text: Howbeit also every ones
true sense is not always the very right and proper sense of that same text.
Whereof I spoke more plainly in the sixth Chapter. But Fulke replieth, to this
and says: Whereas M. Allen allows all the interpretations that the Fathers
have made of the text (1. Cor. 3.) by him alleged, as true, so long as they
affirmed no error: he may by the same reason affirm, that Contradictories are
true. As in that saying (Mat. 5.) of him that shall not come out until he have
paid the uttermost farthing: some have expounded that he shall be always
punished, some that he shall not be always punished. How is it possible, that
both these interpretations can be true? Mary, thus it is true: those He and He
are not one He: but He that shall be always punished, is he that to the end of
the way, that is, of this life, agrees not with his adversary whom he had
deadly iniuried, as saying unto him, Fatue, and thereby incurring the gilt of
Gehenna ignis, which is the prison of the damned. He that shall not be always
punished, is he whose injury was but venial, Cap. 8. par. 3. diui. 2.
as Racha. And so both interpretations agree well not only together, but also
with the text it self: as likewise in the last chapter I declared.

And so much of the Doctors interpretations. Now to the other kind of their
Testimonies, which he alleges against us about any of our Controversies.

Secondly whether the Doctors give any other kind of testimony against us.
j About the Books of Machabees.
And first (although it be but a by matter) whether the Machabees be Canonical
Scripture, or no: because the last thing that I entreated of, was the
Scriptures that be of purgatory, and the Protestants deny the Machabees for
this express saying 2. Mac. 12. It is an holy and healthful meaning, to pray
for the dead, that they may be released of their sins. And touching this
matter he alleges no Doctor, Pur. 214.
but only S. Hierome in two places. The answer whereof D. Allen gave before,
and that rightly and truly, as we shall well perceive if first we remember what
he alleged for the other part. Fulke briefly both reports it, and also
replieth unto it, in these words: M. Allen pretends to prove the book of
Machabees Canonical by authority of the Church, See cap. 11. co^ad 35
when he can not by consent that it has with the Scriptures of God. As though
all books are Canonical Scripture which have consent with ye Scriptures. The
Machabees in deed have so (as also innumerable books of Catholic writers, and
Caluins Institutions too, I trow.) But the Churches authority, and not such
Consent, it is, that proves them Canonical. The Churches authority for the
Machabes.
And the Churches authority D. Allen brings out of the third Carthage
Council: which Fulke in his answer says was a Provincial Council: but he
must remember, that in the 4. Chapter to prove the whole true Church to err,
he told us, that this Provincial Synod has the authority of a General
Council, because it was confirmed in the Sixth General Council holden at
Constantinople in Trullo. And therefore he cannot avoid it, but that the
Machabees are Canonical by authority of the whole true Church, and therefore
in deed also Canonical, if any Scripture at all (and specially such as was
ever by any doubted of) be Canonical: whether the true Church may err, or no.
And therefore again, he does but labor in vain, to show, that the Carthage
Council did err in that Canon, because it names among the Canonical
Scriptures also five books of Solomon, whereas the Church (says Fulke, as
though he had not confessed this Council to be the Church as much as any
other) allows but three, namely the Proverbs, the Preacher, and the
Canticles. Not knowing what S. Augustine, that was one of that Council (as
Fulke him self says,) writes as it were of purpose to give us the meaning of
that Council, and of others likewise speaking, where he also reconeth up all
the same Canonical Scriptures, as the Council does. Au. de doc. christ. lib.
2. cap. 8.
And three books of Solomon (says he) the Proverbs, the Canticles of
Canticles, and Ecclesiastes. For those two books, the one entitled Wisdom,
the other Ecclesiasticus, de quadam similitudine Salomonis esse dicuntur, for a
certain likeness are said to be Salomons, although in deed the be not his,
but Ecclesiasticus is Jesus Siraches, and Sapientia is an incertaine authors,
Aug. Retr. li. 2. ca. 4.
as S. Augustine partly in the same place, partly in his Retractations does
say.

Again (says Fulke, Pur. 215.457. Aug. con. 2 Gaudentij Ep. li. 2. c. 23
for an other answer to the Carthage Council) in what sense they did call
those books Canonical, appears by Augustine, that was one of that Council:
And this Scripture of the Machabees non habent Iudaei sicut, etc. The Jews
count not as the Law and the Prophets and the Psalms. What then? Here you see
(says Fulke) that Augustine howsoever he allows those books, yet he
allows them not in full authority with the law, Prophets, and Psalms. That
which S. Augustine reports of the Jews, he ascribes to S. Augustine him
self. Although also it follow in Augustine immediately: Sed recepta est ab
Ecclesia. But it is received of the Church not unprofitably, if it be soberly
read and heard. Which words also Fulke there alleges, with this note, that
S. Augustine allows not these books, If Fulke be sober the Machabees are
Gods word. If he be not, whose fault is that? 2. Peter 2.
without condition of sobriety in the reader or hearer. As though he allowed
no book of Scripture in full authority, because both he and all other
Catholics with S. Peeter do require the same condition in the reader of the
whole Scriptures, that he wrest them not like a mad man to his own
damnation, as all heretics do, and as the Donatistes did, compting them selves
Martyrs if they killed them selves, and mainteining it with the example of
Razias out of the Machabees, to which S. Augustine there answers. He that
would in deed know, in what sense S. Augustine and his Council call those
books Canonical, let him consider, that under one name of Canonical, they
reckon at once these with all the other Holy books of both Testaments. Au. 2.
doc. christ. 8.
Totus Canon Scripturarum his libris continetur. The whole Canon of the
Scriptures is contained in these books: Five of Moises, that is, Conc. Cart.
3. Can. 47.
Genesis, etc. says S. Augustine. And the Council in like manner: Sunt autem
canonicae Scripturae, and the Canonical Scriptures are these, Genesis, etc.
Lo, they call them all Canonical in one and the same sense, although S.
Augustine there instructs the student of divinity, whilst all were not yet
generally received of the whole Church, to prefer some before others.

Fulkes objections.
Read the chapter before, where S. Augustine requires seven conditions in the
student of Scripture, before he be perfect: and you shall perceive, that it is
but for lack of the second, which is Mitescere pietate, to be meek by piety,
that you so presumptuously make objections, Pur. 386.208.
calling them in your pride, unavoidable resons, against those books which by
your own confession the whole true Church has Canonized. And what be these
unavoidable resons? First because the author of the (second) book commends
one Razis for killing himself, 2. Mac. 7. Au. 2. Gau. 23. and ep. 61
which is contrary to the word of God. S. Augustine answers the Donatistes
and you at once, saying: Touching this his death, the Scripture has told it,
how it was done: it has not commended it, as though it was to be done.

Secondly you say, he abridgeth the five books of Jason. But the Holy Ghost
makes no abridgementes of other men's writings. The book of the Kings, in
how many places it singnifieth, that it abridgeth stories, telling where they
be written more at large in other books that were not Canonical? And is not
S. Mark commonly called Breuiator, the abridger of S. Matthew? Also every
Sermon, and letter in the Acts of the Apostles, Aug. de co^sen. Euang. li. 1.
ca. 2.3.
is it not an abridgement? The Holy Ghost knows, to pour again through his
new vessels, both pieces of other men's writings, as you see Act 17. Tit. 1.
and also books, and much more of Jason the Hebrew. as also of Ethnike Poets.

Thirdly, He confesses that he took this matter in hand, that men might have
pleasure in it, which could not away with the tedious long stories of Jason.
But the Spirit of God serves not such vain delight of men. Is it vain
delight, to desire profitable brevity? In your preface to ye Reader, you say:
I have used great brevity, by a natural inclination, whereby I love to be
short in any thing that I write. Do you count your inclination a vain
inclination? And who sees not, that in all the books of holy Scripture, there
is great observation of brevity, and that (amongst other causes) also to
avoid tediousnes?

Fourthly, He shows what labor and sweat it was to him, to make this
abridgement, ambitiously commends his trauill, and shows the difference
between a story at large, and an abridgeme^t: al which things savor nothing of
Gods Spirit. And specially that in ye end (for all this you carp in the preface
2. Mac. 2.) he confesses his infirmity, and desires pardon if he have spoken
slenderly and barely. Whereby he testifies sufficiently, that he was no scribe
of the Holy Ghost. That he ambitiously commends his travel, is but your
blasphemy, without any occasion given by him. All the rest stands well enough
with the assistance of ye Holy Ghost, unless you think that ye scribes of the
Holy Ghost may not speak of themselves as of men, humano more, or ye they must
always be eloquent, and always able to do al without swet and without labor.
Does not S. Paul as much confess his like infirmity, when he says 2. Cor. 11.
Etsi imperitus sermon, though I be rude in speking? Yea does he not excuse his
bouldnes for writing to the Romans, who were so full of all knowledge, and
says that he did it not but only to put them in remembrance of that which
they knew well enough before? Rom 15. did he not also in that Epistle for his
ease use Tertius his hand? Romans 16. and the like commonly in writing all his
other Epistles also, as appears 2. These. 3? That I speak nothing of his
intolerable pains taken in Preachinge, wherein also he was the instrument of
the Holy Ghost, and not only in his Epistles. These are forsooth your
vnauoideable reasons. Now to S. Hierome.

Hieromes testimonies. Pu. 214.
M. Allen aleageth the authority of Hieronym in prol. Match. But what he
means thereby or what place he notes, I know not, quoth you, Who will believe
that you are so dull? In the vulgar Latin Bibles is a preface upon the books
of Machabees: in it are these words: The Books of Machabees although in the
Canon of the Hebrews they be not had, yet of the Church they are noted among
the Stories of the divine Scriptures. Those usual Prefaces are taken commonly
of S. Hierom, sometime for word, sometime for sense, and so is this, as will
appear by the two places that you bring out of him. In his preface upon the
Book of Kings (you say) he does not only omit it in rehersall of the
Canonical books, but also accompteth it plainly among the Apocryphal. He
there reporteh, how many letters are apud Hebraeos, with the Hebrews, to wit,
two and twenty: and that accordingly (number for number) primus apud eos
liber, the first book with them is Genesis, and so forth to two and twenty.
So expressy he shows that he rekoneth the books there after the Hebrews,
and therefore that he speaks of their Canon, when he says afterward, that
all without these is to be put among the Apocryphal. Therefore Sapientia, which
is commonly entitled Salomons, and Jesus book the son of Sirach, and
Judith, and Tobias and Pastor (for that book also he mentions among the
books of the old Testament, of which only, and not of any of the new
Testament, he there speaks) non sunt in Canone, are not in the Canon. The
first book of the Machabes I found in Hebrew. The second is a Greek. Now what
makes this for you or against us? does any of us affirm that these books
were in the Hebrews Canon?

Pur. 215.
But you have another place out of S. Hierome, to prove that they were neither
in the Churches Canon. In his Preface upon the book of Proverbs: Therefore
even as the Church reads in deed the books of Judith, Tobias, and
Machabees, but yet receives the^ not among the Canonical Scriptures: So also
these two books (Ecclesiasticus, and Sapientia) let her read (as she does)
for the peoples edification, but not to confirm the authority of the Churches
doctrines: to wit, against the Jews (that is the answer,) because their Canon
has not these books in it. But among the Churches people they were also then
read publikly and solemly in their course as well as the other books of
Scripture: As S. Augustine also witnesses of one of them by occasion, saying:
August. de Praed. San. cap. 14.
The book of Sapientia has been thought worthy to be recited at the deske in
the church of Christ, tam longa annositate, so long a rue of years: and with
worship belonging to a book of divine authority, to be harkened unto of all
Christian men, from Bishops, even to the lowest sort, of laymen, faithful,
penitentes, and Catechumenes. This was that reading of it to the peoples
edification. And even so S. Hierome expounds him self in his Preface upon
the book of Judith, saying: With the Hebrews the book of Judith is read among
the Hagiographal (not among the Hieron. prol. galeato in li. Regum.
nine Hagiographal that be Canonical, but among others being Apocryphal.) Cuius
authoritas, etc. The authority of which book is thought less fit to confirm
those things that come into contention (between the Hebrews, no doubt, and
us.) But (notwithstanding the Hebrews counting it Apocryphal) the Nicene
Council (as we read) has reckned this book in the number of the Holy
Scriptures. As also S. Augustine distinguishes, saying: Aug. de Ci. dei. li.
18. ca, 36
The supputation of the times after Esdras to Aristobulus, is not found in the
holy Scriptures which are called Canonical, but in others: among which
(others) are also the books of the Machabees, which, though the Jews do not,
yet the Church counts for Canonical. By all which it is plain, that S.
Hierome means not as the Protestants do, when he says, that the Church
receives not the books of Judith, Tobias, and the Machabees, among the
Canonical Scriptures. (For him self says, that the book of Judith is
Canonical by the Council of Nice) but only as I have said, he instructs
the Christians being ignorant in the Hebrew tongue, what books they should
use against the Jews (for which cause he also addressed his new Translation of
the old Testament out of the Hebrew, as in many places he protests, Hie.
Apol. ad Ruff.
) and that the Church in Canonizing those other books, meant not for all that
that they should be used against the Jews, who receive them not, and therefore
would but laugh at us for our labor. Howbeit also, if S. Hierome did say in
the Protestants sense, that the Church then received not those books neither
in her own Canon, that makes nothing for the Protestants. For we grant, the
time was when the Church did not generally receive some of those books. To
make for the Protestants he should have said, that the Church, (and not only
any private person) neither did then, nor ought afterward to receive them.

Pur. 216.
Where now is Fulke, that says, Hieronym does simply refuse these books of the
Machabees? Again: Hieronym says, the Church receives them not for
Canonical. Pur. 386.
Yea moreover: I have by the consent of the Catholic Church answered them.
And again of Tobias book: Pur. 215.230.
I have showed by authority of Hieronym, which is proof sufficient against
the Papist, that the Church receives not this book of Tobias for Canonical
Scripture. All this you say: but I have showed, that not so much as Hierome
him self makes with you, though also if he did, Supra pa. 1. eodem cap.
that is not proof sufficient against us: as I have told you plain enough
before, that it is only the consent of the Doctors to which we attribute
infallibility, and the scope that of confidence of our cause we give you, to
bring one Doctor if you can, is not in these bymatters, but in our principal
controversies.

And this much of the Canonical Scriptures, though it be somewhat besides my
limits. Whereunto yet I must needs add the place where you say thus: Pur. 218.
If Martyn Luther and Illyricus have sometimes doubted of S. James Epistle,
they are not the first that doubted of it. Eusebius says plainly, it is a
counterfeite Epistle, lib. 2. cap. 23. and yet he was not accounted an
heretic. I say not this to excuse them that doubt of it: for I am persuaded
they are more curious then wise in so doing. Do you make it but curiosity to
doubt of that Scripture which your self also confess to be Canonical?
Howbeit Luther not only doubted of it, but also utterly rejected it, even with
as great courage as you have here rejected the second of the Machabees: and
that also after the consent of the whole Church. Is this no worse then Eusebius
his fault, before the Churches declaration? O worthy estimation of Canonical
Scripture. What matter will not you license them of your side to doubt of,
without note of Heresy, when you dare so do in that which with you is the
greatest? And yet also to show what a merchant you are, A falsarie.
Eusebius says not as you charge him, but the clean contrary. Eu. li. 2. c.
22
His words are these: Of James I read so much. By whom the first of the
Epistles, which are named Catholicae, is said to be written. But this one
thing I may not omit, that although of some it is taken for a counterfeite,
because no such number of the ancient writers makes any mention at all of it
(as neither of that which is said to be the Epistle of Jude, which also is
set in the number of the seven Epistles Catholicall.) Tamen nos istas cum
reliquis, in quamplurimis Ecclesijs public receptas approbatasque cognouimus:
Yet we have found these, with the residue to be publicly received and
approved in very many Churches.

ij About only Scripture.
Next unto this I take in hand the question of Only Scripture: thinking
better to defer the rest touching Purgatory, to the end of the chapter,
dispatching also all other questions before, because they be shorter.

How he ascribed all authority to Only Scripture, and nothing to ought else,
we heard in the seventh chapter. If the Doctors be not of their own side, they
be on ^ulks side
Now he will bear the ignorant in hand, that the Doctors were of the same
opinion, yet confessing withal that they held the contrary no less then we
do, as partly in that same chapter we saw, partly here again we shall see.
And therefore in this question again as in others before, it is no more against
us, then against those Doctors them selves, whatsoever he wresteth out of
their writings.

Cyprian would have nothing done in the celebration of the Lords supper, and
namely in ministering of the cup, Pur. 287.
but that Christ him self did, li. 2. Epist. 3. I answer: he writes there,
contra Aquarios, against them that offered in the Chalice water only, whereas
Christ offered wine. That he calls, aliud quam quod pro nobis dominus prior
fecit, An other thing then that which Christ did first for us, as being clean
against Christ's doing, and such a doing as he did for a tradition to us. But
otherwise, to mingle the wine with water S. Cyprian there requires, and that
also by Christ's tradition: and therefore he builds not upon only Scripture,
as you in alleging him seem to pretend.

Pur. 303.
Now for an other Doctor: where Chrysostom says, It was decreed by the
Apostles that in the celebration of the holy Mysteries, a remembrance should be
made of them that are departed: we will be bold to charge him with his own
saying. And there you allege four places out of him against him self, as it
were for only Scripture. Is not this pretty showing of the Doctors to be of
your side? And what are these places of S. Chrysostom? First, Ide^ Ar. 69.
Hom. de Adam et Heua: Satis sufficere, etc. We think it suffiseth enough
whatsoever the writings of the Apostles have taught us, according to the
foresaid rules: in so much that we count it not at all Catholic, whatsoever
shall appear contrary to the rules appointed. You are a great reader of ye
Doctors, I see. Whosoever made that Homily, he took those words out of that
brief Instruction which in the first Tome of ye Councels follows the Epistle
of Pope Celestinus to the Bishops of France concerning the Semipelagians,
which Bishops I think to be ye Authors of the same Instruction. They take it
(and so they say) out of the determinations of those Bishops of Rome in whose
time Pelagius and Celestius began their Heresy, that is, P. Innocentius and
P. Zozimus, and out of certain Aphrican Councels approved by those Popes. And
after 8. or 9. such Canons or articles, they make an end, saying: As for
certain more subtle points, we are not bound to resolve upon them. We think,
all that suffices enough, which the writings of the Sea Apostolic have
taught us, according to the foresaid rules ( or Canons:) in no wise thinking
it Catholic, that shall appear to be contrary, praefixis sententijs, to the
resolutions set here before.

Again, in Genesis Hom. 58. Thou see into what great absurdity they fall, qui
diuinae Scripturae canonem sequi nolunt, Which will not follow the Canon of
Holy Scripture, but permit all to their own cogitations. He answers the
Heretics, which said, that our Lord took not true flesh. Then (says
Chrysostom) he neither was crucified, nor dyed, nor was buried, nor rose
again. Into such absurdity they fall, because they will not follow the
plain line of Scripture, but their own imaginations of putatiue flesh, such
as was in the Apparitions of the old Testament. What is this for only
Scripture?

But if we be further urged, we will allege that which he says, In Euang.
Joan. Hom. 58. He that uses not the holy Scripture, but climbeth another way,
id est, non co^cessa via, that is, by a way not allowed, is a Thief. O
Christian spirit, if you be urged, you will call S. Chrysostom a Thief by
his own saying, for using Tradition. As though he uses not Scripture, which
uses Tradition: or that Scripture does not warrant Tradition, as 2. The. 2.
The thing which S. Chrysostom there speaks of, is this: that Antichrist, and
those pseudochristes, Judas Galileus, Theudas, and such others, also heretics
and Schismatikes, as Luther, Calvin, etc. cannot show any commission out of
Scripture. But Christ, and his Apostles, with the other Catholic Pastors that
succeed them, come into their cure by good warrant of Scripture. These therefore
are true Pastors, the other are thieves.

We may be as bold with Chrysostom, as he said he would be with Paul
himself, in 2. ad Tim. Hom. 2. Plus aliquid dicam, I will say somewhat more,
we must not be ruled by Paul himself, if he speak any thing that is his
own, and any thing that is humane, but we must obey the Apostle when he
carries Christ speaking in him. And when is that? when he speaks all only by
Scripture? Will you not obey him then, when he says, Ego enim accepi a domino,
For I received it of our Lords mouth. 1. Cor. 1^. See in what a proper sense
you use Chrysostoms words. These are the four places. One other you have
elsewhere, saying: Chrysostom upon Luke, cap. 16. says, Ar. 12. Chrysostom. co^.
3. de Lazaro.
that ignorance of the Scriptures has bred heresies, and brought in corrupt
life, yea it has turned all things vpsidedowne. By which it appears by what
means he would have heresies kept away, namely by knowledge of the Scriptures.
And who would not the same? It is therefore our daily study, and we see our
selves, and show others thereby the abomination of your Heresies, and how you
would face them out with a card of ten. But what makes this for Only
Scripture to be of authority?

As S. Chrysostom, so in like manner S. Leo is of your side, you say, against
us, and against him self. For where D. Allen alleged this saying of his: Pur.
387. Leo Ser. 2. de ieiunio Pentecost.
It is not to be doubted, but whatsoever is in the Church by (general) custom
of devotion kept and retained, it came out of the Apostles tradition, and
doctrine of the Holy Ghost? You answer that the saying of Leo the great, may
be backed with the writing of Leo the great, Epist. 10. They fall into this
folly, which when they be hindered by some obscurity, to know the truth, have
not recourse to the words of the Prophets, nor to the writings of the Apostles,
nor to the authorities of the Gospel, but to them selves. In these words, Leo
as Great as you would have him, makes the Scriptures, and not Customs or
Traditions, the rule of truth. So you gather of those words: as also in
another place, That the Church should overthrow heresies, Ar. 14.
by the word of God only, Leo the first, Bishop of Rome, in his Epist. 10. ad
Flauianum contra Eutichen, plainly confesses. He does not say that all
truths are expressed in the Scriptures, though that be whereof he there
entreats, to wit, the Incarnation of Christ. Mary, when a truth is
expressed in the Scriptures, recourse must be had to the Scriptures. So he
says: but he says not, to the Scriptures only: yea in the very same tenth
Epistle he blames Eutiches the Heretic, much more, for not having recourse
neither so much as to our common Creed, which is not Scripture (you wotte
well) but a Tradition.

Ar. 15.
Of the same judgment (you say) was (not Leo only, but) the whole Council of
Constantinople the sixth, Action 18. confessing that the Heretics and
Schismatikes grow so fast, because they were not beaten down by preaching of
the Gospel and authority of the Scriptures. I confess the same, howbeit the
Council does not. But what is that for Only Scripture? yea the place is
plain for the other side. I marvel you could not epsy as much even by the
piece that you allege, although you saw not the whole circumstance. Being
truly translated, this it is: If al men had simply and without calliditie from
the beginning received the Gospels preaching, and been content with the
Apostles institutions, the matters verily had been well a fine, and neither the
authors of the heresies, nor the fautors of the Priests, had been put to the
pains of conflictes. Who would rest here, as you do, and not imagine somewhat
to follow, with a (but) necessary to be seen? Sed quia Satanas etc. But
because the devil not resting raises up his squires, therefore Christ also in
time convenient has raised up his warriers against them, to wit, the General
Councels that to this time have been holden by the diligence of the Emperors
and the Popes, being Six in number. So expressly they avouch the authority of
the Councels, and you allege them for Only Scripture, whereas also in the words
that you allege there is no mention at all of Scripture, but only of
preaching and teaching.

Likewise S. Hilarious most expressly avouches every where the authority of
the Nicene Council against the Arrians: and yet you pretend, that he would
have heresies against the Trinity, Ar. 11. Hilar. li. 4. de Trin.
to be confuted, not by men's judgment, but by Gods word. You mark well what
he does in that place. How heresies must be confuted, is not his purpose, but
to answer the Scriptures, that the Heretics abused and misconstrued, which he
there had recited at large, therefore he says: Cessent propriae hominum
opiniones, neque se vltra diuinam constitutionem humana iudicia extendant. Let
men's proper opinions cease, neither let the judgments ( or fancies) of men
stretche them selves beyond Gods limite. Therefore against these profane and
impious institutions ( or Catechismes) of God, let us follow the selfsame
authorities of Gods sayings, which they allege in their own false sense,
restoring every one of them to his true meaning. Which there consequently he
does. A goodly testimony for your purpose.

The saying of S. Basil is in every man's mouth, Basi. de spi. Sanc. ca. 27
that the Doctrines preached in the Church, we have them partly by writing,
partly by the Apostles Tradition without writing. And if we go about to
reject such unwritten customs, we shall unawares condemn the Gospel also.
Imo ipsam fidei predicationem ad nudum nomen contrahemus, yea we shall bring
the very preaching of our faith to a bare name. And you your self do note it
as a great matter, that by his confession here, Pur. 380.
the words of Invocation when the Blessed Sacrament is showed, are not taught
by the Scripture, no more then many other ceremonies that he rehearses in the
same place. And yet must he also bear you witness against himself for Only
Scripture. Ar. 11. Basi de vera side, in prooem. Moraliu^.
Well, what says he? In his treatise of faith: We know, that we must now, and
always, avoid every word and opinion that is differing from the doctrine of
our Lord. I say the same. But it is not all one, to be differing from our Lords
doctrine, and not to be expressed in Scripture. In so much that he allows
well of those words, in speaking of the Trinity, Quae apud Sanctos viros in vsu
fuisse reperirentur, Which had been used of the holy fathers, although they
were not in Scripture.

Basi. in Regulis breu. Interrog. 1.
Two sayings more of his you allege, In his short definitions to the first
interrogation: Whether it be lawful or profitable for a man to permit unto him
self, to do or say any thing which he thinks to be good, without testimony
of the holy Scriptures? He answers: For as much as our Savior Christ says,
that the Holy ghost shall not speak of him self: what madness is it that any
man should presume to believe any thing, without the authority of Gods word? If
you saw the place, your malice passes. The words are these Quis esse tanta
vesania, etc. Who can be so mad, that he dare so much as to think any thing
of himself? And it follows: But because of those things and words that are
in use amongst us, some are plainly taught in the holy Scripture, some are
omitted: Concerning them that are written, they must precisely be so observed:
and, concerning them that are omitted, we have this rule, To be subject to
other men for Gods commandment, renouncing quite our own wills. Which he
says, because he writes there to Monks, who vow obedience to their
Superiors.

Basil. Mor. Reg. 26. c. 1.
Again, In his Morals, Did. 26. Every word or deed must be confirmed by the
testimony of holy Scripture, for the persuasion of good men, and the confusion
of wicked men. He there admonishes his Monks, being students of Divinity
to be so perfect in the Scriptures, that they may have a text ready at every
need, so as Christ had to repel the devils temptation, Mat. 4. and Peter to
answer the Jews scoff, Act. 2. And we desire ye same: in so much as when you
bid us cast all away that is not written, we have this text ready, where S.
Paul bids us the contrary, To hold the Traditions which we have learned,
whether it be by his Scripture, or by his word of mouth. 2. These. 2.

Last of all we have to see what you allege likewise out of S. Augustine for
your only Scripture. Augustine.
For you play with his nose also, as you have done with his fellows the
foresaid Doctors, confessing that he is for unwritten Traditions and such
other authorities as we stand upon, and yet alleging him for Only Scripture.
Your confession I have reported at large in the seventh chapter: as for
example, where you say, Augustine blindly defends (in his book De cura pro
mortuis agenda, Pur. 349.
and else where) the common error of his time, of prayer for the dead, which by
holy Scripture he was not able to maintain, contrary to his own rule of only
Scripture, in beating down the Schism of the Donatistes, and the heresy of
the Pelagians. Well then, how do you show out of Augustine against Augustine
him self, that this was his rule?

You make your show in three parts: Ar. 12. Pur. 383.405.368.451.
First you quote only without recital of any words, eleven or twelve places
out of him, In which he prefers the authority of the Canonical Scripture,
before all writings of Catholic Doctors, of Bishops, of Councels, before all
customs and traditions. So you gather of those places. But that is not the
question, Which is to be preferred: but this, Whether nothing but Scripture be
of authority. And touching the preferment also, recite the words when you
will, and it will appear plainly, that he neither prefers the Scripture
otherwise then we do.

Your second part is about this one question, Ar. 12.
Who have the true Church: Of which question you say, that S. Augustine would
have the Church fought only in the Scriptures. Read my first Demand, and you
shall see what S. Augustine would have in that question, and that I would have
the same: to wit, that you answer the Scriptures that he alleges for his
Church and for ours together: and that you bring one text for the visible
Churches perishing after a time, or vanishing out of sight: and one text, that
one Luther, or one Calvin should after so many hundred years restore it
again. This is the sum of al. In deed he is content in that question to set
aside all other authorities, so to draw the Donatists (who drew back all that
they could, standing upon other things impertinent) to try it by the
Scriptures. But that nothing else is good authority in that question, that he
never says. You allenge him De (...) Ecclesia, cap. 2. where he says, (and
the like cap. 3.5.6. The question between us and the Do^stes is, Vbi sit
ecclesia, where the Church is, whether with us, or with them? What shall we do
then? shall we seek her in verbis nostris, in our own words, or in the
words of her head our Lord Jesus Christ? I think we ought rather to seek
her in his words who is truth, and best knows his own body. Where by our
own words you understand all besides Only Scripture. But S. Augustine does
not so. quicquid nobis inuicem obricimus, verba nostra sunt, Our words are
whatsoever we object one to another, of delivering the divine books ( in
Dioclesians time) of burning frankincense to the Idols, of persecuting* As all
your declayming also at this time against us, is for certain crimes of
certain men: We having the like, yea and them more heinous; and that more
truly, to charge you withal. But these words S. Augustine will, (and we with
him) to be silent, when the Church is sought, and the words of Christ in the
Scripture to sound.

Again you allege him Epist. 48. ad Vincentium Rogatista^, where he ^aith, We
are sure that no man could justly separat him self (as Luther did) a
communione omnium gentium, from the communion of all nations: because none of
us seeks the Church in his own righteousness, but in the holy Scriptures.
Whereunto you add your five ^gges* saying: So if the Papists would not
presume of their own righteousness, but seek ^he Church of Christ in the
Scriptures: they would not sepa^ate them selves from the communion of Christ's
Church, now ^y Gods grace enlarged further then the Popish Church. There (...)
no crooked gambrell bow that casts so wide, as you do the ^octors words,
these specially, from their scope. I marvel ^uche at you for it, and much
more if you saw the place. By (...) Communion of all Nations, so often against
the Dona^es, Saint Augustine means the Society of that visible ^urch, which
as it began visibly at Jerusalem, so visibly grew on afterward, and
grows on to this day, and to the worlds end, over all nations. From which
Society or Company, Epist. 48.
fieri non potest, it is impossible, says he, that any can have just cause to
separate their company. Because the Donatistes said that Cecilianus the
Catholic Bishop of Carthage had yielded in Dioclesians persecution, and that
all the other Catholics by communicating with him after that, whereas they
should have excommunicated him for ever, were also defiled thereby: and
therefore that them selves who had not yielded, did well to separate them
selves from the Catholics, as the just from the unjust. Thereupon Saint
Augustine says notably: Just separation impossible.
If any may have a just cause to separate their company from the company of
all Nations, and to call that, Ecclesiam Christi, the Church of Christ: Vnde
scitis, How know you in all Christendom being so wide and side, lest perhaps
before you did separate your selves, some did before separate them selves for
some just cause in some so far countries, that the brute of their justice is
not come to you? How can the Church (being but one) be in you rather then in
them who before perhaps have separated them selves? Ita fit, etc. So it
remains, that seeing you know not this same, you be uncertain of your
selves. Which likewise must needs happen to all ( others) who use for their
Society the testimony not of God, but of them selves (that is, of their own
justice.) And then a little after: Nos autem ideo certi sumus, But we (
Catholics) are certain that none can have justly separated himself from the
company of all Nations: quia non quisque nostram in iustitia sua, because any
of us does not in his own justice, but in the divine Scriptures seek for the
Church: Et vt promissa est, reddi conspicit, and sees it to be represented
even as it was promised, to wit, from Jerusalem to Rome, from the Jews, over
all nations, being mixed both of good and bad, and the good (not consenting) no
whit defiled by the company of the bad. And therefore whether any of our
Popes, any of our other Bishops, any of our other fathers, any of our Catholic
brethren, have been so ill as ye Protestants make them, or no: sure we are,
that Luther possibly could not (as neither ever any could, or can) justly
separate him self, because by the holy most evident Scriptures, that only is
the true church, which beginning at Jerusalem, grows over all Nations: in
which by the same Scriptures, we see that once the Romans were, and from which
the said Romans did never separate the^ selves afterward: and with which
Romans Luther first was, and afterward did Separate himself from them, and
so therefore from the true Church. And yet come you, like a blind beetle, and
say that the Papists did Separate them selves from your Church: bragging as
blindely of your enlarging. For once having made a separation, it is no
enlarging afterward, that can win you the true Church from them that had it
before. Of whose largenes yet also above your largenes, read my 9.31.32.33.47.
Demaundes, and join with me if you list upon them.

Your third part out of Augustine, is more general, to wit, about all
questions with any Heretics whatsoever* thereof you say, Ar. 13.
that he would have heresies confuted only by Scriptures. For, writing against
Maximinus the Arian, li. 3. ca. 14. (a place commonly and often cited) he
says: Sed nunc nec ego Nicenum, etc. Of which place your gathering is this: If
Augustine would not oppress the Arians by the authority of the Nicene
Council, which was the first and the best general Council that ever was, but
only by the Scriptures: how much less would he charge them with other
authorities* that the Papists allege: beside the authority of holy
Scriptures? It is for your own vantage, or else you would not so play the
proctor for Heretics. S. Augustine would not oppress the Arians, nor would
not charge them, but only with Scripture, you say. But does he say, that he
might not? (for there is the question.) You know, (I doubt not) how commonly he
presses the Donatistes with the authority of the said Nicen Council, Aug.
con. Ep. parm. li. 2. ca. 8. De bap. co^. Don. l. 1. c. 7
granting that in S. Cyprians time it was a doubtful thing, whether Heretics
can baptize. But, nullo iam quaestio est, now it is out of all doubt: because
in that same Council it had been discussed, considered, ended, and ratified.
And even so in your own place, a little before, having proved inuincibly by the
Scriptures, that the Father and the Son are vnius eiusdemque substa^tiae, of
one and the same substance, he says immediately: This is that Homousion which
against the Arrian heretics was in the Nicene Council ratified of the
Catholic fathers, veritatis authoritate and authoritatis veritate, not only
by authority of truth (as your self do grant) but also by truth of
authority, (which you deny.) It follows: Which Homousion afterward in the
Council of Atiminum, heretical impiety under the heretical Emperor
Constantius endeavored to infirm, But all in vain, For soon after the
liberty of the Catholic faith preuaiing, Homousion was defended universally.
Then come the words that you allege: Sed nunc nec ego Nicenu^, nec tu debes
Arimine^se tanquam praeiudicaturus proferre co^cilium. But now ( in this
disputation between us two, being upon the matter it self in it self) as it
were to preiudicate, neither must I allege the Council of Nice, nor thou the
Council of Ariminum. For so that Arrian Bishop Maximinus being both to
encounter with S. Augustine upon the matter it self, said in the very
beginning of the disputation: If thou demand my faith, I hold that faith which
at Ariminum of three hundred and thirty Bishops was not only notified, but
also by their subscriptions ratified. Au. contra Max. li. 1. in principio.
Therefore S. Augustine said as before, and further as follows. Nec ego huius
authoritate, nec tu illius detineris. Neither does the authority of the one
hold me, nor of the other hold thee. Where your false translation makes him
to say, that the Arrian was not bounden to the authority of the Nicene
Council, contrary to that which he said before, calling it veritatem
authoritatis, the truth of authority. Therefore they were bound to it, as you
also now be bound to the Tridentine Council: but they would not be holden
within their bounds, as neither you will. And therefore it was to no more
purpose to allege against them that of Nice, then it is to allege against you
this of Trent, specially they having that of Ariminum to pretend for them, such
a one as you (being of all great Heresies, the beggerliest) have none. Neither
would we in the like altercations allege against you the old Councels, if you
would plainly confess them to be against you, so as you do confess the
Tridentine to be against you, and so as the Arrians did confess the Nicene to
be against them. Whereupon S. Augustine there says: By authorities of the
Scriptures, being witnesses not proper to one side, but common to both, let
matter try with matter, cause with cause, reason with reason. The like would
we by his ensample in the like case say to you: in the mean time also not
refusing to answer all that you can allege, be it Scripture, be it Council,
or whatsoever else, as in this book you find: nor requiring you to answer any
private witnesses, but only common, considering that not we only, but you
also (whatsoever you say of only Scripture) do make claim for all that and
appeal to the first 600. years, namely your Jewel, in those two Goticall
Sermons of his at Powles cross Anno 1560.

The other places also that you allege out of Augustine for this general
part, are but particular, and concern no more but that one question of the
Church, whereof your second part was: as this former place co^cerned no more
but ye question of the Trinity. And therefore your probation is not so large,
as your affirmation, where you say, that although Augustine prove against the
Pelagians by the prayers of the Church, Pur. 349.
yet he does not mean to defend, that whatsoever the visible Church
receives, is true: and therefore all other persuasions set aside, he provoke
only to the Scriptures, to try the faith and doctrine of the Church. How true
that is, appears by the very same book De vnitate Ecclesiae, out of which
you go about to show such provoking of his. for there, when he has proved
against the Donatistes, the Church to be his, he says expressly, that to be
enough also for all other questions. Aug. de vnitate Eccl. cap. 18.19.
Sufficit nobis. etc. It is enough for us, that we have that Church, which is
pointed to by most manifest testimonies of the Holy and Canonical Scriptures.

And touching the very question it self of the Church again, what do you
allege out of him? what you gather of his saying, I see, Ar. 13.14.
for you say: By this Augustine declares, first that Heretics must be
confuted only by the Scriptures: and secondly, that neither Councels,
Succession of Bishops, Universality, Miracles, Visions, Dreams nor
revelations, are the notes to try the Catholic Church, but only the
Scriptures. So you gather, but he says not so. Au. de vni. Eccl. ca. 16.
Remoueantur omnes moratoriae tergiuersationes, says he: Away with all
dilatorie drawinges back: such as is Quicquid de peccatis hominum obijcitur,
all that the Donatist Bishop obiecteth of certain men's crimes. Also when he
says for his Church, Verum est, quia hoc ego dico. It is true, because I say
this: or, because this said that felowbishop, or those felowbishops of mine,
or, those Bishops (in their Councels) or Clerks or Lay of ours: aut ideo
verum est, or, therefore it is true, because such and such meruailes did
Donatus, ( who was as it were their Luther,) or Pontius, ( as it were their
Calvin,) or any other: or, because men do pray at the memories of our departed
and be hard, or, because this and that there does happen: or, because such a
brother of ours or such a sister of ours, saw such a vision wal^ng, or dreamed
such a dream sleeping. Remoueantur ista, Away with these dilatories: and let
them show their Church in the Canonical authority of the Holy books. Nec ^ta,
vt ea colligant etc. Neither so as to gather and rehearse those places which
are obscure or ambiguous or figurative, that every man may interpret them as
he list after his own sense. But bring you forth some place so manifest that
it needs no interpreter. Ar. 13. Pur. 333.
Because neither we do say, that men ought to believe us that we are in the
Church, for that, that the Church which we hold has been commended by Optatus
of Mileuis, or by Ambrose of Milayne ( as now, by Fisher of Rochester, or
Hosius of Warmes) or by other inumerable Bishops of our communion: or because
she has been set forth by Councelles of our fellowbishopps. For these were
private to S. Augustines side, as those other Bishopps and Councelles were
private to the Donatistes side. So are they not now, but both sides, we and
you, do claim them. And therefore now better cause to allege them, even also
in the question of the Church, then was in S. Augustines time: how be it then
also he might well have alleged them, although in that book he did not, and
says he did not. For in them was veritas authoritatis, truth of authority,
as here above page (179.) he said to the Arrian, and no less also to the
Donatistes. It follows on further (as you also allege) Aut quia per totum
orbem, Moracles and visions.
or Because over all the world in the Holy places that our communion does
frequent, so great Miracles partly of exauditions, partly of curinges, are
done, in so much that the bodies of ( Geruasius and Protasius) Martyrs, which
lay hidden so many years ( they were Martyred in the Apostles time) were
revealed (as if they will ask, they may hear of many) unto Ambrose, and that
at the same bodies, one that had been many years blind, very well known in
the City of Millayne, received his eyes and eye sight. Or because such a man
had a dream, and such a man in Spirit heard a voice, that he should not enter
into the side of Donatus, or that he should go out from the side of Donatus
Where he adds of these miracles and visions, saying: Whatsoever such
things are done in the Catholic Church, therefore they are to be allowed,
because they are done in the Catholic Church, ( otherwise not, be they done in
Donates side, or in Luthers, or in Caluines.) Non ideo ipsa manifestatur
Catholica, quia haec in ea siunt, But not thereby is the Catholic church made
manifest, because these things are done in her. You translate it, that she is
not proved thereby, as though S. Augustine said, that also true allowed Miracles
and visions (whereby in the Scripture also it self we see Christ him self and
so many other things purposely proved) lack weight and fashion of just
probation. Whereas in deed he says no more of the^, then he says of
Scripture which is obscure: not that it wants authority to prove the Church,
but that it does not make the Church manifest, requiring therefore the
Donatistes to bring such Scripture, as needs no interpreter, Sicut non eget
interpret. Which we allege (says he) out of so many most manifest places for
the Church beginning at Jerusalem, and thence growing on continually over al
Nations even till Domesday. Such Scriptures do make the Church manifest: but so
do not obscure Scriptures, until the interpretation be allowed: Neither
Miracles and visions, until they be allowed. Now the Donatistes would none of
the Catholic Church in their time: but both we and you confess it. And
therefore when we allege the Miracles done in it, you have not to except
against us by this place of S. Augustine. And that again, because we also do
apeale with him to such and the same Scriptures for manifest trial of the
Church, so that my v^ry first demand is thereof: though we use also other
probations, to show that Scripture and all is for us, and nothing for you. As
he also does, where he says to the Manichees upon the same matter: Aug. co^.
ep. Fund. ca. 4.
In Catholicae Ecclesiae, etc. Many things there be, which in the Catholic
Churches lap most worthily do keep me. There keeps me, Consensio, Consent
of peoples and Nations: There keeps me, Authoritas, Authority, by Miracles
begone, nourished by Hope, by Charity increased, by Antiquity made firm and
sure: There keeps me Successio Sacerdotum, Succession of Priests from the
very See of Peter the Apostle, (to whom our Lord after his Resurrection
committed the feeding of his sheep) even to the Bishop that now is: There
keeps me finally, John. 21.
ipsum Catholicae nomen, the very name Catholic, which not without cause among
so many Heresies this Church alone has obtained, Ista ergo tot, etc. These
then so many and so great most dear bonds of Christian calling, do well keep
the man that believes in the Catholic Church, although as yet he understand
not the truth which he believes.

To which place of S. Augustine you pretend to answer, saying unto us: All
this, you will say, makes exceeding much for us: Ar. 69.70.
yea but hear that which follows: Apud vos autem, etc. But with you
(Manichees and Protestants) where there is none of these to allure me and
keep me, sola personat veritatis pollicitatio, there ringeth only a promising
of truth. Then to your purpose as you think: quae quide^ si tam manifesta
mo^stratur, etc. Which truth if it be showed so manifest, that it can not come
in doubt, is to be preferred (I grant) before all those things, by which I am
holden in the Catholic Church. And what of this? By this you may plainly see
(quoth you) that though Consent, (and universality) Antiquity, Succession,
and the name Catholic, be good confirmation, when they are joined with the
truth: yet when a truth is severed from them, it is more to be regarded then
they all. As though S. Augustine granted, that the truth might be severed
from them. Where he plainly says, also most sincere wisdom, syncerissimam
sapientiam, that is, truth and understanding of it without all corruption, to
be in the said Catholic Church, though the Heretics will not believe so
much, but think that the Catholics are gross heads, and blind folowers of
men's commandments. But them selves, though destitute of all that should move
any man to be of their side, yet to have the truth most manifestly and without
all doubt. For that cause S. Augustine joins with them in that book, and
answers their foundations, as I do yours in this book, showing that all this
glorious talking of truth, is but wind of vain words.

One such place more you allege twice to the same purpose. Ar. 14. Pur. 203.
De pastoribus, cap. 14. To a strayshepe seeking the Church what say you, Sir
Donatist? Partis Donati est Ecclesia. The piece of Donatus has the Church.
Read me that out of the Scriptures, out of the Shepeheards voice. For out of
them do I recite Ecclesiam toto orb diffusam, The Church which is not any man's
piece, but (beginning at Jerusalem) spreads over all the world. Sed illi
codices tradiderunt, But ( thou say) such men traitorously delivered the holy
books to Dioclesians ministers, and such men offered incense to the Idols,
such a one and such a one. Quid ad me de illo and de illo? What is that to me
of such a one and such a one? quia nec de illis vocem pastoris annuntias, For
it is thy self that accusest them. But tell me the Shepherds voice, if that
voice accuse one, I believe it, alijs non credo, other accusers I do not
believe. Sed acta proferes, But thou will bring forth Court rolls, wherein
their crimes are registered. Acta profero, And I also bring forth Court rolls,
wherein the same men's innocence is registered. Credamus tuis? creed and tu
meis, Shall we believe thine? believe thou mine also. Non credo tuis: noli
credere meis. I do not believe thine: and I give thee leave also not to believe
mine. Auferantur chartae humanae: sonent voces diuinae. Let men's Court papers
be removed: and let Gods sayings be rehearsed. Ede mihi vnam Scripturam pro
part Donati, Give me one place of Scripture for the piece of Donatus, or of
Luther, or of Calvin, or of any other broken piece. Audi innumerabiles pro
orb terrarum, But for the Church of the whole world, I am ready to rehearse
innumerable places. Now what makes all this for Fulke? unless he think he
has any vauntage in his own false translation of Acta, turning it Decrees.
Yea does it not make against him most inuincibly, as all the rest also that S.
Augustine has written against the Donatistes for his Church and ours? that is,
for the Church beginning at Jerusalem, and thence spreding over all Nations to
the very last time, even in the same manner altogether as it had done to S.
Augustines time?

iij About certain Traditions.
Upon this question of Only Scripture I have stood long, because Only
Scripture and Only faith are with the Protestants all in all, howbeit they
have neither Scripture nor Faith. Now to dispatche other questions very
briefly, against certain Traditions Fulke alleges, saying: Beatus Rhenanus a
Papist, and a great Antiquarie, affirms, that by the Canons of the Nicene
Council and other Councels, which he has seen in Libraries, those oblations
pro Natalitijs, with other superstitions that Tertullian fathereth upon
Tradition of the Apostles, were abrogated. As touching oblations pro
Natalitijs, I have answered in the sixth Chapter. Cap. 6. par. 1. v.
But as for abrogation of any other Traditions, Rhenanus has never a word.

iiij About the marriage of Votaries.
For the marriage of such as have vowed virginity, Ar. 45. Pur. 22.23.
you allege one place of Epiphanius thrice, and another of S. Hieromes twice,
and all about a matter that we hold even as they did. Thus you say:
Epiphanius, Hpiph. li. 2 Haer. 61.
although he count it an offense to marry after their vow (therein he is with
us you know) yet he says, (speaking of such as secretly live in fornication
sub specie solitudinis aut continentiae) under the color of vowed singlenes or
continency) It is better to marry then to burn (that first is not in
Epiphanius). Melius est itaque vnum peccatum habere, and non plura, It is
better to have one sin rather then many. It is better for him that is fallen
from his course (wherein he began to run for the Crown of Virginity)
openly to take a wife according to the law, and a virginitate multo tempore
poenitentiam agere, and a long time to repent (to do penance for breaking)
that vow of his virginity, and so (having done his full penance) to be
brought again into the Church (out of the which he was cast as an
excommunicate person for breaking his vow) as one that has done amiss, as one
that is fallen, and broken, and having need to be bound: rather then to be
wounded daily with privy darts, of that wickedness which the devil puts
into him. So knows the Church to preach: Haec sunt sanationis medicamenta,
These are the medicines of healing. Whereof you gather, and say, that
Epiphanius calls marriage of such men, an wholesome medicine, contrary to
that you confess your self that he calls it a sin, (for so does the
Apostles Tradition, says he) unless perhaps you think Sin to be an wholesome
medicine. No sir, the wholesome medicines are his long penance, and his
reconcilement to the Church again. But at the least (say you) Epiphanius
allows marriage in them, whereas the Popish Church did separate them from
their wives in queen Mary's time. After a solemn vow, (which is made but only
two ways, by taking holy orders, and by professing some common approved rule of
Religion) to marry, is Chry. ep. 6 ad Theod. Monachu^ lapsum. Basil. lib. de
virginitate.
no marriage, and thereupon it is that no Doctor can be alleged which allows
it for marriage, if Priests or such professed Monks and Nuns do marry. But
the sole vow of virginity, and of widowhood, is none of those two, and
therefore but a simple vow: and therefore to marry after it, although it be a
great mortal sin, yet the marriage holds. So says Epiphanius, and so say
we, as some widows in England having taken the mantle and the ring, and
marrying afterward, can bear us witness, whose marriage we have allowed of
(though they may not use it so freely without just dispensation, as other
married Folk, and as their husbands may, because of their vow) and cured them
by penance and reconciliation, altogether as Epiphanius here witnesses of the
Church in his time.

Hie. ad Demetriad. tom. 1.
So is it likewise of the simple vow of virginity, that S. Hierome speaks,
saying: The name of certain virgins, which behave them selves not well, does
slander the holy purpose of virgins, and the glory of the heavenly and
angelike family. To who^ must be plainly said, vt aut nubant, that either they
marry, if they can not contain, or else contain, ( suing to God to give them
strength) if they will not marry. We say the same to the same, and generally
to all others, which of two sins will needs commit one, counsayling them
rather to commit the lesser then the greater: As for example, to say that they
will come to your schismatical and Heretical service, when the Commissioners
require no more, rather then to come unto it in deed: not omitting to tell
them withal, that they should neither so much as say they will come, because
that also is a sin, and a mortal sin: as Epiphanius told those virgins,
that their marriage also is sin.

v. About the Real presence, and Transubstantiation.
About the blessed viuificall Sacrament of the Altar you allege one Doctor
against the Real presence, and three others against Transubstantiation.

Pur. 326.
It was not the belief of S. Augustine, nor of any other in that time (you
say) that the Sacrament is the natural body and blood of Christ. As though it
were the mystical body of Christ, which is his Church: Unless you find more
then these two, his natural body, and his mystical body. Or, as though it
were not his natural body which was the morrow after his Supper to dye for us,
and his natural blood which was to be shed for us. When will you ever admit
any text for plain and evident Scripture, standing so obstinately against
these most clear words of Christ, This is my Body, that is given (and broken)
for you, Luc. 22.1. Cor 11. This is my blood (Mat. 26. Mar. 14.) that is shed
for you (and for many. (Luc. 22. Mat. 26. Mar. 14. And what a gross blindness
is this, considering the infinite difference between bread and Christ, to
think, that being in S. Augustines time taken for bread, it could afterward in
all Christendom be taken for Christ himself, and that without all
contradiction? whereas also at this time you the Sacramentaries, could not
change the doctrine of it from Christ to bread, but heaven and earth cries
out against you for it, not the Catholics alone, but also the Lutherans.

But S. Augustine forsooth says: Pur. 3^8.
Non hoc corpus quod videtis manducaturi estis etc. I will recite the whole
circumstance, that the world may see your dealing. Aug. in Ps. 98.
I find ( says he) how without Idolatry earth may be adored, without
Idolatry Christ's footestoole may be adored. For he took earth of earth:
because flesh is of earth, and of Mary's flesh he took flesh. Et quia in ipsa
carne hic ambulauit, et ipsam carnem nobis manducandam, etc. And because he
walked here in the same flesh, and gave to us the same flesh to eat for our
salvation, and no man eats that flesh but first he adoreth ( it:) we have
found, how such a footestoole of our Lords may be adored, and not only we
sin not in adoring ( it) but we sin in not adoring ( it.) See now how
properly Fulk answers hereunto: Augustine in deed allows the adoration of
the body of Christ whereof that is a Sacrament, but neither can you prove out
of that place, that he would have the Sacrament honored, nor that the Sacrament
is the very body of Christ. As though the same flesh which he took of the
Virgin Marie, and in which he walked, is not his very body, for, the same
(says he) we eat, and we adore it before we eat, bowing and prostrating our
selves even to every particulare holy host, as now in the Catholic Churches
you know, and as S. Augustine witnesses of his time. For it follows in most
manifest words: Et ad terram quamlibet cum te inclinas atque prosternis, non
quasi terram intuearis, And when thou do bow and prostrate thy self unto
any earth, do not consider as it were ( bare) earth: Sed illu^ Sanctu^, but
that holy one whose footestoole it is that thou adorest. Et cum adoras illum,
ne cogitatione remaneas in carne, Also when thou adorest him, let not thy
thought rest in flesh: So as they that thought the same an hard saying, Unless a
man eat my flesh, Joan. 6.
he shall not have everlasting life. Acceperunt illud stulte, they took it
folishly, they thought it carnally, and imagined that our Lord would cut off
certain pieces from his body, and give to them. Whereas they should have said
to them selves, Non sine causa dicit hoc, etc. He says not this without cause,
but because some hidden Sacrament is therein. For so he instructed the twelve
that did stick unto him, when the other had for misliking that saying, plaide
the Apostates: Understand spiritually that which I spoke. You shall not eat
this Body which you see, and drink that blood which they shall shed that
shall crucify me: that is, you shall not eat it and drink it in such form
(so as these others imagined.) I commended unto you ( in those words) some
Sacrament, that is, such a thing as being spiritually understood, will give
you life. Although needs it must be visibly celebrated ( by the visible forms
of bread and wine,) yet it must be inuisibly understood, to be not the thing
which is seen in the celebration, but which is not seen, to wit, my very body
and blood, my very flesh taken of the Virgin. In so much that young children
(Infants) in S. Augustines time at celebrations of the Sacraments, August. de
Trin. lib. 3. ca. 10.
being told with most grave authority, whose body and blood it is, will
think nothing else, but our Lord verily to have appeared in that form to the
eyes of men: and that liquor verily to have flowed out of such a side being
stricken: if they never learn by their own or others experience ( as striking
it, and yet no blood flow out of it) and never see that form of things but at
Celebrations of the Sacraments when it is offered ( to God) and ministered ( to
the receauers:) because they know not that which is set on the Altar, and
after the holy Canon is consumed, whence or how it is made ( by consecration:
like as no man knows, how the Angels made or assumpted those clouds and
fires to signify that which they did announce, though the Lord or the holy
Ghost was showed by those corporal forms.) And therefore those children would
imagine that Christ appeared here, and suffered in no other form, hearing that
this in the Sacrament is his body, and his blood which was shed for us. Now
comes Fulke, and gathers clean contrary to D. Allen, as if S. Augustine
said, Pur. 309.
that these children would imagine nothing of the presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, whereas he says plainly, that hearing thus his presence in the
Sacrament, and that in such sort that it is his blood which was shed, they
would imagine of no other form of his appearing and suffering: signifying as
plainly that they needed only to be instructed of his other form, and not of
any difference at all otherwise between him self in his appearing and
suffering, and him self in this Sacrament.

The next Doctor may be Justinius Martyr, of whose words you gather against
Transubstantiation, thus: Ar. 60.
Here he plainly affirms, that the substance of ^he Sacrament is turned into
the nourishment of our bodies. Therefore it remains still after consecration.
That will appear by his own words, which being truly translated are these
(in his second Apology for the Christians, to the Heathen Emperor Antonius
Pius:) This meat with us is called Eucharistia. To the which none is admitted,
but such as believes our doctrine to be true, and is washed with the Lauer
for remission of sins and to regeneraration, and so believes as Christ has
taught. And why such reverence? For we take not these as the common bread and
a common cup: but even as our Savior Jesus Christ being through Gods word
incarnate, had flesh and blood for our salvation: Sic etiam per verbum
precationis quod ab ipso est sacratam alimoniam quae mutata nutrit nostras
carnes and sanguinem, illius incarnati Jesus carnem and sanguinem esse
didicimus: So we have learned in the Gospelles, that the meat which being
changed nourishes our fleshes and blood, being consecrated through his word
of prayer, is the flesh and blood of that Jesus incarnate. He says not here
that the substance of the Sacrament is turned into the nourishment of our
bodies, as you pretend: but clean against you he shows, that it is not
absurd, bread and wine to be turned into the flesh and blood of Christ, seeing
that every day usually they be turned by nature into our flesh and blood,
when we take them at diner and supper for our nourishment: and that to be done
by the divine word, seeing that by Gods word he took the same flesh and
blood of the Virgin Marie.

Ar. 59.
You gather likewise of Ireneus his words, and say: Here you see plainly that
Ireneus affirms, the Sacrament after the Consecration to consist of the
earthly substance of bread. He does not so affirm. He there treats against
the old Heretics, who said, Iren. li. 4. cap. 34.
all these bodily creatures, yea and our own bodies also, not to be of Gods
making, who is the Father of Christ our Lord, but of another God whom they
call the Creator, and counted him an ill one, and so likewise all his works to
be evil, and our bodies not to rise again. But this cannot stand with the
Eucharist (says Ireneus: Et li. 4. c. 32 and li. 5.
) seeing there, to make an oblation to the father, the Creators creatures,
(that is, bread and wine,) are taken and made the body and blood of Christ, and
our flesh is nourished to incorruption of the same body and blood. But our
doctrine ( says he) is consonant to the Eucharist in the oblation. (Offerimus
enim ei quae sunt eius, for, holding Christ's father to be the Creator, we
offer to him the things that are his, whereas the Heretics cupidum alieni
ostendunt eum, do make him gredy of another, for that he has commanded an
oblation to be made to him of the Creators Creatures, him self not being the
Creator:) Et Eucharistia rursus confirmat nostram sententiam, and again the
Eucharist in the receiving confirms our doctrine of the resurrection,
congruenter communicationem and vnitatem praedicantes carnis and spiritus,
considering that agreeable to it we teach joining and union of flesh and
spirit. quemadmodum enim qui est a terra panis, praecipiens vocationem dei ^am
non communis panis est, sed Eucharistia, ex duabus rebus constans, terrena and
caelesti: sic and corpora nostra, percipientia Eucharistiam, iam non sunt
corruptibilia, spem resurrectionis habentia. For like as the bread which is of
earth, receiving Gods invocation ( that is, the words of Consecration,) now is
not common bread as in substance also it was before,) but Eucharistia
consisting of two things, one earthly ( which before he called carnem, the
flesh of Christ under the form of earthly bread, as also S. Augustine above
page calls it earth, both in that form, and also in his own form) the
other heavenly, ( which before he called spiritum because it is the Godhead: so
also our bodies receiving the Eucharist, now are not corruptible, having hope
of resurrection, and therefore now consisting as it were of two things, so as
the Eucharist does, earthly and heavenly, flesh and spirit. Which his
comparison is very excellent, yet as all comparisons and similitules, unlike in
some things: because the heavenly thing is in the Eucharist in re, in deed, in
our bodies only in spe, in hope. And there it is a substance, to wit, the
Godhead: here but a quality, to wit, the glory of the resurrection. Again the
earthly thing there, to wit, Christ's flesh, is under the form of the former
common bread, without the substance of the same: here the earthly thing, to
wit, our flesh after receiving, is under the form of the former corruptible
bodies with the substance, yea and also with the corruptibilitie of the same
bodies. The likeness, for which he made the comparison, is between the two
receiuings, and the operations of the two things received: For the bread
receives, and our bodies receive, though again differently. And the words of
consecration which the bread receives, works marueilously, and the Eucharist
which our bodies receive, works marueilously, though again differently, as I
have said.

Your last Doctor is Theodoret, Whose words (you say) be directly against
Transubstantiation. If they were so, Pur. 307. Theod. in poly. mor. dial. 2.
it were nothing to the matter in it self, as I told you in the beginning of
this Chapter, and specially this being such a matter, as some ancient Father
(all yet agreeing universally upon the Real presence) might be ignorant of,
considering that some late scholemen, also after the Church had declared for
transubstantiation of the bread, thought notwithstanding, that they might hold
some part of the breads substance to remain, either the matter (as it does in
all substantial transmutations of nature) or else the substantial form,
until this last Council at Trent declared therefore further, that the Church
means by Transubstantiation, the turning of the whole substance of the bread
into the substance of the body, and the whole substance of the wine into the
substance of the blood of Christ. Sess. 13. ca. 4. But because I there said,
that your Apostasy has no patron at all among the old Doctors in no article,
(so inexcusable it is both of you, and of your folowers,) and that remembering
well at the same time this place of Theodoret: you shall hear what I can say
thereunto: although the Lutherans might better allege it then you

First the Catholic asks: Mystica Symbola, quae deo a dei Sacerdotibus
offeruntur, quorumnam dicis esse Symbola? The mystical likenesses, which Gods
Pristes do offer to God (that is, the body and blood of Christ under the forms
of bread and wine) Whose likenesses be they? The Eutychian Heretic answers:
The likenesses of the body and blood of our Lord in their own forms.
Thereupon the Catholic infers, Ergo our Lords body in his own form, is
yet also a true body, and not turned into the nature of Divinity, though
filled with Divine glory: Oportet enim imaginis esse exemplar archetypum, for
an image must have a pattern that is.

The Heretic there thinks that the example of these mysteries makes rather
for him, and says: Nay rather, As these likenesses of our Lords body and
blood, Alia quidem sunt, are one thing before the Priests Invocation, to wit,
bread and wine, but after the Invocation are turned, and be made other things,
to wit, Christ's body and Christ's blood: So also our Lords body after his
assumption is turned into the divine substance, being therefore extant no more
in his own form. The Catholic answers saying: Nay, you are caught in your
own net. Neque enim signa, etc. For the mystical signs do not after
consecration depart (to sense, as you teach of Christ's body after his
ascension) from their nature. For they abide (to sense) in their former
substance, and figure, and form, and may be seen and felt as before.
Intelligu^tur autem ea esse quae facta sunt, and creduntur: But to
understanding (though not to sense) and to faith, they be the things which they
are made: and adorantur vt quae illa sint quae creduntur, and they be adored
(by inclination and prostration, as we heard before out of S. Augustine, because
Fulke says here, Not by any knocking or kneeling) as being in deed the things
which they are believed. Thus it is in the Mysteries, being liknesses or an
image. Therefore the verity in like manner (says he) that is, our Lords body
in heaven, habet priorem quidem formam, etc. Has pardie the former form, and
figure, and circumscription, and (to say all at once) the bodies substance:
though it be after the Resurrection made immortal and incorruptible, and
sitting at Gods right hand, and adored of all creatures. Meaning (as you see)
by substance of the bread and substance of the body, all that is external, as
figure, form, circumscription, etc. Which we in English do by a like term
call the boulke of a thing. As for the interior substance, that question
belonged to his Incarnation, not to his assumption, whereof now they talk.
Neither may any Logician think it strange for the word Substantia to be so
used, if he consider well, how the word Corpus is used in the predicament of
Quantity, though it be otherwise a species of Substantia.

But the mystical likeness (says the Heretic) changes at the least his
former calling. For it is no more named, that which it was termed before, but
it is called Body. Therefore also the verity in heaven must be called God, and
not Body. Not so, says the Catholic: It is named not only Corpus, Body, but
also panis vitae, Bread of life. And so likewise the body in heaven, we name it
Diuinum corpus, and viuisicum, and dominicum, docentes non esse commune
alicuius hominis, etc. The divine and viuificall, and Dominicall body, teaching
that it is not a common one of some man's, but our Lords Jesus Christ, who is
God and man. Where you see, that such a difference as he puts between our
common bodies and our Lord Gods body, the like he puts between common bread
and this bread of life, which therefore with him is Christ's body under the
form of bread (being thereby become as properly bread, as common bread is
bread) and not the common substance of common bread, which no man can say to be
bread of life.

vj. About the Sacrament of Penance.
Now to approach nearer to Purgatory, about the Sacrament of Penance the
Church of God says four things. First, that by the Priests absolution the
guilt of sin is remitted, and so the penitent reconciled to God, and
therefore pardoned the eternal pain of hell. Secondly, that after this
remission: for all that, he may yet be in debt of some temporal pain.
Thirdly, that he may and must pay the same temporal debt by works of
Satisfaction. Fourthly, that upon good cause a Bishop may pardon it in part,
and the Pope wholly. Against these four points Fulke alleges, saying:

Absolution.
Pur, 168.
But what avails this submission (to Gods ministers) when the Priest does not
by his Absolution take away one hours torments in Purgatory, as both M.
Allen him self in effect confesses, and the master of Sentences also
teaches. It avails to take away the eternal torments of hell. Is that
nothing with you? When you be in them, your saucie tongue would give all the
world for the least touch of the fingers end of Gods Priests, whom now in
your heretical pride you despise far more then the rich Jew did poor
Lazarus.

Temporal debt remaining after Absolution.
Against the second you allege Augustine and Chrysostom, even against
themselves, for in the third chapter page 16. you confessed them both to stand
for Purgatory, which implies debt of pain after remission of sins. But go
to, what says Austine? He says (quoth you) of the deaths of Moises and Aaron,
Pur. 42. Aug. in vet. Test. lib. 4. ca. 53
that they were signs of things to come, not punishments of Gods displeasure.
This is your sincerity. His words immediately before be these: When it is said
to them, Vt apponantur ad populum suu^, that they should be gathered to their
people: It is manifest, that they be not in the wrath of god, which separateth
from the peace of the holy eternal society. And thereby it is manifest, that
also their deaths were signs of things to come, which things he there
declares) and not punishments of Gods indignation. You see how precisely he
speaks, to wit, of Gods wrath and indignation which punishes by death to
separate from his people for ever: least he should have spoken contrary to the
most manifest text, and to him self a little before, where he said, that God
foretold them both, quod ideo non intrarent, that therefore they should not
enter into the land, quia non eum sanctificauerunt, because they doubted of
his gift that water could flow of a Rock. And so is the text it self most
evidently: Nu. 20.27. Deuteronomy. 32.
You shall not bring this people into the land, but you shall dye, because you
did not believe me, because you offended me, because you trespassed against me.
And yet you will not grant, that for their sin, the fault being remitted:
they were punished by death. These are they that will not stand against evident
Scripture.

Likewise about the example of David you say: Pur. 43.
I would wish no better authority of the ancient Fathers, then even that
which M. Allen him self alleges out of Augustine contra Faustum li. 22. cap.
67. that the punishment of David was, flagelli paterni disciplina, the
chastisement of Gods fatherly scourge: as he does most plainly declare the
same in his book De pec. mer. ac rem. li. 2. ca. 23. Is such authority so
good to prove that after the fault is forgiven, that is, after the son is
received again into favor, no pain is owing? Belike then you scourge your
children that offend not, as well as them that have offended, and them also that
have offended, you scourge not only after that you have received them again
into favor, but also after that you have pardoned them all punishment. Then
surely are you as wise a father, as a divine. No reasonable man, but hearing of
a fathers scourge, would by and by gather of it, punishment for some offense,
where you gather the contrary, A fathers scourge, ergo no punishment. But your
author S. Augustine does not so. In the chapter before commending his humility
sub flagello dei, 2. Reg. 16.
under Gods scourge, when Semei so diuelishly reviled him, he reports how
David said, Meritis suis hoc redditum superno iudicio, That this was executed
upon him by Gods judgment for his deserts, that is, for the same matters of
Vrias, whereof he speaks in the place by you alleged out of the Chapter
following, and says, that the Prophet Nathan told him, quod acceperit veniam,
that he had forgiveness, ad sempiternam quidem salutem, as to everlasting
salvation But notwithstanding, as God had threatened him, flagelli paterni
disciplina non est praetermissa, The fatherly scourges chastisement was not
omitted: to the end, that both for his confession of his sin, he might be
delivered everlastingly, and by such affliction he might be tried temporally.
Where also he commends him for not murmuring against God, as if he had sent
him a false pardon of his sins. Intelligebat enim, etc. For by his profound
wisdom he understood, but that God was gracious to him confessing and
repenting, how worthy his sins were of everlasting pains, for the which (
sins) being beaten with temporal corrections, he saw that unto him continued
the forgiveness, and Physic withal not neglected. So expressly he says that
he was beaten for his sins, for his deserts, although withal it was Physic
for him and pr^bation. Neither in the other place De pec. mer. does he say the
contrary. For these be his words: That forgiveness of his sins was granted,
that he might not be stopped from receiving life everlasting: and yet the
effect of that same threatening followed, that his godliness might in that
humility be exercised and proved: not only, but also (as he said in another
place) that he might thereby be beaten temporally for his deserts: though he
express not this cause also in this place, for that he had here to answer the
Pelagians, and show some cause, why death, if it came only by sin (by
original sin,) remains still upon all men, even them also whose original
sins are so fully forgiven in Baptism, that they owe nothing, neither
eternally, neither temporally, for them.

Pur. 43.
But for a slat conclusion contradictory to M. Allens assertion, I will use (you
say) the very words of Chrysostom in the 8. Hom. upon the Epistle to the Romans
Vbi veni^, ibi nulla erit poena, Where there is forgiveness, there is no
punishment, One may see by this, that you would use the Doctors words as
courageously as we do, if they were on your side, as they be on ours* But it
cools your courage, because you are feign to confess them in many things to
be plain against you: and not able neither to maintain that they be with you,
when you pretend they be. As here S. Chrysostom speaks of the forgiveness
given in Baptism to the Jew passing from the wrath of the Law to the grace of
Christ. But our assertion speaks of the forgiveness given in the Sacrament of
penance, to the Christian that has shamefully dishonored the grace of Christ.
If such be contradictories with you, then as your Divinity is new, so is your
Logic also new.

Satisfaction.
Pur. 87.
Against the third you allege Chrysostom and Ambrose: but how fondly, the very
words that you allege, though we seek no further, Chryso. de compun. cordis.
li. 1. in fine.
will declare. Non requirit Deus ciliciorum pondus, etc. God requires not the
burden of shirtes of hear, (says Chrysostom) nor to be shut up in the
straites of a little Cell, neque iubet, neither does he command us to sit in
obscure and dark Caves: this only it is which is required of us, that we
always remember and ^count our sins, etc. He there reproves them* that
(...) ^rie mourning for their own souls, quasi quidum (...) labor sit, as if
it were a labor intolerable. Therefore he says, that God does not command as
necessary that (...) take him self to the strait ^mourning of Monks. (...)
And (...) forsooth do tell us thereupon, that Chrysostom ^f any man had (...)
^ther believe him, speaking of such kind of wo^ (...) his fellows count to be
the chief works of p^n, (...) that they serve not for satisfaction for our
sins unto God (...) again: Therefore by Chrysostomes judgment, that (...)
satisfaction of Gods righteousness, nor any obedience of Gods commandment,
has banished the Heremites, (...) Anachoretes, and cloyed the world with
cloysterers: but the superstitious and slavish fear of Purgatory, and the
blasphemous presumptuous pride of men's merits. Thus you take on as it were
upon S. Chrysostomes saying, not considering that Demetrius was a Monk, to
whom he there writes, commending (...) singulerly for the very same works of
penance: (...)
nor that Chrysostom also him self was a Monk (and that by your own
confession, and wrote a book which is extant, Aduersus vituperatores vitae
Monasticae, Against the dispraysers of the Monastical life, that is, even
against you also for saying as you do in this place.

Again you say: Pur. 8^. A^. in (...) 22. li. 1^.
What S. Ambrose thinks of that kind of satisfaction, whereof M. Allen
speaks, is plain by those words which he utters of Peter: Lachrymas eius
lego, satisfactionem non lego. I read of his tears, I read not of his
satisfaction. He utters these words also there immediately before: Non inuenio
quid dixerit, inuenio quod fleuerit: I find not what he said, I find that he
wept. Whatsoever you gather hereof, he that reads the place, must needs
gather the contrary, so wit, that he thinks Confession necessary, and
satisfaction necessary: but that tears are both a special kind of confession,
for Lachrymae crimen sine offensione verecundiae co^^tentur, Tears confess
the crime without touch of shamfastnes, quod voce pudor est consiter^* that to
confess with voice is a shamefast thing: and also a special kind of
Satisfaction, forLachrymae veniam, Tears though they do not ask pardon, they
obtain it. Which yet again he says not as though only tears would serve,
but, Pete^ opened not his mouth, least so quick requesting of pardon might
more offend. First we must weep, and then request. But a plain place to know
what S. Ambrose thought of Penance and Satisfaction, is his whole book To the
Virgin that had broken her vow, and namely these words, Ambro. ad virg. lapsa^.
ca. 8. Pur. 84.
Grande s^elus grandem habet necessariam satisfactionem, For a passing great
crime, is necessary a passing great satisfaction. Which words import none
other thing (you say) but that an heinous offense must be earnestly bewailed,
if repentance be not counterfaited. As though he there doubted lest her
repentance were counterfaite, and not earnest: saying yet unto her, Tu quae iam
ingressa es agonem poenitentiae, Thou who art already entered into the or,
exercise
field of penance, with much more to the same effect: declaring (I say) that
he took her penance to be unfeigned, as being well begone, but yet besides,
that her whole life is little enough to make just satisfaction unto God.

Pardons.
Wherein he is so vehement, that you come again on the other side (touching
our fourth Article) and pretend by the same word of his, that the Church can
not pardon the penance or satisfaction which sinners do owe. Where I say
nothing how you overthrow your own ignorant imagination, that the old
Canonical satisfaction was only to satisfy the Church, ur. 8 5.
and not to satisfy Gods justice. As though not only the Church, but also
every private man may not pardon such kind of satisfaction as the sinner owes
to him, and hold himself contented with as little as he list. Therefore to omit
this: He assures her (you say) as Cyprian in his Sermon de Lapsis, does the
fallen men of his time, that forgiveness of sins is proper unto God only, and
follows not of necessity the sentence of men, but the sentence of men ought
to follow the judgment of God. Pur. 73.
Alluding belike to the place where somewhat before you alleged Cyprian, and
gathered of his words, that not only he plainly denies that absolute and
sovereign authority of men, which M. Allen affirms, but also declares what
he means by satisfaction of God, to wit, inward and hearty conversion.

The two places in deed are like (although the fall of that Virgin was
breaking of her vow, and the fall of those men was denying of Christ in
persecution.) but they make not against Pardons, no neither of those most
heinous sins, unless you think that the Churches binding is prejudicial to
her lowsing, both being given her of Christ. For what else does S. Ambrose
there, but bind that virgin (as being her Bishop) to do penance al her life?
Inhaere poenitentiae vsque ad extremam vitae, etc. Stick to penance even to
the end of thy life, and presume not that pardon may be given thee of man's day,
for he deceives thee that so promises thee. For thou that have in special
sinned against the Lord ( because she was his vowed spouse) it is meet that of
him only thou look for remedy in day of Judgment. So that all her life he
binds her to penance, bidding her not to hope for any pardon at his hands.
The Emperor Theodosius he bound also, Theo. hist. li. 5. ca. 17.
though indefinitely: but after eight months penance loused him again with a
pardon. Who sees not that all this makes plainly for pardons, and not
against them?

Likewise S. Cyprian in that Sermon, and in twenty Epistles at the least,
makes plainly for Pardons, in that he does no more but reprove them that be
given partly of such as had not authority to louse, at least those deniers, as
of Lay martyrs, and of mere Priests: partly of such as had authority, but
without cause, without moderation, and to unpenitent persons: partly and most
of al, both these defects concurring. But otherwise, although (being Primate of
all Affrike) he reprehended a certain Bishop for giving pacem, peace to a
certain Priest, Cyp. ep. 59
before he had done poenitentiam plenam, full penance, (which manifestly was a
Pardon) contra decretum de Lapsis, contrary to the Councels decree touching
such deniers: Pacem tamen quomodocunque a Sacerdote dei, etc. Yet ( says he)
being once given by a Bishop.
the Priest of God, in what manner soever, we will not revoke it: and therefore
we permit Victor to enjoy the leave to communicate which has been granted
him. Notwithstanding that, to those Impenitents, trusting also but in lay men's
pardons, he cries as you allege: Nemo se fallat, etc. Let no man deceive him
self, Cyp. sermo de Lapsis.
let no man beguile him self, only our Lord can give mercy: only he can
grant pardon to sins as being committed against him. Homo Deo esse non
potest mayor, nec remittere aut donare indulgentia sua seruns potest, quod in
dominum delicto grauiore commissum est: ne adhuc lapso, and hoc accedat ad
crimen, si nesciat esse praedictum, Iere. 17.
maledictus homo, qui spem habet in homine. Man can not be greater then God (
to louse the impenitent whom God binds) neither can the servant ( who has
no commission) remit, in part, or forgive, in the whole, with his indulgence,
that which by so great a fault was committed against the Lord: least
furthermore to the fallen person be added this crime also, if he be ignorant
that it was forespoken, Cursed is the man that has his trust in man. Mat. 10.
Dominus orandus est. Dominus nostra satisfactione placandus, qui negantem
negare se dixit: Our Lord must be prayed unto, our Lord must by our
satisfaction be pacified, who has said, that he will deny his denier. His
second Epistle is to those Martyrs in prison, instructing them not to give
pardons them selves, nor to appoint the Bishops so or so to pardon him and his,
and him and his, but to make their suite for those whose Poenitentia est
Satisfactioni proxima, penance is very nighe to satisfaction, that is almost
all fulfilled, and to remitte the matter to the Bishops power, Note the
antiquity of pardons.
sicut in praeteritum semper sub Antecessoribus nostris factum est, As in time
past always it was done under our predecessors. And yet Epistle 54. the
Council gives a plenarie to all the Deniers at once that were doing their
penance, because of another persecution at hand. Epistle 52. he shows
Clerus Romanus, Sede vacant, appointed that the like pardon should be given to
every one in extreme sickness. But I forget my self, to allege so much, being
here only to answer.

vij. Of Purgatory.
This Chapter is grown to such length, and yet is Purgatory behind. But the
gentle Reader will consider, I trust, how lightly any beast may trouble the
pure water, but that it is not so soon cleared again: not doubting also but
the variety passes away his weariness. As I am likewise studious of method,
to put all in convenient order, for the same cause. And the order that in this
part I think good to follow, is, to speak first of the Churches practice, and
then of particular Doctors.

Of the Canonical memento of Oblations, and of Sacrifice for the dead
practiced by the Church.
First then, to prove that for a certain space after the Apostles, there was
no praying for the dead, at least in some Churches, this Companion reasons ab
authoritate negatiu^, negatiuely of the authority of Justinius Martyr, and of
Tertullian, (to which I must join Origin, Epiphanius, and a Council of
Spain) though him self, unmindful in one place what he says in another,
plainly (...) Pu^. ^
affirms, that such an argument even of all men's authority, is false.

Therefore thus he says: Seeing it is certain by testimony of Justinius
Martyr, that there was no mention of the dead in the celebration of the Lords
Supper, (...)
for more then an hundred years after Christ: we must not believe Chrysostom
without Scripture affirming that it was ordained so by the Apostles. Well then,
Chrysostom your elder ones, affirms it as more at large you confessed the
same in the 3. and 7. Chapters.) but you and certain of the contrary by his
elder Justinius. What be Justinius his words? Where you recite them, you say
again: Pur. 259.
By which it is manifest, that in those first and purer days there was ^o
mention at all of Sacrifice for the dead. But no word so in Justinius: Yea in
reporting there the order of ye (...) ^ist, he says expressly, that the Bishop
is long about it, Just. Apol. 2. in fine.
you also after he is com^ ^o Consecration. And when he has ended Those
prayers and the Consecration, all do answer^ Amen, as also at this day we see
at the later Elevation, where the Consecration is concluded. In that long space
you can find no time for memento domine defunctorum. But certain it is, and
manifest (say you) that there was none, and that Chrysostom and al his fellows
must not be believed. You might as well say, that in S. Augustines time also
there was no mention of the dead, Aug. epist. 59. q. 5.
because he also reports sometimes the sum of the Canon without naming ye
dead: yea and that your own next witness Tertullian must not be believed,
because he expresses certain prayers, which Justinius does not. And yet
between them two you find no repugnance, but set upon D. Allen, as before upon
S. Chrysostom, with them both at once, saying: And where he says, there was
ever found in the celebration of the Sacrament, a solemn prayer for all the
departed in Christ: To reprove his vanity, the order of prayers and
administration of the Holy mysteries, Tert. in Apolog. aduersus Gentes.
described by Justinius, and of Tertullian also, do sufficiently declare, what
was the usage of the Chrystians in those purer times. Because there it is
expressed for whom and what they prayed. Oramus etiam ( says Tertullian) pro
Imperatoribus, pro ministris eorum, and potestatibus seculi, pro rerum quiet,
pro mora finis. We pray also for the Emperors, for their officers, and powers
of the world, for peace, for delay of the end. Do you not see, that in saying,
we pray also for these, he signifies that these were some, but not all they
prayed for? as if he should say, Among other things we pray for these. Which
other things he had not cause to express there, as he had cause to express
these, to wit, for that the Christians were charged of the Heathen thus: Deos
non colitis, and pro Imperatoribus sacrificia non impenditis. First, you do not
worship the gods. Secondly, you do not bestow sacrifices ( with the Heathen
at certain appointed times) for the Emperors. Therefore making his Apology,
he expresses the Emperors and such persons and things as concerned their
Roman Empire, as you may read more amply somewhat before.

This is a clear answer, and therefore enough. How much more, considering
that your self also confess, that Tertullian is against you. Pur. 369.
In so much that you are feign to say: To leave out of our Service, prayers and
sacrifice for the dead, we have sure warrant by example of the eldest Church,
and nearest to the Apostles times, as we have showed out of Justinius Martyr,
and Tertullian before he became an Heretic, meaning a Montanist. To which your
cavil I have answered cap. 6. page 49. And therefore Tertullian stands
upright against you with your own confession more at large cap. 3. page 15.

How much more again, considering that about the very same time Arnobius to
the same purpose wrote thus: Cur immaniter nostra Conuenticula meruerunt dirui?
Arnob. li. 4 co^tra Gentes, sub fine^.
etc. Why deserved our Churches to be pulled down barbarously? in which the
highest God is prayed unto, peace and pardon is asked for all men, for the
Magistrates, for friends, for enemies, for the living, and for the dead? So
expressly he says, to confound your arguing out of others ab authoritate
negative.

You joined Tertullian to Justinius. The matter joins also Epiphanius to them.
Of him you say: Pur. 370.
It is easy to be gathered by Epiphanius, that the old form of Liturgy was
but to make mention of the dead, to have them in remembrance. And because they
used to make memory of all sorts of men that were dead in Christ, he expounds
it according to the error of his time. That this memory was a prayer for the
sinners, for the just, as Patriarchs, Prophets, etc. a signification that they
were inferior to Christ. A simple cause why they should be remembered (so that
neither the old form of Liturgy likes you in remembering the dead at al: VVil
you see a pure Puritan.
no more then the old oblatio^s for the dead though they were only oblations of
thanksgiving, for they were taken up of the Church in Tertullian and Montanus
time by perverse emulation of the Gentiles, so you said cap. 6. page 53.) But
this shifte Epiphanius is driven unto, because he did not consider, that the
memory and oblation which the old Fathers made for all the departed in Christ,
was a sacrifice of thanks giving, and not of prayers for them. And again: They
had in deed in elder time, Pur. 356.
as appears by Epiphanius, the name of oblation: but it was for the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs. Which plainly shows, that it was
but an offering of thanks giving. You are deceived by thinking that it is but
one memory whereof Epiphanius speaks. Look in the Liturgy of S. James, as
also of S. Basil, and of S. Chrysostom, and diverse places of S. Augustines,
and you shall find two distinct memories. And therefore Epiphanius says: Epip.
Hier. 75. Aerij li. 3. tom. 1.
Et pro justice, and pro peccatoribus memoria^ facimus, Both for the just, and
for the sinners we make memory. And that by tradition of the Apostles, as he
there says against your friend Aerius. Pro peccatoribus quidem, misericordiam
dei implorantes, For sinners pardie requesting Gods mercy. Which is not his
exposition, as you pretend, but the very words of the Tradition, that is, of
the memory it self. Pro justice vero, etc. For the just both Fathers and
Patriarks, Prophets, and Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs, and Confessors,
Bishops also, and Anchoretes, and for every order: Vt D. I. Christum ab hominum
ordine separemus, To the end we may separate our Lord Jesus Christ from men's
order, pondering in our mind, that our Lord is not egalled to any man, although
a thousand times, and upward, that man do live in justice. For how is it
possible? for he is God, and the other is a man. Which reason of his was to
deep for your divinity. He saw that the like memory might be made also for
our Lord him self, if it were but a thanks giving. And therefore not being made
for him likewise, he conceived that the Apostles had another reason therein, so
to separate the just from Christ, and not only the sinners from the just.
Although otherwise when the just and the sinners are not separated, but joined
both together in some one Collet of the Church, then (as S. Augustine said ca.
3. page 16.) the same one Collet is at once a propitiation for the sinners, and
a thanks giving for the just.

Now to the place of Origin, which is another of your trumpes that you trust so
much in, Pur. 249.427.
saying: This one testimony of Origin shall testify, what the judgment of the
Greek Church was concerning Purgatory and prayers for the dead, from the
Apostles time unto his days. And yet you are feign to confess not only thus
in the same place, I wotte well superstition in the Latin Church was somewhat
forwarder: but also of Origin him self in another place, Pur. 116. Orig. in Ie.
Ho. 12. In Number. ho. 25. In psalm. 36. ho. 3. Ori. in Job. lib. 3.
and to say: But howsoever he doteth about passage through fire, and
purifications after this life: yet he affirms in another place, that the day
of Christian men's death is the deposition of pain. Whereby it appears, that
either he was not constant with him self, or else that Origens Purgatory was a
paynlesse Purgatory. Why? speaks he of any pains, but the pains of this
life? Mark his words once again: We do not celebrate the day of Nativity, cum
sit dolorum atque tentationum introitus, seeing it is the entrance of sorrows
and tentations: but we celebrate the day of death, vtpote omnium doloru^
depositionem atque omniu^ tentationum effugationem, as that which is the doing
off of all sorrows, and the driving away of all tentations. Of all sorrows and
of all tentations (you see) which our day of Nativity is the entrance unto.
Therefore ( says he) we both celebrate the Memories of Saints, and devoutly
keep the Memories of our parents or friends dying in the faith. But it
follows, you say: Tam illorum refrigerio gaudentes, quam etiam nobis piam
consummationem in fide postulantes, Partly rejoicing for their ease, partly
also requesting for our selves a godly finishing in the faith. Do you not see,
that he expounds their ease to be their godly finishing in faith? for then
they rest according to the body from all the sorrows and tentations of this
bodily life, in hope also to live for ever after a while a^cording to ye same
bodies. Which causes us also at this day to rejoice unspeakably when we hear
that our friends in England dye in the Church of God among so many tentations
there to the contrary, and to thank God for it with all our hearts, though
withal we say Mass of Requiem for their souls. For so it follows after in
Origin, Oblations for the dead.
touching their friends souls: Celebramus nimirum, etc. And this we do in our
celebration for our parents or friends: We call together the religious with
the Priests, the faithful with the Clergy, (meaning by the Religious, the
Monks, which were the principal order of the faithful or Layetie, as the
Priests were the principal order of the Clergy: which I note by the way,
because of your saucines with D. Allen here, proceeding of your ignorance in
Antiquity, neither understanding so much as these very words of Origin)
Inuiting moreover the needy and poor, filling with food the fatherless and
widows. That our solemnity may be made to be a memory of rest to the souls
departed whose memory we celebrate, and may to our selves be made to be a
savor of swetenes in the sight of God eternal. That is, a sacrifice of thanks
giving for them that were alive, as you interpret it, showing your great skill
in the Scriptures. He alludeth to Philip. 4. where S. Paul speaks of the
like charity of the Philippians toward him, calling it odorem suauitatis, a
sweet savor, that is, as there it follows, a sacrifice acceptable and
pleasing to God, signifying that such works are passing meritorious, as being
in the moral sense meant by those burnt Sacrifices of the Law, which all
(and not only when they were for thanks giving) were called sweet savors to
God. Pur. 427.
The like ignorance you show also in the former clause (which is more to our
purpose) to think that memory for one can not be a prayer for him: Col. 4.
as though S. Paul in prison did not commend him self to the Colossians
prayers, in saying: Memores estote vinculorum meorum, Remember my gyues. Heb.
13.
And to the Hebrews, Remember them that are in gyues, as if you were in gyues
with them. And as S. Augustine writes, Au. de Ciu. li. 21. ca. 27.
Quod frequentatur ore Christiano, That which is common in Christian mouths,
each humble person to commend him self to the devout, and to say, Remember me,
deserving also at his hands, so to do. And so in our Mass, when we make for
our fri^d alive memoriam patientiae, a memory of patience, for our friend
departed memoriam requiei a memory of rest, it is a prayer to God to give him
patience, to give him rest. And that Origin means even so, you may see in S.
James Mass, where be the very words that he alludeth unto: Remember O Lord our
God the souls of all flesh of the right believers, from Abel the just even to
this day. Fac eos requiescere, make them to rest in the land of the living in
thy kingdom, etc. Nostrae vero vitae fines, and direct in peace the finishing
of our lives to be Christian, acceptable, and pure from sin.

Cyp. ep. 66
And therefore again, where S. Cyprian says of one Victor being departed,
Neque enim ad Alta^e dei meretur nominari in Sacerdotum prece, For he is not
worthy to be named at Gods altar in the prayer of the Priests: what exposition
is this of yours? By prayer he means not prayer for delivery of the dead out
of Purgatory, Pur. 284.
but as Origin says, for the faithful living, to have the like godly
departure as he had that was fallen asleep. Origin helps you not, as I have
showed: and S. Cyprians words be so plain, that you do nothing else but show
your obstinacy in wrangling upon them, and your ignorance in Antiquity. Three
things at Mass were (and are) usually done for the dead: First, his friends
offered for him, partly his own bequest, partly their own charities, Pur. 244.
out of Chrysostom.
to the sustenance of the Clergy and relief of the poor. Secondly, the
Priest offered the Sacrifice it self of our price for him. Thirdly, he named
him after consecration in the memory of the dead, to commend his soul to God
among the rest. All these three S. Cyprian has there expressly: Touching the
first he says, The Council decreed, that if any do such a thing, Non
offeretur pro eo, there should be no offering for him. And therefore there is no
cause that any offering should be made there with you ( he writes to the
Priests, Deacons, and Laity of the parish) for the sleeping of Victor. ( so he
calls the offering at the day of ones death, because there are other
offerings besides, as at the months minds day, and the twelve months mindday.)
Touching the second he says: The Council decreed also, Ne sacrificium pro
dormitione eius celebraretur, That the Sacrifice should not be celebrated for
the sleeping of such a one. And touching the third, He is not worthy to be
named in the Priests prayer at the Altar. Et ideo non est, etc. And therefore
there is no cause, that any praying should there with you be used in the Church
in his name. For heed may be taken hereafter, that this be done no more, if
this fact now, be punished.

By which appears again, that it is but mere cauilling, when you
distinguish between Oblations of the dead, Pur. 259.
and Oblations for the dead: because oblations of the dead them selves, no
less then of their friends, were oblations for the dead, as S. Cyprian here
expressly calls it, offerri pro eo, to offer for him.

And therefore makes against you not only the second Toletane Council, as
you also confess, Pur. 426.
which decrees of such Penitents as dye before reconciliation, saying: Placuit
nobis, etc. 2. Tole. c. 12
It pleases us, that both the memory of such may be commended ( to God) in
their Churches, ( in the memento of the dead) and offerings for their sins
may be taken by the Priests. Item three others, which you neither would
confess, nor could deny, to wit, the fourth of Carthage (whereunto the
Toletane does allude) decreeing of the same Penitents, 4. Carth. ca. 79.
vt memoria eorum and orationibus and oblationibus commendetur, that their
memory may be commended both with prayers and with oblations (or offerings) of
their own and their friends alms, and of the Altar. 1. Brac. c. 34 35.39.
The first Bracarense, decreeing of such as kill them selves, vt nulla pro
illis in oblatione commemoratio fiat, neque cum Psalmis ad sepulturam eorum
cadauera deducantur, That no memory be made for them in the oblation of the
Altar, nor their corpses brought with Psalms to their burial. Simili modo, In
like manner, that upon Catechumenes, dying without the redemption of Baptism, (
through their own fault, Dying unreconciled passing dangerous.
because they were not disposed to leave as yet their ill living, for which
cause many now also in England do defer reconciliation) neque oblationis
sanctae commemoratio, neque Psallendi impendatur officium, should be bestowed
neither the memory of the holy oblation ( which before they called
commemorationem in oblatione, the memory in the time of the oblation: but you
could not see so much) neither the office of Psalms. Appoynting moreover, that
if any thing by contribution of the faithful be offered either at the Feasts
of Martyrs, or at the minddayes of the dead, the Hebdomadarie have it not, but
to avoid inequality and discord, it be reserved of one of the Clergy, and
once or twice a year divided between all of the Clergy. Not only these
Councels (I say) do so clearly make against you, but also Vasense, and the
said fourth of Carthage, which you pretend to have answered, in saying that
they are flatly falsified by D. Allen, because you think that Oblations of the
dead: and Oblations for the dead, are not with them, as with D. Allen, all one.
But to see your wrangling, let any reasonable man confer the two Canons as
well of the fourth of Carthage, as also of Vasense, which D. Allen does
allege. The one Canon, 4. Car. c. 79 95. Vase. c. 2.4.
being the 95. of Carthage, and the fourth of Vasense, excommunicateth the
Executors, qui oblationes defunctorum, aut negant Ecclesijs, aut cum
difficultate reddunt, Who either deny to the Churches, or pay very hardly, the
Oblations of the dead: qui Oblationes defunctorum retinent, aut Ecclesijs
tradere demorantur, Who keep back, or be slow in delivering to the Churches,
the Oblations of the dead. The other Canon, being the 79 of Carthage, and the
second of Vasense, decrees of obedient Penitentes, dying by chance without
reconciliation, Vt eorum memoria and orationibus, and oblationibus co^mendetur,
That their memory be commended to God, both with prayers and with oblations,
as also before was alleged: Horum oblationem recipiendam, and eorum funera, ac
deinceps memoriam Ecclesiastico affectu prosequendam, etc. That their oblation
be received, and on the day of their burial, and afterward upon their other
minddays, the churches affection bestowed upon them, because it is unreasonable
to exclude their co^memorations out of the healthful sacrings, to whom, for
their passing preparation to the same mysteries, Fortasse nec absolutissimam
reconciliationem Sacerdos denegandam putasset, The Priest peradventure would
have thought that neither the most absolute reconciliation should be denied.
For though to all obedient Penitents at the point of death they gave both
reconciliation, and the fruit thereof which is the blessed Sacrament of the
Altar, yet they gave not to all such full absolution from the residue of their
penance, in case they recovered, as we see Con. Cart. 4. Can. 76.78.

So then these four Councels are against you (besides the two General Councels
of Florence and Trent, which your Caluinicall spirit contemns, like an
Heathen and a Publicane.)

You promise D. Allen, saying, Pur. 187.
Your Provincial Councels shall be answered by as good Provincial Councels as
they are. But where be those good Provincial Councels of yours? I find where
you promise again afterward, and say: Pur. 277.
The Council Bracharense (as afterward I shall more plainly show) does
insinuate, that no prayers were made at all for the souls of the departed in
their Church at their burials: but only a remembrance of them in prayers,
with thanks giving and singing of Psalms. For Purgatory should seem had not
yet traveled into Spain. But when you come to the place, Pur. 426.427. 3.
Tol. c. 22.
you plainly confess the contrary, to wit, a memory for the dead, in that
Council. Mary the third Toletan Council you there produce, as for you, in
that it decrees, Religiosorum omniu^ corpora, cum Psalmis tantu^modo, and
Psallentium vocibus debere ad sepulchra deferri, That the Corpses of all
Religious (at the least, if the Bishop can not prohibit it in all Christians,)
be carried to their graves with Psalms only, (without that funebre carmen quod
vulgo defunctis cantari solet) funeral heathen song which is wont to be song
to the dead) and with the voices of the Psalmessingers, (without that heathen
beating themselves, or their neighbors, or their families, on the breasts.)
And to make all sure against any reply, you add: If you say, this does not
exclude prayers and oblations: they add, that it must be thought sufficient,
that in hope of the Resurrection, upon the Corpses of Christians is bestowed
Famulatus diuinorum canticorum, the office of the divine Psalms. For so ought
Christian men's bodies throughout the whole world to be buried. So then, this is
your argument: In carrying the Corpses to their graves, they did sing Psalms:
Ergo in their Churches they had no prayers nor oblations for the Souls, namely
in Spain, whereas S. Augustine at the same time said, Aug. de cu. pro mor.
ca. 1. 2. Mac. 12.
Vniuersae Ecclesiae authoritas in hac consuetudine claret, Although no where
at all in the old Scriptures it were read (as it is in the books of the
Machabees) that Sacrifice was offered for the dead: yet great is the
authority of the whole Church, which in this custom is clear: where in the
prayers of the Priest, which are made to our Lord God at his Altar, the
commendation also of the dead has his place. But to return to your reason:
you might with it prove as well that now also we have no prayers nor oblations
for the dead, because we carry the Corpse with Psalms: as also the whole
dirige in effect is Psalms: and namely De profundis for the dead, because it
is a Psalm, is it not a prayer for the^, trow you? or was not Purgatory
traveled into Affrike neither, when S. Augustine wrote as above, because there
also they carried their corpses with Psalms? In so much that soon after S.
Augustines death Victor bishop of Vtica reporting the lamentable deuastations
of the Catholic Churches there by the Arrian king Gensericus, Victor de pers.
Vand. li. 1. fol. 3. b.
says among other things: Quis vero sustineat sine Lachrymis, etc. And who can
abide without tears, to remember, when he commanded our deads corpses to be
carried unto burying with scilence without the solemnity of Psalms? Which
lamentation you have in England renewed to us, with addition also, in that our
Priests neither with scilence may bury the corpses of our Catholic brethren,
but your Ministers (a Gods name) with whom they would not communicate in their
life, must have the laying up of their bodies after their death: a disordered
folly in you Heretics, and the sin of Schism in such Catholics as give
consent unto it.

Pur. 327. from.323.
To these memories, oblations, and sacrifice for the dead, does belong also the
place of Possidonius, which you say, proves plainly that it was the
sacrifice of thanks giving that was offered for the commendation of the godly,
and quiet deposition or putting off of his body. Where he writes of S.
Augustine thus: Nobis coram positis, etc. In our presence the sacrifice was
offered unto God, Possid. in vita Aug. cap. 31.
for the commending of his bodies deposition, and so he was buried. Meaning by
ye bodies deposition, not the putting off by death, but the laying down of it
in ye earth by burying: as by leuatio corporis, the taking up again of the
bodies or Relikes of Saints you might have perceived, if you had been
skillful in Antiquity. And by commending the deposition, he means the
commendation of his soul to God upon that day, as I told you before. Both
which you might have plainly understood by that which D, Allen in the very
same paragraph alleges out of S. Augustine speaking of his mother: Aug. 9.
co^f. ca. 12.14.
Nam neque in eis precibus ego fleui, quas tibi fundimus, cum offeretur pro ea
sacrificiu^ precij nostri, iam iuxta sepulchru^ posito cadauere, priusquam
deponeretur: For neither in those prayers did I weep, which ( according to her
request upon her deathbed, memoriam sui ad altar tuum fieri, that memory of
her might be made at thy altar) we made unto thee O God, when the sacrifice of
our price was offered for her, the corpse now standing by the grave, before it
was laid down. Which place is so plain, that your self are feign to
confess, that in the celebration of the Sacrament, the error of that time
allowed prayers for the dead generally, and special remembrance of some in
the prayers, ( namely because S. Augustine there moreover desires God, to
inspire all his Priests reading that book, Vt meminerint, To remember at thy
Altar Monica thy servant, and Patrike once her husband, my Parents.) Repeating
the same again a little after, in these words: In ministration of the
Communion, there was a special remembrance of her in the prayers, as there was
of all dead in the faith a general memory. So that you use indifferently
these two, prayers for the dead generally, and, a general memory of the dead,
because you saw evidently, that S. Augustine by remembering of his father and
mother at the Altar, meant praying for them. And yet such a cauiller you are,
Fulke the ansvverer: Fulke the replier.
that D. Allen in saying, memoriam sui, a memory of her, to be a memory for
her, must be charged with pseudologia, and as though she would have her son
to be a chauntrie Priest to sing for her: not being able for all your gybing
to deny, but that he did both himself pray for her at the Altar (if that be to
be a Chauntrie Priest) and procure other Priests to do the same.

Well, by this practice about S. Monica, the Reader perceives how properly you
affirmed, that it was only thanks giving which Possidonius reports was done
for S. Augustine. But for all this (you say) although a memory or prayer was
made for her in the celebration of the Sacrament, yet was it not offered for
her as a Sacrifice, and as a propitiation of her sins. No sir? does he not
say expressly, The sacrifice of our price was offered for her? Yea, but he
expounded before in plain words, A friend of trust for Protestants. August. de
verb. Apo. Ser. 34.
that he means thereby nothing else but the foresaid memory. Those plain
words neither you recite out of him, nor no man else can find in him: as
neither he nor any other reasonable man would utter such a meaning in such
words. But these most plain words I find in him in another place: Hoc a
patribus traditum vniuersa obseruat Ecclesia, vt pro eis qui in corporis and
sanguinis Christi communione defuncti sunt, cum ad sacrificium salutare loco
suo commemorantur, oretur: This as a Tradition of her Fathers, the whole Church
observes, when they which are departed in the communion of Christ's body and
blood ( for the excommunicate so were not) be in their place mentioned at the
healthful sacrifice: to pray for them. What more? Ac pro illis quoque id
offerri commemoretur, and to express that for the^ also the sacrifice is
offered.

Of particular Doctors. Whether S. Augustine doubted of Purgatory.
Notwithstanding all this: you will needs have fools believe that S.
Augustine was doubtful in the matter of Purgatory: notwithstanding also that
he so plainly prays for his mother, Therefore O Lord God, Aug. 9. confess. 13.
setting aside her good deeds for a while, for which with joy I do give thee
thanks, Nunc pro peccatis matris meae deprecor te, now I beseech thee for my
mothers sins ( for which at this day we also pray for ye most Pur. 328.
perfect, excepting undoubted Martyrs, until by Canonization they be known to
be Saints) Hear me for the medicine of our wounds that hung on the Cross,
and sitting at thy right hand, entreats for us, etc. So plainly, Pur. 327.
I say, that you confess, this place to prove prayer for the dead used by S.
Augustine, and are feign to say, It was all but superstition or will worship
in him, according to the corrupt motion of his own mind. Pur. 270.279.315.
Au. ep. 64. Enchi. c. 110 de cur. c. 18. Pu. 54.110 121.161.187 382.
In another place also, that he allows oblations for them that sleep, to
profit somewhat. Oblationes pro spiritibus dormientium vere aliquid adiuuare
credendum est. And yet for all this Augustine was very uncertain (you say
very often) unconstant* and doubting of it, so that Satan (whose instrument you
make that blessed Doctor) was but then laying his foundations of Purgatory:
though in other places contrarying your self after your manner, you say, It was
somewhat risely budded up in his time, yea and thoroughly finished. And to prove
this his pretensed doubtfulnes, you allege four books of his, Enchir. ad
Laur. cap. 69. Ad octo Dulc. quaest. q. 1. De fide and op. ca. 16. and De Ciui
Dei. li. 21. ca. 26. In all which places he repeateth one saying, as D. Allen
noted before you, answering it most clearly, and showing against this
pretensed uncertainty of his, that not only in other books, but in all the
same books also, and almost in the very same chapters, Pur. 118.
he holds as a matter of faith, and to be believed of all Christian men, that
the prayers of the living do release some of their pains in the next life. And
constantly, (as al other Catholics ever did) confesses, that the sins or
unclean works of the living not duly by penance wyped away in this world must
be mended after our death. For De Ci Dei these words he has, August. de Ciui
li. 21. ca. 24. and 13 Ench c. 110. Ad Dulcit. q 2.
Tales constat, ante Iudicij diem per poenas temporales, quas eorum spiritus
patiuntur, purgatos, etc. It is certain, that such men being purged before
domesday by temporal pains, which their souls do suffer, shall not after the
resurrection be committed to the torments of the everlasting fire And a little
after: Temporali supplicio ac sanctorum orationibus mundatos, being cleansed by
temporal torment and prayers of the holy ones. Which declaration of D. Allens
was so evident, that your self are compelled to say: Pur. 110.196. Aug. ciu.
li. 20. c. 25. li. 21. c. 13.24. Pur. 121.
Howbeit 21. book. c. 13. of the same work De ci. dei, he concludes very
clearly (and that upon the texts Mal. 3. Esa. 4. Mat. 12.) that some suffer
te^porall payns after this life. This may not be denied.

And yet that in the same books he was uncertain, you have so plain words,
that you suppose D. Allen never read the places in Augustines own books, but
only received his notes of some elder Papists, that had spent more time in
gathering them, but had not such audacitie to utter them as M Allen. Who but
you could or would for shame of heaven and earth set such a face upon a matter
so clear of it self, and so confessed of your self. But which are those so
plain words? Ench. c. 69.68.
Nonnullos fideles per ignem quendam purgatorium, quanto magis minusue bona
pereuntia dilexerunt, tanto tardius citiusque saluari: Some of the faithful
after this life to be saved so much later or sooner, by a certain Purgatory
fire, as the more or less they loved transitory goods, (but yet having Christ
in their heart for the foundation, that is, so as they preferred nothing before
him, but were ready to forsake all rather then him.) This to be so is not
incredible, Et vtrum ita sit, quaeri potest, and aut inueniri, aut latere, And
whether it be so in deed, it may be searched, and (by search) either found, or
not found.

These are the plain words, in which, to replye to D. Allens answer, you
will needs have S. Augustine so often in one book and almost in one Chapter,
to be grossly contrary to him self, one while certain, another while
uncertain of one and the self same thing.

But D. Allens answer (according to S. Augustines plain words in these
chapters also, as well as in the others is, as it was, that he speaks not
still of one thing, or of one Purgatory fire, but of two diverse. The one
Purgatory fire, is, to punish (and so to purge) by temporal pains, the
souls for there sins, for their evil life, though not so evil, vt
misericordia habeantur indigni, that they may be thought unworthy of mercy. Of
this Purgatory S. Augustine, with all the faithful of all ages, holds him
self ^o certain. The other Purgatory fire is, as the fire of Tribulation in
this life, for the most perfect also to pass through, even them whose life was
talis in bono, vt ista non requirat, so good that they need not to be relieved
with the prayers of the Church: and therefore not to punish sin (as now we
speak of it) but only to wear out by little and little rerum secularium (quamuis
licite concessarum, etc. such affections to worldly lawful things, as to
wife, etc. that without grief of mind he can not part from them: so as the
other can which builded gold, silver, and pearls, whose work therefore is not
burned up, quia non ea dilexit quorum amissione crucietur, because he did not
love those things, with the loss whereof to be tormented, And of this
Purgatory S. Augustine was uncertain, as it is in deed very doubtful (says
D. Allen) to this day also, Pur. 119.
not only because we know not whether such worldly lawful affections do
remain in the Elect souls departed, but also because nothing but sin, and
the debt of sin, seems to endaunger the soul to any pain, whether it be
poena sensus, or only poena damni. Whereupon (to say the truth) it seems to
me more probable (although S. Augustine inclined more to the other side) that
there is not any such Purgatory, but rather that after full penance for sin,
or full pardon of it, the soul goes without all delay straight to heaven.

And so I have showed plainly what S. Augustine was certain of, and what he was
uncertain of: thinking good withal to admonish the Reader, that although for
more perspicuitie I name two Purgatories out of S. Augustine, yet I mean but
one purgatory with two diverse operations, as it is but one fire of tribulation
in this life, though it have those two operations, to purge sin with
punishment, and to purge worldly lawful affections with grief of mind when
we must in persecution depart from our beloved. That also Purgatory fire after
this life, is for the first of these operations, it is certain. Whether it be
also for the other, it is uncertain.

Hitherunto pertains that also, where you say: Pur. 317.
M. Allen affirms that S. Augustine De cura pro mortuis agenda, never
doubts, but intercession may be made unto the Saints for the dead: and
oppose to his affirming cap. 5. of the same book, Cum ergo matter fidelis, etc.
Therefore when the faithful mother desired (of Paulinus Bishop of Nola) to have
her sons body laid in the Martyrs Church: Si quidem credidit, eius animam
meritis Martyris adiuuari, hoc quod ita credidit, supplicatio quaeda^ fuit, If
she thought his soul to be helped with the Martyrs merits, this her thinking
was a certain supplication: and haec profuit, siquid prosuit, and this
(supplication) profited, if any thing profited. Here Augustine, you say,
doubts whether supplications to the Martyr profit any thing, or no. You are a
man past al shame, Such are the enemies of the Church of Christ.
and so shall the Reader well perceive if he read the place. S. Augustine does
not doubt, whether supplications to that Martyr S. Felix, or to any other
Martyr, profit: nor whether they profit the dead: (yea clean contrary, he
exhorts there very earnestly to those and all other supplications for the
dead, saying that Non inaniter siunt, they be not made in vain, cap. 1.
Prosunt quibusdam mortuis, They profit one sort of the dead, cap. vlt. Non
sunt praetermittendae, they must not be omitted, cap. 4. Religiosus amicus
nullo modo debet a supplicationibus necessarijs in eius co^mendatione cessare,
They be necessary, and the devout friend must in no case omit them, cap. 5.
Fiunt recta fide ac pietate, They be made with right faith and piety, cap. 4.)
neither does he doubt, whether Affectus matris locum eligens sanctum, The
mothers affection choosing an holy place to bury her son in, be a
supplication to the Martyr of the place: but only whether that mother had that
cogitation. For that (says he) is all the profit that comes to your friend
departed, by your burying of him in such a place (for of his own devotion
therein more does come) to wit, if you had aforehande such cogitations of the
Martyrs merits, that they should help him: and again, if afterward by
occasion of the place when you think upon it, you commend affectually eidem
Martyri animam dilectam, the beloved Soul to the same Martyr, ca. 4.5.

Whether S. Augustine denied Purgatory.
Not content to say S. Augustine was doubtful of Purgatory, you say further,
that also he denied it, de verbis Apost. Ser. 14. and Hypog. con. Pel. lib. 5.
Pur. 110.
where he acknowledges the kingdom of heaven for to receive the godly, and
hell fire for the punishment of the wicked: but a third place (says he) we are
altogether ignorant of, neither do we find it in the holy Scriptures. Now
take the pains to report also the answer your self: He writes against the
Pelagians, that imagined a third place for the (everlasting) rest of Infants,
that were not baptized. And what can you reply thereunto? But the same reason
serves as well against the Popish Purgatory, because we find it not in the
holy Scriptures. But does S. Augustine so reason against it? for him you
pretended to bring as denying Purgatory. Or does he say, that he found it not
in the Scriptures? Yea you confess (though with much wrangling) the
contrary, to wit, that he says the Scriptures to make for it, some (I say) to
suffer temporal payns after their death, Veruntamen ante illud nouissimum
iudicium, but before that last judgment, that is, before the Judge has said,
Venite, and discedite: Come ye blessed, Away ye cursed. For until then
Purgatory is not ended. As also in this same chapter, page he said: 2. Mac. 12.
In the books of the Machabees we read, Sacrifice offered for the dead. And
immediately after against your reason also: Sed etsi nusquam in Scripturis
veteribus omnino legeretur: non parua est vniuersae Ecclesiae, quae in hac
consuetudine claret, auctoritas: But although it were not read any where at all
in the ancient Scriptures, the whole Churches authority, which in this
custom is evident, is not small. So that you see the said reason by S.
Augustines judgment, not to be any whit prejudicial to such matters as stand
upon the whole Churches authority, although to al new inventions of Heretics
against ye church, it be a plain prejudice.

And now I must remember the Reader of that place where D. Allen bids him to
require of these new Teachers, before he believe them, Pur. 380.382.
To allege some place of any ancient writer, which does expressly deny
Purgatory or prayers for the dead: as we (says he) for the confirming thereof
have alleged in plain terms very many. And hear what Fulke there answers:
If we be required to show some place of any ancient writer, which denies
Purgatory or prayers for the dead: we have already showed, that Augustine
sometime does doubt whether there be Purgatory: sometime affirms, there is
no mean or third place, but heaven for the elect, and hell for the reprobate.
Considering therefore, that S. Augustine in those places makes nothing for him,
as I have showed, but expressly against him, as him self also confesses: thou
see, gentle Reader, that he has no Doctor to bring which denies Purgatory.
Let us come then to the other part, whether any Doctor deny prayers for the
dead.

Other Doctors about praying for the dead.
Likewise for praying or satisfying for the dead (you say) we have alleged
Cyprian and others, your Canon law, Pur. 382.
out of Hieronym, etc. Yea Gelasius the Pope says, that no man can be absolved
of the Pope after his death, 24. q. 2. cap. Legatur. Wherefore serve the Popes
pardons then? The place of S. Hierome is answered already, page Your great
place of Gelasius is of certain Heretics in Constantinople, that said to the
Popes Legate there: Date venia^ nobis, dum tamen nos in errore duremus: Give us
absolution, notwithstanding we continue in our error. Therefore he bids
them show, even from the beginning of Christian Religion, Veniam nisi se
corrigentibus fuisse co^cessam, that absolution was ever given but to such as
did amend themselves. And because they would not only them selves be absolved,
but also their fellows who were dead, that they might be named anong others in
the Canonical memory of the dead, thereupon he says again, that it can not be
showed, our Savior, or any after him, In errore mortuos absoluisse, to have
absolved such as dyed in their error. Nam in ligatione defunctum nunqua^ dixit
absoluendum: For he never said, that we should absolve one that dyed in the
bond of excommunication. It is a sign you lacked witnesses against praying and
pardons for the dead that dyed in our communion, for whom only all our
suffrages are, when you were feign to allege, and to make so much of him that
spoke only of them that dye in excommunication.

Cyp. co^tra Demet. in fine. Pur. 140.
Like stuff it is that you bring out of S. Cyprian. For he speaks it to the
Idolatrous and persecuting Paganes, exhorting them, and saying: We exhort you,
whilst you may, whilst as yet somewhat of this life remains, to satisfy
God, and to rise out of the botome of dark superstition, into the shining
light of true Religion. Quando isthinc excessum fuerit, nullus iam locus
poenitentiae est, nullus satisfactionis effectus. Hic vita aut amittitur, aut
tenetur, Clipping.
( etc. you say, omitting that which follows, because it showed plainly S.
Cyprians purpose not to be your purpose.) Hic saluti aeternae cultu dei and
fructu fidei prouidetur. When you are gone hence there is now no place of
penance, no effect of satisfaction. Here life is either lost, or saved. Here
everlasting salvation is procured by the worshipping of (one) God, and by the
fruitfulnes of faith. This forsooth is that which can not stand with the
Papists opinion of Purgatory. By this forsooth appears what Cyprians judgment
was of Purgatory (and the effect of satisfaction) after this life. And again
because exhorting there Demetrianus him self (Proconsul of Africa) to
repentance, which had been (so you say deceitfully, Changing.
as though he now were converted, for that you should have said, which
presently was) a wicked man, and a persecutor of the Christians: he says to
him, Tu sub ipso licet exitu, and vitae temporalis occasu, etc. Do thou,
although it be but a little before thy end, and setting of this temporal life,
pray for thy sins to the God, which is the one and true God: Confessionem and
fidem agnitionis eius implores, Do thou humbly call for confession, and faith
of acknowledging him (he alludeth to the ceremony, quid petis? Fidem.) Venia
co^fitenti datur, and credenti indulgentia salutaris de diuina pietate
conceditur: Pardon is given to him that confesses, and healthful forgiveness
is granted by Gods goodness to him that believes: Et ad immortalitatem sub
ipsa morte transitur, and even at the point of death is passage to
immortality. Because Christ does quicken him that is mortal, by the heavenly
regeneration, viuificat mortalem regeneratione coelesti. This which is so
expressly written of the Infidels in hell, and of Baptism, to pretend it (as
you do) to be written of the faithful in Purgatory, and of penance after
Baptism, argues plainly, that either you saw not the place in S. Cyprian, or
rather that seeing you would not see.

Of the same sort it is, that, Pur. 82. Cyp. de Lapsis.
where S. Cyprian speaks of Deniers of Christ in persecution, which would not
afterward come to the Priests to confession, and says, Every one, I beseech
you brethren, confess his sin, whilst yet he that sinned is in this world,
whilst his confession may be received, whilst satisfaction and remission
facta per Sacerdotes, made by the authority of the Priests, is acceptable
with our Lord: you gather thereupon, and say: If men can not satisfy, nor
Priest remit, but whilst men are in this life, then farewell satisfaction for
the dead, and Purgatory. As though we hold, that they which will not submit
them selves to the Priests in this life, may be helped after their death: Or
that confession may be made by the dead, and satisfaction enjoined them, and
that being done, absolution given them by the Priests.

Again it is of the same sort, which you allege out of S. Chrysostom, where
first you confess that he holds expressly, Pur. 2^1.
prayers to profit the dead, and alleges Scripture for it (your words I
recited in cap. 3. and that notwithstanding, say afterward: Otherwise when he
judged uprightly and according to the Scripture, his words sound clean
contrary to the opinion of Purgatory, and works of other men to be meritorious
for the dead, as in the very next Homily, being the 42. in 1. Cor. Quapropter
oro, etc. What a worthy S. Chrysostom was every kind of way, I need not to
say. I can admire him, I am not able to commend him sufficiently. But what a
base opinion have you of him (as also of so many others his pears) to think
him so gross, Caluins intolerable light has marred Fulkes eyes.
to speak clean contrary to him self, and that upon one Epistle, yea and in
the very next Homily? You do herein nothing else, but justify my saying in the
beginning of this chapter, that you can not in deed show the Doctors to be for
you against us, but that in deed you confess them to be with us against you,
and pretend only that they be against us in so much as they be pretensiuely
against them selves. But why did you not as well say, that D. Allen him self is
against us, in that in the seventh chapter of his second book he shows, Pur.
271.
That the benefit of prayer and alms apperteineth not to such as dye in
mortal sin? For what else does S. Chrysostom say in that long allegation of
yours, but that no friend, no just, shall help him that dies in mortal sin,
either committing evil that he ought to refrain, or omitting good that he
ought to atchieue: beseeching them therefore to convert and amend, and to get
against they dye, good words of their own to trust in before that Judge.

Pur. 112. Ambro. in Psalm. 40.
Likewise of S. Ambrose you confessed cap. 3. page 16. Ambrose in deed allows
prayer for the dead. And yet because he says: Been addidit (in terra,) quia
nisi hic mundatus fuerit, ibi mundus esse non poterit: The Prophet did well to
add (on earth) for if he be not cleansed here, he can not be cleansed, from his
mortal sins. But the true translation is, he can not be clean there,
neither from his venial sins, though from them he may be cleansed there, as
also from the temporal debte of his remitted mortal sins: yet, I say, by
these words it is plain enough with you, that Ambrose allowed no purging after
this life.

One place more, or two, you allege more out of the same Doctor, Pur. 106.
with this note thereupon: Thus says Ambrose plainly in this place,
whatsoever he speaks allegorically of the Fyerie sword in other places, as
in Psalm. 118. Ser. 20. and in Psalm. 65. by occasion of which two places you
grant not long after, that the Old writers opinion was, Pur. 132.
that all men, were they never so just, passed through that fire into Paradise,
and were purified thereby: because they ascribed to Purgatory fire those two
operations, the one whereof S. Augustine and we (as I said erewhile) do doubt
of. All this notwithstanding, the same Ambrose (you say) upon Romans 5.
overthrows Purgatory, in that it follows of his words there, Pur. 105.
that no man feels pain after this life, but he that shall feel it
eternally. And surely to the same effect he speaks in his book De bono
mortis, you say, only because cap. 4. where he concludes, that death in every
respect is good, ( yea although a man have lived ill, and shall after death
abye for it, for also in that case, non mors malum, sed vita, Not his death,
but his life was evil) among others, this cause he renders: quia deteriorem
statum non efficit, sed qualem in singulis inuenerit, talem iudicio futoro
reseruat: because it makes not the ( ill) state worse, but such state as it
finds in every one, such it reserueth to the judgment to come. Now who
says, that Purgatory after death alters the state of the evil to worse? yea
or also that it promoteth the state of the good to better. Every man's state (we
say) both is at his death, and shall be at domesday, according to his merits
in his life. Neither he that is cleansed in Purgatory, has his merits either
multiplied or amplified thereby, but only his venial sins and temporal
debtes taken away. In the former place his words are these: Although Abraham
were in hell, ( or in the inferior parts) yet he was severed with a long space
between, so that there was an huge chaos inter iustos and peccatores, quanto
magis impios? Between the just and the ( Catholic) sinners, how much more the
impious ( Heretics?) Vt justice esset refrigerium, and peccatoribus aestus,
impijs vero ardor: That to the just might be ease, and heat ( as it were of
the sun) to the sinners, but fiery heat to the impious: vt ante iudicium,
quo vnusquisque dignus esset, non lateret: that which each sort were worthy of,
might before the judgment, be partly known. Now how you can infer of these
words, that no man feels pain after this life ( although S. Ambrose him
self say it expressly in other places) but he that shall feel it eternally, I
see not. Unless perhaps you would bind him to yield a reason of Purgatory
pains withal, when he yielded a reason of Abraham's bosom, and of the damned
Souls hell, or else have him pronounced guilty of contradiction, and
Purgatory by your argument ab authoritate negative quite subverted.

From this saying of S. Ambrose we might well pass to the sayings of other
Doctors alleged against Limbus patrum a friend of Purgatories, but only that
we must stay a little while for your pleasure, Pur. 142.143. Emis. ho. 3. de
Epipha. Ber. in vita Humberti.
with Eusebius Emissenus (though him you take for a counterfaite) and S.
Bernard. Because these two set forth very terribly, but truly, the pains of
Purgatory, therefore with you the one shows him self an utter enemy to the
release of the same, and the other denies the remedy or remission of them. As
if you would say, that the holy Scripture also where it preaches Gods justice,
denies his mercy, though in other places it preach his mercy no less. For see
you not S. Bernard as earnest also for the remedy of those pains, where D.
Allen alleges him calling your friends the Apostolicie of his time, Pur. 420.
Ber. Ser. 66 in Cantica.
miscreants, and dogs, for laughing us to skorne (says Bernard) that we
baptize infants, that we pray for the dead, that we require the help of the
holy Saints? In so much that your self also confess in another place, saying:
Bernard is of opinion, that sins not remitted in this world, Pur. 194.
may be remitted in the world to come.

Whether Purgatory be only for Venial sins.
One other little stay we must make about S. Augustines judgment, Pur. 122.448.
being this, as you say, That Purgatory serves to purge none but very small
and light offenses: Whereas D. Allen says, that it is for great faults also,
which by penance are made small, alleging for it this plain place: Quaedam
enim peccata sunt quae sunt mortalia, Pur. 128. August. de ver. and fall. Poen.
ca. 18.
and in paenitentia fiunt venialia, non tamen statim sanata: For there be
certain sins which be mortal, and in penance be made venial, but not
straight healed. As oftentimes certain sick persons would dye but for Physic,
yet are not straight healed. Lanquet victurus, qui prius erat moriturus: Feeble
he is, though now to live, and not to dye as before. And therefore although one
truly converted at the point of death, from his wickedness (nequitia, etc.)
shall be saved. Yet we do not promise him that he shall escape all pain. Nam
prius purgandus est igne purgationis, qui in aliud seculum distulit fructum
conuersionis: for he must first be purged with the fire of Purgatory, ( who in
this world converted, but) deferred the fruit of conversion to the other
world. Studeat ergo quilibet sic delicta corrigere, vt post mortem non oporteat
talem poenam tolerare: Therefore let every one labor so to amend his sins (
also after his conversion, because he is now as the sick person past danger
of death, but not healed as yet) that after death he suffer not such passing
grievous pain. You took not the pains to take the book, and read the
place, and therefore blindly you say, that this Doctors words are plainly of
light and small offenses, and not of heinous and great offenses, even also
against your own eyes that saw the word Mortalia. And again, that the
manifest meaning of his words, is not of a mortal sin forgiven, as though he
said, that it become a venial trespass, but that a mortal sin may be
pardoned. Whereas he speaks so manifestly of a mortal sin after penance,
as of a mortal disease after Physic: the danger of soul death in the one,
as of bodily death in the other, being now past, but the healing behind, and
therefore also danger of Purgatory pain for it behind.

D. Allen alleges for the same, also Enchir. cap. 71. where S. Augustine
affirms, that, Et illa peccata a quibus vita Fidelium scelerate etiam gesta,
sed poenitendo in melius mutata discedit, Also those sins in the which the
faithful have wickedly lived, but now by penance left them, changing their
lives to better, are after taken away by the same remedies, as minima and
quotidiana peccata, breuia leuiaque peccata, the least and daily, the short and
light sins, to wit, among other remedies, by the Pater noster, which is the
daily prayer of the faithful. Which also in the next world he admits ca.
69. and 70. of the said Infanda crimina, qualia qui agunt regnum dei non
possidebunt, Gal. 5.
heinous crimes which deprive the parties of Gods kingdom: Si conuenienter
poenitentibus eadem crimina remittantur, If the same crimes be forgiven them (
in the Church) upon their due penance: then he grants, I say, that such
persons also may be saved by Purgatory fire after this life, and not they only
that dye with Venial sins. This D. Allen there alleges briefly, and you
say never a word unto it. Pur. 120.
Only you snatch those words (which he alleges among others out of another
place to another purpose) Illo enim transitorio igne, non capitalia, Au. Ser.
41. de Sanctis. 1. Cor. 3.
sed minuta peccata purgantur, By that transitory fire, (whereof the Apostle
says, He shall be saved by fire) are purged not mortal, but light offenses:
neither considering that he speaks of purging culpam, the fault it self, for
he speaks against them that continue still in committing mortal sins, and
deceive them selves with false security, while they think that peccate ipsa,
those sins may be purged by the transitory fire, and them selves afterward
come to everlasting life. Nor knowing, that he there also very often, as above
in his Enchiridion, grants, the same fire to be also for the said mortal
sins, if one have left committing of them, but not yet fully redeemed them
poenitentiae medicamentis, with the plasters of penance.

viij. Of Limbus patrum.
And now we are come to your Doctors yt you allege against Limbus Patrum. The
one is S. Augustine, Pur. 56.60 Au. ep. 99.
of whose most clear testimony alleged by D. Allen (Because the Act. 2.
Scriptures make evident mention both of hell and of pains, I see no other
cause why our Savior came thither according as we believe, nisi vt ab eius
doloribus saluos facerit, But to rid some of the pains thereof. Fuisse enim
apud inferos, and in eorum doloribus constitutis hoc beneficium praestitisse
non dubito: I am out of doubt that he was in hell, and that he bestowed that
gracious benefit upon some that were in the pains thereof. You are feign to
say, that it is but the authority of a man. But you have another place, a Gods
name, Where he seems utterly to deny, that he came in that prison of hell. And
to make all sure, you imagine what we will answer to it, and then you make
your reply. But all besides the text, like one that never saw ye book. For he
says there as plainly as in the other place: Fuit apud inferos Christi Anima,
and diuinitas, Aug. in Felicianu^ Arrianu^. ca. 17 18.15.
Both the soul and the divinity of Christ was in hell. But for what cause? Vt
anima animas reparet, That his soul might repair our souls, and (as above he
said) deliver some souls out of their pains there. But not to suffer any
pains there it self, as the Arrians did blaspheme. For if ( says he in the
words that you allege) his, or the good theefes (for it may be understood of
either) body being dead, his soul is immediately called to Paradise: do we
think any man yet so impious, that he dare say, our Saviors soul, in that
three days of his bodily death, apud inferos custodiae mancipetur, is in hell
committed to prison? Lo sir, what he utterly denies, to wit, that his soul
was committed there to prison: not, that it came in that prison as to deliver
the prisoners.

Your other Doctor is S. Ireneus, whom D. Allen first alleged saying
manifestly, Pur. 55.59 Iren. lib. 3. cap. 33.
that Adam was Implens tempora eius co^demnationis, quae facta fuerat propter
inobedientiam, Fulfilling the times of that condemnation, which came by
disobedience, until our Lord came, and then solutus est condemnationis
vinculis, he was released of the bonds of his condemnation. And you answer,
that the name of Adam seems to be taken in these words, rather for a name
common ( signifying all mankind) then for a proper name. Jesus, how blindly? Do
you not know, that he reports li. 1. ca. 31. that the proper Heresy of
Tacianus was, Adae saluti contradictionem faciens, His ignorance.
that he gainsaide the salvation of Adam: and after him S. Augustine Haer. 25.
Saluti primi hominis contradicunt, The Tacianistes gaynsay the salvation of the
first man? And do you not see that he disputes against that Heresy in the
said place, li. 3. even from cap. 33. to 39.

But you have another place of his, Iren. lib. 5. in fine.
where he plainly overthrows our fantasy, in that he says of the place
where Christ's soul was those three days, that it was such a place as all
his disciples shall rest in until the time of the general Resurrection. He
says not so: he disputes against those old Heretics, Who said that
immediately as soon as they were dead, they ascended above heaven, and above the
Creator, and came to the mother, or to their feigned father, leaving their body
for ever, never to rise again, and therefore attayning al perfection and the
highest promotion at once. S. Irenee therefore avouches against them not only
the Resurrection, but also the order of the Resurrection, and says, that if
this were so, then our Lord giving up his Ghost upon the Cross, would
straight have gone upward, leaving his body to the earth. But he did not so:
Three days he conuersed where the dead were, in the inferior parts of the
earth, in the midst of the shadow of death. And then after that he arose
corporally, and after his resurrection was assumpted. Seeing therefore no
disciple is above his master, says he, it is manifest by this, that also his
disciples souls shall go ( he says not, into the same place, but) in
inuisibilem locum definitum eis a deo, into an invisible place, appointed for
them by God, and there shall tarry until the resurrection, abiding the
resurrection: and afterward receiving again their bodies, and rising
perfectly, that is, corporally, sic venient ad conspectum Dei, so shall come to
the sight of God: to wit, the whole man both in soul and body. So he may well
be understood: because the Soul of Christ also had the sight of God before his
Resurrection. Yet supposing that he thought, neither so much as the Souls to
see God, before the Resurrection (as some other Doctors did think, until it
was of late defined by the Church, as I noted before in the eight chapter, yet
that does not declare, as you pretend, that he thought of Limbus Patrum
otherwise then we do. For you heard him say before, that Adam at our Lords
coming was released out of that place, being a place of captivity: and now,
by him, his soul is in that other invisible place. Whereof it follows
manifestly, that by him the former place is not al one with the later.

And so, thanks be to God, I have fully answered all that you allege against
Purgatory, or any other Article of the Catholic faith, according to my
promise in the beginning of this Chapter. Whereby the Reader may perceive,
perfect unity of faith to be betwixt the Fathers then, and us now,
notwithstanding all that you could bring. And that so evidently, that in most
matters, and in most of the Fathers, you were feign to pretend no less, that
one and the same man was not in unity with him self: so that this chapter
needed not so much for defense of our doctrine, as for the defense of the
Doctors them selves against your childish and arrogant detractions.

The tenth Chapter.
That notwithstanding all which Fulke has said against D. Allens Articles, in
his first book being of that matter, or also in his other of Purgatory:
every one of my 51. Demaundes (and therefore also, every one of my Motives, and
likewise every one of those Articles) stands still in his force. Every one (I
say) and much more al of them, to make any man to be a Catholic, and not a
Protestant.
BY the Sums or Arguments of the chapters aforegoing, the Reader may
perceive, that being laid together, they make a manifold evident
demonstration to the condemnation of the Protestants side and justification of
our side, so that whosoever will be saved, must neither believe them, nor
communicate with them, as being Heretics, and Schismatikes, but must be of our
belief in all things, and of our Communion, as who have both the truth and
the Church of Christ, even the same that our Auncetors, to wit, the Apostles,
and their Successors after them, had in their several times. Which also was
the total sum of M.D. Allens Articles first, and after them, both of my
Motives, and Demaundes. Nevertheless I have thought good, for the more
manifest clering of all, to have this chapter aparte, and following the order of
my Demaundes, one by one, (which if Fulke had done, he had saved me some
labor) to sifte all, in substance and effect, that he has said to D. Allens
Articles, in the former of his two books, answering withal these few
Scriptures and Doctors of his, which in the two last Chapters I pretermitted,
and reserved to this place. By this the Reader shall see evidently, the force
of each one Demand (how much more of all?) to hear the Protestants quite
down, considering that all is nothing, which this fellow, in both his books,
could either answer unto them, or obiecte against them. Specially, if he will
first read over every Demand, as it lies in my book, and then, that which
here is correspondent unto it.

1. Collatio Carthaginensis touching the Church of the Scriptures.
FIrst therefore, by reason of their triuiall position of Only Scripture in
all questions (for the which notwithstanding, they have neither Scripture, nor
Doctor, as I have sufficiently declared cap. 8 page 110. and cap. 9. page 171.
to 183.) and because the question of the Church is of all other the principal,
as one which being agreed upon, and so the House of salvation found, all brable
is at an end, also by Fulkes own confession here cap. j. Whether it can not
err, as we say, or may err, as they say: Hereupon in my very first Demand,
on the one side I ask them (as S. Augustine did the Donatistes) some evident
Scripture for their Church, that is to say, for Luthers piece, or for Caluines
piece of Luthers piece: on the other side I point them to very many most
evident Scriptures for our Church (in S. Augustines two books against the
Donatistes, de Collatione Carthaginensi, and de vnitate Ecclesiae) that is to
say, for the Church beginning at Jerusalem, Act. 1. like the little
musterdseede, Mat. 13. and growing and spreading thence over all Nations, over
S. Augustine and his fellows in the Christian Nations of their time, and over
us and our fellows in the Christian Nations of our time, and so forth to the
end of the world.

Now Fulke, wheresoever he makes mention of the said Carthage Conference,
etc. What does he? does he reply, and show, that the same most evident
Scriptures make for his Church: or, that they make not for S. Augustines
Church, and our Church, that is, for the visible Church of all Christian
Nations? yea like a blind buzzard, he there overthrows quite his own Church,
and plainly confirms ours, as I have noted cap. 9. page 176. to 183. in the
question of Only Scripture, upon the places of S. Augustine (which he there
alleges) requiring and bringing Scriptures for the Church. And as I offer
cap. 7. page 106. to show more copiously, if he dare join with me upon this
Demand: and stand to S. Augustines Disputation at Carthage, etc. and to the
evident Scriptures there recited as concerning this question of the Church. And
as towching certain dark and obscure Scriptures, such as S. Augustine would
have to be set aside in this question: the Donatistes in deed alleged some
such for their Church, that is, for Donates piece cut of from the Church of
all Nations. But for Luther or Caluines piece, Fulke has alleged neither so
much as any such. Howbeit against our Church he has aleaged some such. But I
have cap. 8. page 124. to 133. most clearly showed, that neither they make any
whit at all against our Church (as neither certain expositions of some Fathers
cap. 9 page 155) and that they make vnauoideably against the Protestants.
Being ready to show the like, in those more evident Scriptures also, which the
Donatistes alleged against our Church, if Fulke list to repeat them, and in
any other likewise that he can allege.

2. Building of the Church amid persecution.
In the 2. Demand I report S. Chrysostomes argument (which is not his only,
yea it is the Scriptures) against the Jews and Paynimes, to prove, that Christ
is God, because no Persecution of theirs or any others could, or can suppress
Christ's Church, though in the first beginning of it, it were so poor and
small, and they so mighty and cruel against it: but that it has, and shall
continually stand in the sight of the world, mauger all the Gates of Hell.

Now Fulke to this argument has answered nothing, nor to the Doctors, and
Scriptures that make it. The Jews and Paynimes are not yet so much beholding
unto him. Marie an objection against it, I grant, may be made of the text of
the Apocalypse here cap. 8. page 124. as you allege it, and understand it, to
wit, that the Persecution of Antichrist shall drive the Church into the
Wilderness, that is (you say) into a secret place, out of the open sight of the
world, Fulk a falsarie.
there to remain for a long season. But I have there declared manifestly, by
the text it self, that both in your alleging you play the falsarie, putting a
long season, for a very short season, and in your understanding a deprauer of
Scripture to your own damnation, expounding that which is meant of fleeing in
heart to God in time of worldly desolation, to be meant, of becoming
corporally invisible.

3. Going out. Motive 18.

Thirdly I demand of them, to show when we went out of the foresaid Church of
al Christian Nations, seeing they deny us to be still within it. As we say,
and the world sees, and Fulke him self confesses here cap. 7. page 103. that
they are departed from our Church, and goes about to yield a cause for their
so doing: Whereas by S. Augustine (whom him self alleges here cap. 9. page
177. as it were against our separating of our selves from them, which is one of
his gross contradictions: and this also no better, Ar. 66.
that we Catholics are departed from the Gretians) it is impossible for any to
have a just cause to Separate them selves from the said Church. In so much,
that no company can be named, from the very beginning of ye same Church, which
so did, and obstinately stood in it (as they do,) but it was Schismatic.
Yea and against his imagined Church in the wilderness here cap. 8. page 124. we
are expressly warned, If they say unto you, Ecce in deserto est, Behold Christ
is in the wilderness, nolite exire, do not go out, Matthew. 24. but keep still
in the visible everlasting Church that visibly comes of me, beginning at
Jerusalem.

4. Rising after. Motive 19. Article. 11.

Fourthly I require them, to show any beginning of our Church, other then the
beginning of Christ's Church at Jerusalem, Act. 2. As we show, and the world
sees the beginning of their company now of late by Luther, who before was one
of us, nor he only, but all that he drew away after him. So that no man can
say, they were before that, invisible Protestants, because it is so evident,
that they were visible Papists. And to these two, or either of them, Fulke
answers nothing.

I require them moreover in the same Demand, to show so much as any first
beginner of any one Article of our doctrine, so as he received it not at the
hands of his Predecessors, and they of theirs, and so forth, even up to the
Apostles. As we show that Luther began his new Articles of him self, and
received them not at any man's hands. And also, if any of the same Articles had
in old time any patron, (as Aerius against praying for the dead) that he
likewise in his time was the first beginner of it, and received it not of his
Elders, but that his Elders held the contrary of his Article, so that his
Article evidently was of him self, and not of the Apostles. How this iiij.
and xxxviij. Demand do differ.
I do not here charge them with such Articles as they were of the Church then
condemned for heresies (for that is enough of it self against them, whether
they were then first begone, or before: and therefore I have of that a several
Demand number. 38.) but as they were then first begun, which of it self is
enough to show that they were not received from the Apostles, whether they were
condemned of the Church then for Heresies, or no. Now of these matters there
are two long Treatises between D. Allen and Fulke, first in the book of
Articles, Art. 11. page 35. to 47. Secondly, in the book of Purgatory lib. 2.
ca. 13. and 14. page 387. to 424. In which places the old Heresies that they
charge one another withal, I reserve to their proper place in the Demand
aforesaid: as also the chaunges that he says some Popes to have made, to the
45. Demand. What then belongs to this Demand? First touching the arguments
or consequences: secondly touching the antecedents.

The 1. Arg.
The one argument is this: Our first Authors can not be named: Ergo, they were
none other but the Apostles. His first answer is, that it follows not. And
one while he does nothing but chafe at us for it, saying, Must we find out the
authors of Heresies? Pur. 391.
Nay justify them your selves by the word of God if you can, etc, as I noted
here cap. 7. page 79. Another while he will answer it with a witty example of
the common wealth, saying: Must the Magistrate either justify a theefes
possession, or else bring out the author where he had it? Nay the thief must
bring out good proof, how and by who^ he came by such goods, or else he is
worthy to be served like such a one. If that would serve, we bring so good
proof for the Article of praying for ye dead whereof you there entreat, that
your self confess we stole it not, but that we received it from hand to hand
of our Auncetors, ca. 3. whom your self confess to have been the true Church
of Christ cap. 2. Will you then quit us, and with your witty example charge
Christ's Church to be a thief? But you confess, cap. 3. page 19.20.21. that
she tells you how she came by it, to wit, by ye Scripture and Tradition of
the Apostles. And moreover, how your friend Aerius would have stolen it from
her, as now your grandsire Luther would steal it from her heir. What
Magistrate after all this will admit the thief to plead against the lawful
heir in such childish manner as you do, having nothing neither to disprove the
possession, or the Euide^ces of the heir, nor to bring as Evidence for your
self: as by my answers in the chapters aforegoing it is most manifest. Pur.
388.
Again (you say) the first author of every heresy can not be named. Where you
reckon ten, and say: These and a hundred more heresies, shall they be thought to
have their heresy from Tradition of the Apostles, if the first author of them
can not be named? For example: There was one heresy of them that were called
Acephali, because there was no head known of them. Where have you that cause?
I Nicenu^ 2. con. pa. 62. tomo. 3, Nicep. li. 16 ca. 27.
find that Seuerus B. of Antioch was their head, whose name was Seuerus
Acephalus. And again, that they were but a piece of the Eutichians, whose head
was Eutyches: as the Puritanes, whose special head we be not certain of, are a
piece of the Caluinists. In such sort to show the author, is enough: or also to
show the beginning it self, for that is the cause why we seek for the author,
to show the beginning. Which again is showed eue^ by this that the primitive
name of Christians would not serve them, but they must have new names to be
called by, that, I say, declares that they began after the beginning. And so
we can show the authors also of the other nine Heresies that you name (which
also your self do in naming of them) and of all other, if it were worth ye
while, as partly you may see noted in M. Rishons Table. And in no such sort can
you show our first authors.

And so I am now come to your second answer, wherein you deny our Antecedent.
For you say: Pur. 402.413.
If any man or men were the authors of our faith, as it fares with the Popish
faith, we should be injurious unto them, if we did not acknowledge our
founders, as they do some of theirs. Tute Lepus es, and pulpamentum quaeris.
You make D. Allen to be that same non plus of Cambridge, Pur. 64.
who when he lacked an argument, said, he would dispute ex concessis. You are
he even your self. Do we acknowledge any founders of our faith, but the
Apostles of Christ?

Ar. 47.
Again you say: Thus we have noted to you the names of diverse Heretics, which
first preached certain Articles of your doctrine. Those notes you mean
wherewith you noted here cap. 3. page 24. the confessed true Church, as well as
us: which I have clean wyped out cap. 6. page 57.58. and will wype away the
rest likewise here in the 38. Demand.

Ar. 39. Pur. 389.
Again for the first beginning of one particulare, you say: It can not be
proved out of any authentical writer, or by any credible author, that any
before Tertullian, who was almost two hundred years after the incarnation of
Christ, either named or allowed prayer for the dead, or that it was used in the
Church. Tertullian him self flourishing within one hundred years after the
Apostles, does witness, that it was used before his time, and that it came to
his time by Tradition of the Apostles. The same does S. Chrysostom, S.
Augustine, S. Epiphanius, and many mo, witness, by your own confession here
cap. 3. page 2.3.4. Are not these authentical writers, nor credible authors
now with you, who here cap. 2. page 11. to 22. were with you, the most
approved writers, and the Doctors of Gods Church? I think Gods Church may
believe her Doctors better then you her rebels. Howbeit also any reasonable man
will think it enough for us, to bring it up to Tertullians time, and put you
to prove that then it began, if you will not grant that it came from the
Apostles.

Ar. 43.
Of another particular you say: Transubstantiation, no small Article of your
Religion, was not decreed until the year of God (of our Lord you would say)
1215. But you will not, I trow, infer thereupon, that then it began. For by
the same reason an Arrian may say, that Homousion, no small Article of our
Religion, began in the first Nicene Council, because it was not decreed
until then. Both words were then decreed, but the things meant by them, came
even from the Apostles, Lanfra^cus lib. contra Bereng.
and was decreed also, the one of them 200. years before that time, to wit,
when the Heresy of Berengarius ( superesse in Altari post consecrationem
substantiam panis and vini, the substance of the bread and wine to remain
after Consecration, and not only against the Real presence) was condemned in
diverse Councels, and he glad to recant it: as by the writers of the same time
we know.

The other Argument is directly against you (as this was directly for us. The
2. Arg.
) Your first Authors can be named after the beginning of the Church, rising
with their new opinions: Ergo, their opinions were Heresies, and they were
Heretics, and you be Heretics, namely maynteining the same obstinatly. Here
again you deny both the consequence, and the antecedent: but how friuolously,
I have at large reported cap. 7. page 80. where you put in your poor and cold
exception of Only Scripture, having nothing else to stay against the Ancient
Fathers, who both made that consequence, and also noted your beginners, but
that they must prove all by Scripture, or else neither does their argument
hold, neither was Aerius (etc.) your first Author. As also in another place
you say to D. Allen thereupon: Your rule is false. For you leave out the
chiefest condition, Pur. 413.
which, js, that the opinion it self be contrary to the truth first preached
by the Apostles, or else it is no Heresy, though it may be truly fathered
upon any man, sooner or later. Full wisely. D. Allens rule is this: [Any
opinion that may be truly fathered upon any man, that was long after the
truth was first preached by the Apostles, if it be upon a point of Faith, and
contentiously maynteined, it is an Heresy,] that is to say, contrary to the
truth first preached by the Apostles. And you can by no exception, by no
reason disprove it. Now your rule is this: Any opinion that may be truly
fathered upon any man long after the Apostles, if it be upon a point of Faith,
etc, and contrary to the truth first preached by the Apostles, it is an
Heresy, that is to say, contrary, etc. Are not you then a proper rule giver?
Any opinion that is contrary to the truth first preached by the Apostles, is
contrary to the truth first preached by the Apostles. No doubt but D. Allen
should do wisely, to correct his rule, which is not his, but the Fathers rule,
by such learned advise.

5. Contradicted.
Motive 20. Article. 11.
Another rule of D. Allens is, according to my next Demand, Pur. 412.
Whosoever was wondered at and withstand and in his first arising and preaching,
by such as were in the unity of the Church, (as Aerius by S. Epiphanius, S.
Augustine, etc. and now Luther and Calvin by the Romans, etc.) he was
(according to the matter) an Heretic, or a Schismatike, if he were obstinate.
I ask them therefore, who so withstoode us at any time, or what heresy was
not so withstood, according to Gods promise to his Church: Upon thy walls,
Esa. 62.
O Jerusalem, I have set watchmen: all day, and al night, even for ever, non
tacebunt, they shall not be scilent. Whereupon S. Augustine says confidently, by
the warrant also of the Parable: Aug. ep. 119 cap. 19. Mat. 13.
Ecclesia dei inter multa^ paleam, etc. The Church of God beset with much
chafe and with much cockle, although she tolerate many things, not being able
to redress them, yet such things as be against faith or good life, she neither
allows, nor is scilent, nor practices. And Fulke him self says as much:
The Church of Christ in such places as she is (join hereunto ca. 2. Ar. 92.
where he confesses the known Church of the first 600. years) suffers no
man damnably abusing her Religion, without open reprehension.

Now against this, and so against him self to, what has he to say? One while
he brings causes, why and how our Religion entered into the true Church with
scilence. 1 For because it came not in suddenly, Ar. 43.39.35. Pur. 256.
but entered by small degrees at the first: and therefore was less espied by
the true Pastors, (where he adds) especially being earnestly occupied against
great Heresies, and open adversaries, that sought to beat down the chief
foundations of Christian faith, as the Valentinians, Marcionistes, Manichees,
Arrians, Pur. 419.
Sabellians, and such like monsters. 2 Another mean or cause was this, that in
those ancient times if the Gentiles or Heretics had any thing that seemed to
have a show of piety, or charity, they would draw it into use, with such
correction as they thought was sufficient. And this was a great corruption.
Where he adds, So they took of them, etc. eight or nine things of ours he
there names, his words are here cap. 3. page 9. Amongst the which prayer for
the dead is one, 3. the causes and manner of the entering whereof he renders in
like sort more at large. cap. eodem page 14. to 20. as, because it had a
pretense of Charity, Ar. 39. Pur. 386.78.
it deceived simple men the sooner. And the ignorant peoples error first winked
at, because it had a show of piety, was allowed at length of Augustine, and
others, who followed the common errors of their time. To omit, that D. Allen
foresaw and prevented these goodly causes (Pur. 384. etc.) I say it is a fond
part, to tell why and how a thing was done, which thing was never done. For so
the Scripture before alleged promises, and S. Augustine affirms, that there
should not be, nor was, any such silence in the true Pastors. In so much, that
you can not name any confessed Heresy, but it was so contradicted, howsoever
the Fathers were at the same time otherwise occupied. And we show, that these
supposed Heresies were not (as you blaspheme) taken into the Church by
emulation of Paganes or Heretics, as here cap. 6. page 36. to page 56. In how
many places does S. Augustine say, that Origens heresy of the Damneds
salvation after a while, was joined with a certain humane piety: And yet, who
knows not, how the Origenistes for all that, were most ernestly and
continually resisted. And the like may be showed in all the like, that as well
the Heresies which had a show of piety and charity, were faithfully resisted,
as the others, no Heresy at all lacking some show for the time. And howsoever
now you make a small matter of prayer for the dead, Cap. 11. co^tradict. ^1.
in the next Chapter (after your usual manner of contradicting your self) you
will make it equal to the greatest, most blasphemous against Christ and
against God, and occasion of most licentious wickedness in all that believe it,
etc. Besides that the Fathers in deed withstood your friend Aerius, who would
have entered with the contrary, and likewise all those other known friends of
yours, the old Heretics. Had they, for all their being occupied against those
horrible Heresies, leisure to withstand truth, and had they not leisure to
withstand corruptions of truth? You think your folowers very beetles, if you
hope to blind them with such gross conueiance.

But you have also Scripture forsooth, to cover your iuggling. Ar. ^8. 2. These.
2.
For, when the Scripture tells us, that the Mystery of iniquity, preparing
for the General defection, and Revelation of Antichrist, wrought even in S.
Paul's time: it is folly to ask, whether suddenly and in one year, (and
consequently, with much preaching against it, Ar. 43) all Religion was
corrupted. Against your blaphemous understanding of this text, as if it said,
that the Church of Christ wrought the mystery or preparation of Antichrist, I
have replied cap. 8. page 121. But now, whosoever wrought it, does your text
say, that there was then no preaching against it? No such word. Besides, what a
mad imagination is this of yours, that if all Religion had been corrupted in
one year, then the Pastors would have cried out against it: but being wrought
by little and little, they either could not epsy it, or were content to wink at
it? For who sees not in the Ecclesiastical Histories and other monumentes of
Antiquity, that they gave warning vigilantly and faithfully, as well against
those Heretics that would have corrupted but one or a few Articles, as against
those others that sought to corrupt many or all? So have they done all the time
of the mystery, against all the Heresies that from the beginning have wrought
it, 1. Joan. 2.
covertly therein serving Antichrist, them selves also therefore termed
Antichrists. So they do now also, being the time of the defection or
Apostasy, (though not General. S. Paul does not so call it) of which
Antichristian Mystery you Protestants are the workers, as I have declared cap.
8. page 124. to.133. And after all the mystery, when his Revelation comes,
shall that at least pass uncontrolled? You, according to the blasphemies of
your Apostasy, do make, that Antichrist is long ago revealed (to the which I
have in the same place answered most irrefragably by the Scriptures them
selves that you abuse.) But now, whenever his Revelation be, does any text
say, that there is then no preaching against him? Ar. 36. 2. These. 2. Mat. 24.
Apoc. 12.
For so you say: When the coming of Antichrist was in all power of lying
signs and wonders, in so much that (if it were possible) the very Elect
should be deceived: and a general departing from the faith was foreshewed: and
the Church to be driven into the wilderness: What marvel were it, if none of
our Church could preach against it, as it first entered? As though the Scripture
were not plain, that not only as he shall enter, when the time of his
Revelation comes, but also even during the whole time of his reign, there
shall be open and stout preaching against him over all the world, with most
mighty working of true Miracles against his lying wonders, and most constant
resisting of him to blood and to death, though his torments and tormentors be
never so horrible and Satanicall. As I have partly noted in the same 8.
chapter, page 124. to 130.

All this you have said, to defend, that our Religion might be false and of a
later entrance, Ar. 36.
although it were not gaynesaid at the first entering of it. As for that which
you say of preaching and writing against the Popes authority, when it first
began, it is answered above cap. 9. page 157.

Now on the other side, that your Religion is not false, though it were
withstood by the true Pastors in Aerius, Iouinianus, etc. this you say: Pur.
413.
They that defended that Heretics should not be baptized, were withstood by
Cyprian and all the Bishops of Africa, who were in the unity of the Church:
yet were they not heretics, nor their opinion heresy. Much forsooth to the
purpose. Were withstood (you should have added) at their first arising and
preaching. But then you had marred your example your self. For their opinion
did not then first arise, but came by lineall tradition from the Apostles. And
the contrary opinion of Agrippinus and his successor S. Cyprian did then first
arise, and was withstoode by Pope Stephanus, etc. who Aug. de bap. cont. Don.
li. 5. ca. 23.
wrote and commanded, Vincen. Lirin. ca. 9. apud Cyp. epist. 74.
nihil nouandum, nisi quod traditum est, to make no innovation, but keep the
Tradition. And therefore it was an heresy, and they that held it obstinately
(as afterward the Donatistes and Luciferians) were Heretics, and the Eus. li.
7. ca. 2.3.4. Niceph l. 6. ca. 7. Hier. co^tra Lucif. Bed. l. octo quest. q. 5.
Aug. co^tra Cresc. li. 3. ca. 1.2.3. and de Bap. li. 2. ca. 4. and Ep. 48.
Catholics recanted it, both in Africa and in Phrygia, though S. Cyprian him
self peradventure was martyred in the mean time.

But yet you have in store one example about this rule, to dorre us withal,
and to show, that Are. 93.
the Romish Church can well enough abide, the true Religion of Christ to be
damnably abused (by wicked men) not only without (open or privy) reprehension,
but also with allowing. Which is no worse the^ you hold here of the true
ancient Church which you call your own. But your example out of Matthaeus
Paris. is clean against your self. For it shows manifestly, that neither
those Friars preachers, which attributed too much to Religion or life
Monastical, nor those Parisian Doctors, which detracted too much from it,
lacked their reprehenders among ye Catholics, as they were all, until some of
the Doctors afterward proved obstinat heretics. And that when the matter was
brought before the Pope, he took such blessed order with it, as was very meet
for his Apostolic See, to wit, that the Friars new scandalous book secreto
combureretur, should be privily burned: for shaming their order, say you. And
what fault was that, I pray you? Know you not, how S. Augustine used Pelagius
and his disciples in the beginning of their new doctrine, when he first wrote
against them? Tacenda adhuc arbitratus, Aug. Retr. li. 2. ca. 33.
etc. I thought good not to express as yet their names, hoping that so they
might more easily be amended. Imo Pelagij ipsius nomen non sine aliqua laud
posui: quia vita eius a multis praedicabatur: Yea in my next writing expressing
the name of Pelagius himself, I did it not without some praise: because his
life was commended of many. Thus did S. Augustine use one Monk, and him the
author of a most pestilent Heresy, as he proved afterward. And your Christian
spirit would have all the order, all Monks, the innocent also, shamed for the
fault of a few. Such would have been your care to amend those few: and such
your providence to save the wheat, whereof these few might have made as great
waste, if they had not bine wisely handled, as Friar Luther now has made, for
lack of a silver spur and a Cardinals hatte: and as Erasmus also might have
made, had he not been made of by Catholic Bishops far above his merits.

Yet one shift more you may seem to have, where you say for your argument ab
authoritate negative, of the whole Scriptures authority negatiuely: Pur. 449.
And this conclusion M. Allen him self made of man's authority, cap. 13.
Purgatory and prayers for the dead were not preached against at their first
entry: Ergo they are true, or rather, there was no such entry of them as you
imagine, but they came lineally and quietly from the Apostles. But of all men's
authority it is false, you say. Howsoever the argument of all men's authority
negatiuely be, good or bad, who but you would call this such a one: All
heresies (according to the Scriptures, Fathers, and Histories) have been
preached against at their first entry. This was never preached against: Ergo
this is no heresy, nor never since the Apostles time did enter.

Names.
In the three next Demaundes I have three easy and familiar notes, by our bare
names, to know which side is right, Ar. 66.
and which is wrong. To that generally Fulke says: He is a foolish sophister
that reasons from names to the things. In what Logike he has that axiom, I
know not. But this I know, and you shall hear it In the 7. Them. See cap. 11.
his 37. co^tr. Aug. in Ps. co^t. partem Donat. Ar. 68.
anon, that also him self so reasons. I know moreover, that S. Augustine so
reasons: Dicitis, mecu^ vos esse (says the Church to the Donatists) sed
falsum videtis esse. Ego Catholica dicor, and vos, de Donati part: You say
that you be with me. But you see it is false. For I am named Catholica, and
you, Of Donates part. S. Augustine, I trow, he will not call a foolish
sophister, nor him self a foolish sophister. Again he says generally: If the
only name of an honest man, of a learned man, of a good Christian, is enough
to prove the thing: many a knave, ass, hypocrite, may prove himself an honest
man, a learned man, a good Christian. As though we said, the argument to be
good from every name to the thing. No sir, we say it no more but of three sort
of names: of which the Fathers said it before us, and experience teaches it,
and you can not disprove it by giving any instance. For there are in it further
reasons, then only arguing from names to things.

6. Catholics. Motive 1. Article. 20.

First then we say, that since the Apostles did bid us believe that church which
is named The Catholic Church, evermore to this day they have been true
Catholics in deed, which were in times of Heresies and Schisms commonly
called Catholics, and easily known thereby. For this we allege among others,
S. Augustine: whereof you take notice (which may be written, it is so rare a
thing in this your book against the Articles) and go about to answer him with
his own words: but very fondly, as I have showed cap. 9. page 182. The rest
that you have, is oppositions after your custom. As where you oppose to this
name, your stale exception (which here cap. 7. Ar. 69.
you oppose to all things) of Only Scripture, saying: Wherefore howhoeuer you
boast of the honorable name of Catholic, except you prove that your opinions
agree with the Scripture, they are not Catholic in deed, by Chrysostomes
judgment. Again: By this you may see, that Chrysostom thought it not
sufficient to have the name of Catholic. Your folly in this allegation I
detected cap. 9. page 172. neither is it Chrysostomes, neither does he speak
of the name Catholic, nor of the Apostles writings, but of the Apostolic Sees
writings.

Ar. 66.
Another opposition: You your selves will not account the Grecians (now since
their separation) for true Christians. And yet as many nations have since then
called them Catholics, as you are able to show on your side. Though they are
not so called by you: for no more are you so called by them. Be bold to say
enough, how little soever you be able to prove. To say, the Grecians be called
Catholics, is like as to say, the Latins be called Catholics: which were
forsooth a proper saying, considering that not only we but you also be Latins.
But this I say, that as among the Latin or Western Christians, he that in
common talk or writings hears Catholics named, understands us therein, and
not you: so likewise if he hear the Catholic Gretians, or the Catholics of
the East, whether he be Latin or Gretian, he understands them that be with
the Pope, and believe the Holy Ghost to proceed of the son also, and not the
Schismatic and Heretical Gretians. And therefore in this example is nothing
to the contrary, but that they be true Catholics, which are known by the
name of Catholics. And so much you say of the name and rule it self. Now
which of us two have that name, whether we, or you?

Ar. 66.
The Heretic Gretians do not call us Catholics, you say. No more do you that
be Heretic Latins. But yet both you and they mistake not the person, when
common talk and books so calls us. Therefore (I say) we be true Catholics.
On the other side you say: Ar. 68.
And we have as many Nations, and more then you have, that by public
authority call us Catholics, and you Heretics. Who be so called any where by
public authority, is not the question, but who be commonly called and known
by that name. Howbeit also of any such public authority no man knows but
your self. But this all men know, that those also of your own side, in
France, Flaunders, etc. in their public Edictes, call us Catholics, and them
selves by other names.

Now supposing that it is our name, yet you have a shift, saying, Ar. 67.
that we boast and trust only in these names, (Catholic) and (Church,)
without the things them selves, as the wicked Jews did, crying, The Temple of
the Lord, when they had nothing less then the Temple of the Lord, Iere. 7.
Mat. 21.
but rather a den of thieves. Our Lord both in the Prophet, and in the
Gospel, acknowledges it to be his Temple, although they in it were thieves
and wicked persons. So is ours his Catholic Church, although some of us were
so wicked as you make us. Howbeit the wicked both then and now, trusting only
in the Temple and in the Church, and not amending their lives, deceive them
selves: how much more they that trust in the co^uenticles of Heretics, which
are the Synagogues of Satan.

On the other side, supposing that it is not your name, you have also your
shift, saying: Ar. 68.
If you have no greater argument to condemn us, the^ that we are not called
The Catholic Church, then you can no more condemn us then Christ and his
Apostles, that were not only not called the true Church, but also were called
Heretics and deceivers, by the Jews, which were as rightly called Gods
people, as they that give you the name of Catholic Church, are called the
Christian world. Nay, bate me an ace of that, I pray you: unless you can
likewise show by predictions of the Prophets, and correspondence of Luther, the
reprobation of the Christian world in these days, as we all see the
reprobation of the people of God the Jews in those days. Besides that you
have great reason forsooth, to require that the Jews should have used those
names which they never heard of, or else you not to be tried now by them after
their institution, receiving, and universal using.

And yet again you will needs have the name from us. Ar. 95.
For why might not our Church, when it was most hidden (you say) be as rightly
called Catholic, as the Church of the Apostles, when it was so particular,
that it was contained in the narrow bonds of Jury? For (you say) it is not
called Catholic, because it should be every where (for that it never was, nor
never shall be) But because that wheresoever it be in parts, it is one body of
Christ. I read of many old Heretics, that gave many interpretations of that
name, to draw it to them selves: but you are the first, to my knowledge, that
said, because it is vna, therefore it is called Catholica. The old fathers in
their Creed were of another meaning, when they said distinctly: I believe One,
Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic (that is, Roman) Church. No Sir, S. Augustine
tells you another interpretation: Aug. de un. Eccl. ca. 2.
Ecclesia vtique vna est, quam maiores nostri Catholicam nominarunt, vt ex ipso
nomine ostenderent, quia per totum est. Secundum totum enim, cath olun Greece
dicitur. There is no doubt but only one Church, even that same, which our
Auncetors named Catholica, to declare by the very name it self, that she is
over all, to wit, beginning at Jerusalem, and from thence growing over all
Nations, continually till the end of the world, when having taken in the
fullness of Nations, she shall be wholly assumpted in glory. And therefore
your Church, neither when it was hidden as you imagine, neither now that it is
open as we all see (God hide it again) can be called Catholic, Au. Callat. 3.
diei. nu. 2. post. Collat. c. 27.28. Epist. 48.
because (as S. Augustine so often resoneth against the Donatistes) you do not
communicate with totius Orbis Ecclesia, the Church of the whole world, but have
separated your selves from it, from the Church (I say) which began in Jury,
and grows on to this day, and therefore as well then in the beginning, as any
time after, was the same and had the same name, as the tree of musterdseede is
the tree of musterdseede, whether it be grown little or mikle.

Ar. 95. Pur. 14.
But what a thing is this, that you speak with the spirit of the Donatist, and
say? The Popish Church is not in every part of the world: For Mahomets sect is
in the greatest part: Many countries are Idolaters: and the most part of them
that profess the name of Christ, are not in the fellowship of the Popish
Church. It is iumpe the argument of Cresconius: Aug. co^tra Cresc. li. 3. ca.
63.
Argumentaris, quod ideo nobis non totus Orbis communicet, etc. Thou make
this argument ( says S. Augustine) that therefore the whole world does not
communicate with us, because as yet either many men there are of the Barbarous
Nations which have not yet believed in Christ, or many Heresies under the name
of Christ, abhorring from the communion of our fellowship. The full answer
thereof you may read there in S. Augustine. Although I allege almost nothing,
but only answer, my length grows tedious to my self, and I fear, to the
Reader also: not for any substance of your arguments, but for the multitude of
your trifles, to say the least and best of them. As again where you say (like
non plus) that Most Papists will confess, Ar. 69.
that many things in their Church have need of reformation, as not being
universally perfect, and that it is halting in many things from the truth of
Gods word, neither yet dispersed over all the World, but contained in a corner
of Europa. and therefore it is not by S. Augustines rule, the Catholic Church?
Is yours then by that rule, the Catholic Church? As the Jews care not, if
none be Christ, so that Jesus be not Christ: even so you reason like men, that
care not if none be the Church, so that the Roman be not. O miserable People
that must have such Leaders. The Church now may vouchsaue to be so spoken of by
you, when you speak no better (here cap. 3.) of the same Church also in S.
Augustines time. But we tell you, with the words of S. Augustine (for we
confess no more then he also does) by you alleged, where he repeateth the
Creed: August. de Ge^. ad (...). imperfect. ca. 1.
Constitutam ab illo Matrem Ecclesiam, That the Holy Ghost being given, founded
the Church our Mother, quae Catholica dicitur, her that is called Catholic, ex
eo quia vniuersaliter perfecta est, et in nullo claudicat, et per totum orbem
diffusa est, of this, because she is universally perfect, and halteth in
nothing ( though the Donatistes and other like Heretics do never so much
triumph in that interpretation) and is spredde over all the World, in manner
aforesaid. Both interpretations agree to our Mother, and we claim them
accordingly, says S. Augustine and we, whereas the Heretics are compelled to
renounce the later, which is the more proper and plainly peremptory, and to
shrewde them selves in the former most vainly, saying, that the Church is
called Catholic, non ex totius orbis communione, Epist. 48.
sed ex obseruatione omnium Praeceptorum Diuinorum, atque omnium Sacramentorum,
Not of the whole worlds communion, but for the keeping of all Gods
commandments and of all the Sacraments.

By all this wrankling you win nothing but this, that you declare thereby the
name to be ours, and not yours: as also by this, that you defend your fellows,
for saying Universal in steed of Catholic, and Congregation in steed of
Church: Ar. 67.
because (say you) they are so in English, and are not else commonly
understood. You should have said rather, that they are so in Latin, and then
by your wise conceit, one should tell the people of the gathering over all, and
they would understand that better then the Catholic Church, because these be
Greek words. Even as if you would not name Baptism unto them, but rather
Ablution or washing: Apostasy the cause of changing these words.
nor Heretic, but a chuser: nor Schismatike, but a Cutter. No my masters, it
was not for more perspicuitie, it was not, that you changed those known and
worn names: it was because they were preoccupated by us before you were borne,
and therefore were as a great block in your way, to be removed before you could
enter into the Christian hearts that you were to seduce. for which cause, your
Apostasy has gone about to change and translate more Greek names also the^
those as you know, Priest, Bishop, etc. though they were understood well
enough before.

Motive 2. Article. 19.
7. Heretics.
The second rule is of the name Heretics, being the contrary to the name
Catholics, and therefore we need now stand less about it: That such as are
of Christian men commonly called and known by the name of Heretics, are
always Heretics in very deed. To this Fulke ageeth not, but corrects it,
saying: Ar. 65.
Those that by (true) Christians have been called and counted for Heretics,
have proved so in deed, (and therefore say I, Aerius, Iouinianus, and
Vigilantius, were Heretics in deed, because you confess here cap. 2. that
they were true Christians, who called and counted them so. But this not being
for your vauntage, you infer otherwise.) And therefore the Papists, being
called and counted Heretics of true Christians, without doubt are Heretics in
deed Even as undoubtedly as you be true Christians, that so call them. That
briefly is our answer to your rule, though you answer it your self also,
where you say, The Devil stirred up Tyrants, Heretics, Popes, Saracenes, and
Turks, Ar. 78.
to destroy the Church, who that counts Popes to be Heretics, would so
divide?

What is now your answer to our rule? Forsooth, The true Christians were of the
Arrian people (who were people commonly called Christians) called and taken for
Heretics. What is that to the purpose? but were they commonly called
Heretics, even so much as of the Arrians? Even as much as we now be commonly
called Heretics of you. For you know pardie your selves, that if you should in
your talk and writing say, Heretics, simpliciter as we do: you could not be
understood to speak of us, so as we be with all perspicuitie understood to
speak of you. Yea, but although we be called Heretics (you say here cap. 7.
pa. 80.) yet in that our faith agrees with the word of God, we prove our
selves in deed to be no Heretics. Witness here cap. 8. where al your
deprauatio^s of Gods word are revealed to your confusion.

8. Protestants. Motive 3. Article. 18.

The third rule is upon the name Protestants, and such like: That they have
always been Heretics, who have had such new names in respect of their several
faith and doctrine: and always Schismatikes, who have had the like in respect
of their several communion: namely, if they were obstinate therein. To this
Fulke answers: We desire most of all to be called Christians, Ar. 65.66.
cou^ting it a most honorable name: although in reproach we be called of you,
Caluinists and Lutherans. As the true Christians of old were of the Arrians
called in reproach Homousians, and Athanasians. I told you in my Demands, that
to be like rather to this that Luther invented to call us Papists. For we were,
you know, before Luther began, as they were before the Arrians began. And
neither they, nor we, then without a name. What other the^ was our name, but
the name of Christians? In unity of ye name were al together at that time. And
when afterward Arius, and Luther began their parts, what offended the old
Christians, I pray you, to leese their old name? And keeping their old name,
what need had the Arians to call them Homousians and Athanasians, or Luther to
call them Papists? was it of necessity, or of reproach? And therefore on the
other side, the name Christians being preoccupated, how could men talk of
Arrius his faction, or of Luthers faction, without some new names, as Aria^s
and Luthera^s? Therefore it was not of reproach, but of necessity: in so much
that your own side also in their talk, in their Edictes, and in their
books, specially one against another, are constrained to use those or other
Names. But we are not constrained, nor do not call our selves Papists: but we
call our selves still, as before, Christians, or (for more distinction and
perspicuitie, Pacia. Ep. 1. and 2. ad Sy. Habetur in Bibliotheca edita Paris.
1575
when we deal with you) Catholic christians. For (as S. Pacianus says
passing finely in his Epistle De Catholico Nomine, to Sympronianus a Nouatian,
though he the^ took him to be a Montanist) Christianus mihi nome^ est,
Catholicus vero cognome^. Christian is my name, but Catholic is my surname.
And therefore you may long desire ye name of Christians, before you get it. The
great count that you make of it, is to our glory whose name it is.

But this is notable, that howsoever you be ashamed of those names, you
confess two other names, (granting withal that they which choose to
themselves such new names, Ar. 87.
are none of the Catholic Church) to wit, Gospellers and Protestants.
Specially where you say: Ar. 65.
As for the name of Protestants came first of them that made protestation
against the decree of Spires in Germany, (Anno 1529. twelve years after Luther
began) and from that time has been attributed to professers of the Gospel. Of
whom soever it first came, it is within the compass of our rule. And therefore
you had good cause to add and say: Which name they do not so much delight in,
as you do in the name of Papists. We delight even so much in the name of
Papists, as in ye invention of your Patriarch Luther. Howbeit we say not that a
Catholic may to the Heretics deny him self to be a Papist: no otherwise then
to the Arrians, to be an Homousian. If you Sacramentaries or Caluinistes
delight not in the name of Protestants, the Lutherans do, and stand as
earnestly against you upon their senioritie for that name, as we do stand
against you both upon our senioritie for the name of Christians and of
Catholics. But your confessing of the name, on the one side, and yet saying on
the other side, that your true Christians delight not in it, Ar. 65. Infra ca.
11. cont. 50. Ar. 65.
as also that they desire to be called Christians, without choosing any other
name, I reserve to the place of your co^tradictions.

But of us you say as much: They can not be content with the name of
Christians, but choose unto them selves new names after the calling of their
Sect-masters: as Franciscanes, Dominicanes, Benedictins, Gilbertins,
Augustinians, Scotistes, Thomistes, Albertistes, etc. This is answered in my
Demands and Motives (as all the rest also in effect.) Yet I say again to it:
A Sect imports a division. Now what division is between those Catholics, and
us the other Catholics that have none of those names? Be we not all of one
faith, and of one communion? So easily is your accusation wyped away, and not
only from us (I say) who have none of those names, but also from our brethren
who have them. They be not of that sort as the name of Christians, and
therefore (by Logike you know) not priuatiuely opposite thereunto. But such
are these: Arrians, Pelagians, Lutherans, Caluinistes, Protestants. Because
being before, of Christ, of his unity, of his communion, all called
Christians: they for some matter, either of faith or other, dividing themselves
from the same, follow the communion or fellowship of Arius, of Pelagius, of
Luther, of Calvin, of those Protesters. Why then are those our brethren so
named, if S. Augustine, S. Benet, S. Frauncis, S. Dominike: if S. Thomas, and
Scotus, were not Sect-masters? I answer: the first sort, because they profess
to live after ye rules of those principal Abbots: the other sort, because they
hold certain Scholasticall questions (which either can not be matters of
faith, or else as yet be not, because they be not yet defined by the Church)
according to the opinions of those principal Schole Doctors.

9. Conversion of Heathen Nations. Motive 25. Article. 1.

My nienth Demand does note, who are (after the Apostles) the Conuerters of
all Nations from Paganism, (whom the Scripture calls, the witnesses of
Christ to the extremes of the earth. Act. 1.) to wit, we, and not the
Protestants. According to Tertullians most singular observation, speaking of
Heretics, and saying: As touching the ministry of the word, Tertul. de
Praesc.
what should I speak? considering that this is their endeavor, non Ethnicos
conuertendi, sed nostros euertendi: Not to convert the Heathen, but to subvert
our people. This glory they do more seek after, Si stantibus ruinam, non si
iacentibus eleuationem operentur, To work ruin to such as are standing, and
not raising to such as are lying. And so Fulke may glory, I do not deny, as he
does also, where he says: Ar. 33. Ar. 95.
The Land of Bohemia was converted by John Hus, and Hieromyn of Prage. Again
in another place: And at this day the most part of Europe, is converted from
Idolatry, Heresy, and Antichristianitie (such he counts the Catholic faith)
unto the same true faith that we maintain: as in England, Scotland, Ireland,
France, Germany, Denmark, Suetia, Bohemia, Polonia, by public authority: in
Spain and Italy, a great number under persecution and tyranny. That is your
glory in deed, that you have subverted many in many Christian nations. We can
not so glory, nor you can not show that we have done the like in any Nation,
although you say with a brazen face, Ar. 3.
It is certain that the Popish Church has perverted and corrupted al parts of
the Latin or Western Church, with Idolatry and false religion. But that you
have converted any Nation from Paganism, you do not, nor you can not boast.
But the truth is, although you say that we have not converted the Nations to
Christ's faith, Pur. 460.
but perverted all nations from the faith of Christ, that our Church, that is
to say, the Communion of S. Peter's See Apostolic, or ye church beginning
visibly at Jerusalem, and visibly growing on to this day, is she that
conuerteth al Pagane Nations to be Christians, not only at this present, so
many nations of both the Indies, and in Afrike: item so many others that this
last thousand years have been converted, three whereof you name, Liuonia,
Prussia, Lithuania, Ar. 3.85.
with this lying censure, that we converted them by force of arms, rather then
by preaching and teaching: but also all them that were converted either in the
500. years before that, or also in the Apostles time it self. Against this
clear truth what mist have you to cast? Forsooth, not we, but certain
Heretics and Schismatikes converted some nations to the profession of Christ's
name, Ar. 2.3.
though to false religion. Do you grant that it was to false religion, and yet
bring that for an instance? It is an evident argument that you had no instance
in the nations that we confess to have been converted to the true faith of
Christ. Was not this scope enough for you, and reason enough for us when we
say, (as in my Demand you may see) that it was our Church, by which all
Nations were converted or corrected to the true faith of Christ?

And yet also for your said instancies, where you quote your Authors, they
shall be answered. In the mean time I quote to you Eus. li. 2. ca. 1.
reporting the conversion of Ethiopia to have been of the right stamp,
according to Psalm. 67. and Act. 8. which two places he there does cite: Ar. 2.3.
because you to show, that the true Church of Christ did not convert all, do
say, For in Aethiopia there are yet people converted by the False Apostles,
which taught circumcision and observation of the Law: in which heresy they
continue unto this day. Who should tell that better then the Ethiopians
themselves? whom we see to have their house at Rome, and to be Catholics. And
your self do say in another place, Pur. 357.
that their Liturgy does savor plainly the usage of the Greek Church. Their
Emperor did his obedience to Paulus III, and also an Ethiopian Abbot, which
Abbot in his Epistle dedicatorie before the rites of their Baptism and
Liturgy, does expressly inueigh against them that did falsely report of them as
not Catholics and obedient subjects to the Sea Apostolic, much rejoicing
therein, and desiering that they might be so taken. Howbeit I deny not, but
there might be some corruption, though not of heresy peradventure, but for
lack of free conuersing (being intercluded by the Turks and Saracenes, and
often oppressed by Tyrants and Infidels of their own) with the Roman Church,
In qua semper ab ijs qui sunt vndique, Ire. li. 3. ca. 3
conseruata est ea quae est ab Apostolis traditio, In which Church ( says S.
Irenee, that is, by repayring to it) the faithful that be all about, have
always preserved the^ selves in the tradition that comes from the Apostles.

And where you say for another instance, Ar. 2.3. Pur. 337.
It is manifest by all Histories, that the Nations of the Alanes, Goths, and
Vandales, were first converted by the Arrians: in so saying you declare that
you never read the Ecclesiastical Histories, presuming notwithstanding to
write against these Articles which are in manner nothing else but certain
observations thereof. Read Socrates li. 2. ca. 32. (and not only li. 4. ca.
27. and Sozomenus li. 6. ca. 37. but specially Theodoret li. 4. ca. 32. who, as
a Catholic Bishop, of purpose to take from the Arrians that vain brag of
theirs, shows, that the Goths were first Catholics, and not (as you say)
first converted by the Arrians: but, only by false informations and to much
trusting of their Bishop Vlphilas, being another Balaam, led out of the way.

You talk also of the Nations that were converted by the Donatists and
Nouatians. Pur. 337.
But we shall know your Histories and authors hereafter. Again you say: And it
is also manifest by Histories, Ar. 3.
that the Grecians (who^ the Papists count no part of their church, but
Schismatikes) converted the Moscouites first of all. Did the Grecians convert
them since their Schism? O great Historian. The truth is, there was great
emulation then in the Grecians against the Latins, but not schism nor heresy
as yet, nor long after, and therefore of our Church they were then: Howbeit it
is not the true faith, nor our religion (as you say truly) which the
Moscouites have, but such as they them selves did list to receive, with many
qualifications and modifications of their own. such was the fruit of the
Grecians emulation, and such is the necessity that S. Peter cast the net.

But if Histories fail you, yet one demonstration ex per se notis you have, to
prove, that not we, but you converted all true Christian Nations. Ar. 2.
And what is that? If the Papist can prove, that we hold not the same faith and
truth, unto which the Apostles converted the Nations, we refuse to be called
the Church or Congregation of Christ. The Papist proves (to omit a 1000.
others of his proufes) that you be Heretics (and therefore hold not the same
faith etc.) by the testimony of that which your self confess to be the true
Church of Christ: here cap. 2. and cap. 3. Again: We are members (witness
your Separation, here Them. 3. Ar. 2.3.
) of that Church, which converted all Lands in the earth that are converted to
the true Religion of Christ: and we affirm, that the Apostles taught none
other faith in steed of true Christianity, but that which we hold, as we are
ready to prove by the word of God. Witness here cap. 8. Where all your absurd
Deprauations of Gods word are answered, and not that only, but also showed by
the express word of God among other things, that the Sacrament of
Confirmation went every whither together with the Apostles Gospel, as the
chiefest point of Christianity, Ar. 3.
page 145. But no marvel of your audacitie, to say, we are ready to prove
it, considering that you are bold to conclude of this, saying thus: I have
showed, that our church, holding the true Doctrine of the Apostles, is that
which converted all Nations to true Religion. Then belike all those Nations
were (and are) of your Religion, and you will be content to be tried by them,
as by Afrike (for example) whose Religion we know by Tertullian S. Cyprian, S.
Optatus, S. Augustine, etc. Or if you have better Monumentes of any other
Nations Religion, name it, and let us try it between us. But whosoever sees
here cap. 3. how you are feign to charge the true Church, the Primative Church,
with erring, may easily conjecture, what you dare do.

Motive 17.
11. Britannie.
Well, we be English men, and therefore in a several Demand I name our
Country, England or Britannie, unto you. Specially because the Prophets (as
you know) speak much of the conversion of Islands expressly, and namely of such
Islands as were farthest of: As also because there are exta^t such momuments of
our Islands conversion and religion, in Tertullian, Origin, S. Hierome, S.
Chrysostom, S. Gregory the Pope, with many other like, and specially in the
History of our own countreyman S Bid.

But here Fulke tells such English men that list not to be deceived, Pur. 346.
but to see into what faith all Nations were converted that were turned by the
Apostles, that they were better to consider the word of God and the History of
the Acts of the Apostles: and bids us of so many Nations there recorded, to
name one, Pur. 166.332.
unto which Purgatory, or praying and sacrificing for the dead, was taught. You
are profoundly seen in the Scriptures, I perceive by this. Why? was the Acts
of the Apostles written, to show, into what faith all Nations were converted,
that were turned by the Apostles? Nay, is there so much as any mention of the
twelve Apostles preaching to any nation of the Gentiles? No sir, that book was
written to show only the beginning of the Church (according to the Prophets)
to wit, at Jerusalem and among the Jews, and the taking of it from them for
their deserts, and giving of it to the Gentiles, even from Jerusalem the head
of the Jews, to Rome the head of the Gentiles: And there S. Luke ends it,
not caring to tell so much as the fulfilling of that which our Lord had foretold
Act. 27. to S. Paul (in whose person this translation was wrought, and not in
S. Peter's, nor any others of the Twelve, for causes to long to be here rendered)
Caesari te oportet assistere, Thou must stand before the Emperor. Because his
purpose was no more but to show the new Jerusalem of the Christians, and so to
leave them to it, to know what are the particulars that the Apostles taught.
And so withal, you have one of those Nations named in the Acts, and that no
common one, ^o wit, the Romans, which received of the Apostles not only the
Article that you require, but also all the rest which at this time it has,
neither you being able by Scripture or otherwise to prove the contrary so
much as in any one, and we proving it both a particulars and in the total
sum, partly by Scriptures, partly by other unavoidable demonstrations.

Well, for all this trigiuersation (by which you see what you have won) you
will yet be content to be tried by our Britannie. Ar. 49.
For you confess, that the Church of the Brytans, or Welchmen, before
Augustine came in to convert the Englishmen Anno 597. continued in the faith of
Christ, even from the Apostles time, Pur. 332.
so that for six hundred years almost this land was never void of Christians.
Go to then, and prescribe us the form of this trial. Prove (you say) that
Paul, or Simon, or Taddeus, or Joseph, or whosoever first preached the Gospel
in this Island (in the reign of Tyberius the Emperor, as Gildas testifies)
taught prayers or sacrifices for the dead: prove it I say, and the day is
yours for ever. In this brief answer one probation may suffice. If you
require us to prove it out of the Scripture, considering that the Scripture
does not tell of our Lands conversion, you declare your self to be but a
pratler. If other authors will content you, what greater ones can you ask,
then those so many, whom here cap. 3. page 20. you confess to witness that
the Apostles, and namely S. Paul (cap. 7. page 86.) left that Tradition?
Another probation thereof you fear, if the Brytaines received the faith from
Rome of Pope Eleutherius (which is most certain) as the Englishmen did
afterward, of Pope Gregory. And therefore you talk so willingly of the
Apostles preaching there before, not considering how that makes more for us, in
that the Brytaines thereby could judge the better of the matter, The Britons
begun by the Apostles and Romans, accomplished by Eleutherius.
and so would not have received from Eleutherius (to whom they sent for their
accomplishing) the contrary of that which the Apostles so little before had
planted among them. Which probation proceeds as well, although not the
Apostles (which yet I believe) but the Christian Romans (to whom they were
then subject) began the matter, which again is most certain.

But you are so afraid of Christ our great kings City, that is, of Rome, Pur.
371.
the Christian Jerusalem, that yet again you say: It were easy to prove by
that controversy which the Britaynes and the Scotts had against the Saxons
about the celebration of Easter, that our Country first received their
conversion from the East Church, whose ceremony they did then defend, even as
the East Church did long before against Victor Bishop of Rome. By which it
appears, that this land did never receive the doctrine and ceremonies of the
Latin Church, before the time of the Saxons. But this your reason has no
other ground, but only your own ignorance in the History, as I have noted
ca. 2. pa. 4. Where also you have an evident demonstration, that the faith of
the Britons first, and of the Saxons after, was all one, because the greatest
paynt wherein their Bishops differed from S. Augustine, was that same about
Easter Sunday: in so much that S. Augustine was very earnest with them to
join with him and preach to the Saxons. Which according to your imagination,
had been as wisely done of him, as if we now should move you (considering that
you keep Easter when we do) to preach and teach as you do.

All this considered, no man may marvel to see you in such a pecke of
troubles about the Religion of the Saxons: one while allowing it, as it had
been yours: another while condemning it, Infra ca. 11. co^trad. 50.
because it was ours. Your allowance you utter in the very same words,
wherewith here cap. 5. you allow of them that you confess to have been the
true Church of which all ought to be that would be saved. Thus you say: Pur.
335.
All that was then taught the Saxons for Christianity was not false. For the
Bishops and Christian teachers of the Brytish nation, whose aid they (that
came from Rome) required, and at last obtained, to the converting of the
Saxons, retained the foundation of faith Jesus Christ, and the only sacrifice
of his death. Again: Pur. 337.
Many things and the principal were true, that were taught unto the Saxons. Now
for us you confess, and say: Pur. 346.
You think it is the surest way to look to that faith in all points, which
this Land first received: If men should follow your counsel, in some things they
should follow your faith which you now teach. Namely, Pur.. 335 336.
they received and used unprofitable prayers for the dead, and many other
superstitious opinions. Neither does it follow, that all that taught or believed
those errors, so long as they builded upon Christ the only foundation,
perished. If the Saxons received prayer for the dead, why do you say of the
Britaynes (whom erewhile you confessed to have taught them) that although
Gildas accuse the Priests of his time for seldom Sacrificing, Pur. 332.
and although the error of praying for the dead were received in other places,
yet whether this Country were free from it, I am not able to say, nor you to
prove, that it was infected with it?

Because of these points which you confess, and many others that you can not
deny: Ar. 49.
therefore now the English Nation received their Religion first from Rome, at
such time as religion there was very corrupt: The Saxons were converted by
superstitious Romanists: Pur. 337.348.
Yea (as some think) they were not so much converted from Gentilitie to
Christ, as perverted from pure Christianity to superstition. See I pray you,
they were not only Christians before, but so pure as no other Christian Nation
in the world, if you remember what he said of all others here cap. 3.

And yet again on the other side, were their corruption by those Romans never
so great, Pur. 335.336.346. Ar. 49.
yet such was the faith that was received even of the Saxons, that you can show
us if we will, plain and pithy confutations (at that time) of many points of
Popish doctrine, and namely (that which we count the chief) the Real presence
and transubstantiation, yea and direct inuectiues against the Pope and all
Popish doctrine. Mary in deed that were worth the sight. Do you grant, that in
some things. and namely prayer for the dead, they received the faith which we
now teach: and yet have you cards of the^ to show not only against many points
of Popish doctrine, but against all popish doctrine? And what be your cards?
Diverse monumentes of antiquity, (as Prayers, Psalms, Homilies, with diverse
other small Treatises and pamphlets) in the old English or Saxons tongue, in old
English written hand, and namely that printed Saxon Homily, which was
appointed to be read at Easter. Belike they were of S. Bedes making (for so we
read in his life) that he compiled many godly things in the vulgar tongue, and
not only in Latin, and his Homilies to this day are read in the Churches,) or
rather of some his Elders, such as he in his History makes mention of,
because it was one hundred years after our first conversion, before Bid him
self did flourish. Is this possible, think you? No, no. Non sunt recte diuisa
temporibus tibi Daue haec. In S. Bedes story, and in all his works, and al
other writers of his time, and before his time you find nothing against the
Pope, nor against any one point of his doctrine. But clean contrary we find
so plainly for the Pope and for every point of his doctrine, that you are feign
to put the revelation of Antichrist, and the disparition of the Church (here
cap. 2.) at the very time of our conversion. For which cause also you refuse
(as we saw before) to be tried by Bedes history, Pur. 333.
telling our countrymen, that they were better to consider the Acts of the
Apostles: and saying in another place, that you way not worth a slye that
which D. Allen tells out of Beda. For who sees not there our Religion most
plainly, and namely for Beda hi. li. 1. ca. 24. Greg. li. 12. epist. 15.
the Popes authority, and Beda li. 1. ca. 25.27.29.
Mass, the very points that your Saxon Homilies do impugn? But what say we
then to those godly monuments? Who can not say and see, that if they were such
as you make them, they should not all this while be kept unprinted, neither
should that which was printed, so soon and so diligently have been called in
again: for why? either they contain not such matter as you report, or they
be but of some of these late Wiclesistes making, such as (by your own saying)
are yet common to be seen. Disprove my conjecture if it be wrong, Ar. 34.
and then you shall see whether I can reply.

10. 12. Miracles and Visions.
Unto these two Demands I couple two others, of Miracles, Motive 5.6.7.
and of Uisions, noting that the very Scriptures do by them commend unto us
Christ him self, his Apostles with their successors the conuerters of all
Nations, and their doctrine: and saying accordingly, that the Miracles and
visions of our Church, are infinite, Pur. 166.331.333. Greg. Dial. li. 4. ca.
24. Et Epist. l. 7 ep. 30. li. 9. ep. 58. and mora. l. 27. c. 6. in Job. 36.
Damas. ser. de defu^ctis. Beda hist. li. 1. c. 31. l. 3. c. 13. li. 4. c. 21.
li. 5. c. 13.
alleged also by the Doctors against the Jews also and Paynims, to convert
them to Christ: Whereas the Protestants have not all this while been able so
much as to heal a lame horse, though Luther and Calvin (as we read in their
lives, namely set out in French) attempted wonders. Now what says Fulke to
this? The examples out of Gregory, Damascene, Bid, you may spare for your
friends: there is none of us that makes great account of them. Again: I force
little what Augustine (our Apostle, of whose Miracles and holiness S. Gregory
also, whose Monk he was, does testify, as also of his learning, Hebrew
psalters written with his own hand, which you count a high point, etc.)
wrought to confirm his errors: neither do I way worth a fly that long tale
you tell out of Beda, of him that had his cheynes fallen of in Mass time: that
credulous and superstitious age had many such feigned Miracles. Again: You
leap but 600. years from Christ, to Gregory's Dialogues, from which time I will
not deny but you may have great store of such stuff: as you have miracles now
in Flanders of the honest woman of the old Bailey in London. Happy it were for
you, and you were so honest. Neither when she was in Heresy, was she dishonest
for ought that I have hard, and the Miracle even as I tell it in my Motives, is
most gloriously known at Bruxelles. You should have better played the Doctor
of Divinity, if you could have informed the simple how to know fained Miracles
from unfeigned: and why Miracles unfeigned may not be after S. Gregory's time
as well as before. You will tell them (as here cap. 2.) that straight after his
time was the Revelation of Antichrist, Pur. 336.338.
and that these were and are his lying signs and wonders, 2. These. 2. such as
errors had always great plenty to establish them withal. This is the very
bones and marrow of your new Gospel: and yet all worm-eaten and rotten. For
first, what Scripture tells you that after the Revelation of Antichrist
(supposing it at that time which you would have) there shall be none but fained
Miracles? Apoc. 11. tells me the clean contrary. Secondly, why cannot you
for the defense of Christ his true Miracles against the Infidels, discover the
fainednes of Antichrist his wonders, whereas we discover the lying of all fond
Miracles which sundry errors (though not in such great plenty) have
pretended? Thirdly, what Scripture tells you, that the time of Antichrists
revelation was so long ago? It tells me the clean contrary, as I have most
evidently declared cap. 8. page 125. Discovering therewithal your gross
falsation of the Scripture to rack it to your blasphemous purpose. A wise
Revelation, that was yet so many hundred years hidden, and the party reveled,
taken yet for Christ his own Uicare? Consider their absurdnesse.
No, no sir: you that be mystical Antichrists, may of fools be mistaken, and
thought to be the Ministers of Christ Jesus: but your Lord in proper person
shall show himself openly enough, and expressly against the only Christ, our
Lord and Savior Jesus, not so much as desiring to be thought of his side.
Fourthly, what say you then at the least to our infinite Miracles before S.
Gregory's time? as those, which S. Augustine De Ciuitate Dei. li. 22. ca. 8.
reherseth to the Paganes, wrought by the Relikes of the first Martyr S. Steven,
after many particulars, even six Resuscitations of the dead, saying generally:
Si enim Miracula sanitatum (vt alia taceam) modo velim scribere, quae per hunc
Martyrem, id est, gloriosissimum Stephanum, facta sunt in colonia Calamensi,
and in Nostra, plurimi conficiendi sunt libri: For if I would write but the
Miracles of healings (to omit the others) which by this Martyr, that is, by
the most glorious S. Stephen, have been wrought, but in two Cities, Calama,
and Hippo, ( where his familiar friend Possidonius, and him self were
Bishops) very many books were to be made. What Scripture have you against
these Miracles? Either you must remove the coming of Antichrist so much
higher (which a little thing would make you to do) or else you must bring your
blind followers some text that testifies his lying Miracles to go also so long
before his coming, and the workers of them for him to be the very Martyrs and
ministers and true Church of Christ him self. For else how will you now defend
that our Church has no true Miracles, Ar. 85.
but the power of Antichrist in lying signs and wonders?

As for your censure of Miracles and Uisions, that what soever is consonant to
the word of God, is to be received, Pur. 163.333.
that which is not agreeable therewith, is to be detested, although an Angel
from heaven were the bringer of it: as though these were against the truth of
God uttered in the holy Scriptures. All this hangs but upon the twyned
threede of your own poor word, though you say never so much, that it is
briefly and plainly so set forth in the word of God, as I have showed in the
eight chapter, answering all the textes that you pervert for Only Scripture,
and namely that text of an Angel from heaven, page 110. And the place also of
Saint Augustine, chapter 9. page 181. Pur. 333.
In so much that where you say thereupon, He will not allow (Miracles and
Visions) for sufficient proofs, without the authority of the Scriptures, you
do shamefully abuse your Reader, for he says expressly, that whatsoever such
things are done in the Catholic Church (as he there also mentions many
generally, and some particularly) therefore they are to be allowed, because
they are done in the Catholic Church. And you grant that these of S.
Augustines reporting, were done in the Catholic Church: Ergo, by S. Augustine
even in that place, you must allow them, and so condemn your own Religion.

Motive 26.
13.15. Honor of Crosses and of Saints. 14.16. Virtue of Crosses and of
Saints. 17. Exorcismes. 18. Destroying of Idolatry.

In the next five Demaundes I report certain arguments made of the old
Doctors in their books, against the Paynims, to prove that Christ is God, and
not their Idolles, by certain points of our Religion, as the Sovereign Honor
both of his Cross, and of his Saints, and the miraculouse power not only of
them two, but also of his Church in her ordinary exorcismes: requiring the
Protestants to help here the Paynims, if they be either able, or not ashamed,
and also in the next Demand bidding them open their eyes at length, and
behold, that our Religion has been and is the bane of Idolatry, yea and
those very points of our Religion, which their perverse blindness counts and
calls Idolatry it self. To all this Fulke had nothing, but like a Cuckoo,
You have not (says he) destroyed Idolatry, Pur. 460.
but set up Idolatry. Not waying what I tell him according to the prophets,
that we have so thoroughly converted al Nations from Idolatry, that we have
made them forget also the names of their Idolles.

Motive 41. Article 10.
19 Kings.
My 19. Demand is of the Christian Emperors and Kings, of whose conversion
together the Scripture speaks expressly, and of the conversion of Nations. The
chief of them Fulke names here cap. 2. and confesses (with us and for us)
that they were of the true Church in the first 600. years: yea and chalengeth
them to have been of his Religion, no less then we do. But what proufes does
he bring thereof? Not one. Neither does he answer so much as any one of our
proufes, no not that which D. Allen alleges, Pur. 429.
how Constantinus honored the Sentence of the Priests Council (at Nice)
tanquam a deo prolatam, as pronounced of God. Pur. 313.
Ruff. li. 1. ca. 5. yea he is feign to confess, that in the burial of
Constantinus him self, the very first Christian Emperor, Eus. in vita Constable.
li. 4 c. 58.59.60.66.71.
there was prayer for his soul, according to the error of the time, being the
time of the first Nicen Counsel. In Eusebius is much more, Sacrifice also for
his soul, with the intercession of the Apostles, in whose honor it was offered
at their Relikes, in their Temple, Pur. 312.
and all by the procurement of Consta^tinus him self. Again, That the Emperor
Theodosius Junior prayed for his fathers and mothers souls, Arcadius and
Eudoria. But the story says not (quoth he) that he prayed to S. Chrysostom
for them, as M. Allen thinks. The story is Theodorets, and his words are
these: Hist. Trip. li. 10. c. 26. ex Theo. l. 5. c. 35.36 Pur. 222.226. Amb.
super obitum Theod.
And he setting his face and eyes upon the shrine of that holy man, made
supplications for his parents, and prayed (him) vt veniam illis tribueret,
that he would pardon them the injuries which of ignorance they had done him in
working his death. Again, as touching Honorius of the west, brother to the
said Arcadius of the East, where S. Ambrose says, Eius principis (Theodosij
Senioris) et proxime conclamauimus Obitum, et nunc quadragesimum diem
celebramus, assistente sacris Altaribus Honorio Principe, We finished of late
(upon the seventh day) this Princes Obite (Theodotius Senior their father) and
now we celebrate his fourtyth day, our Prince Honorius standing by the sacred
Altares. To this Fulke had nothing, but partly to reprehend the thing as
superstitious both in the Bishop and in the Emperor, partly to inueigh
blindly against D. Allens translation. For Ambrose speaks not (he says) of
his fortyth days mind, but of the solemnity of his funeral kept 40. days
together. As though the fortyth day is not one of the forty, and yet also how
plainly he expresses the singular solemnity of the fortyth day, as of the
Obite before, saying, And now we celebrate his fortyth day, whereas others use
to keep the Third day and the Thirtith, (which was and is the use of the
Roman Church:) But the Church of Millaine kept the seventh day, and the
fortyth.

All this considered, who sees not, that as well the Catholic Emperors within
the first 600. years be against him, as the others of later times: and
therefore that it is but a cast of his facing and deceiving art, that he
says: Ar. 33.51.
Before the general Defection (and Revelation of Antichrist) it is an easy
matter to name you the Emperors and Princes of our Church, as Constantine the
great, See the impudent Heretic, them vvh^m he condemned before.
Iouinianus, Valentinianus, Theodosius, Arcadius, Honorius, Martianus,
Iustinianus, Mauritius, and diverse other. But when the Kings of the earth had
committed fornication with the great Whore of Babylon (as the holy ghost
foresheweth Apo. 17. and 18.) it is no prejudice to our cause, if we cannot
show any of them, that have maintained our Religion. Your malicious and
ignorant setting of the Defection and Antichrists revealing, at the year 607, I
have confuted cap. 8. page 126. by the Scriptures most manifestly. But that you
point the same time for the Kings of the earth to have fornicated with her,
your ignorance and malice surmounteth it self, as it is evident by that which
I say there page 126. that Babylon is this world from the beginning to the
ending thereof, and called a Whore for that it has such allureme^ts, whereupon
the same S. John exhorts us in his Epistle, 1. Joan 2.
and says: Love not the world nor the things that are in the world. The world
is transitory, and also the concupiscence of it. And therefore in his
Apocalipse, he makes her to sit upon all the earthly and worldly Kings that
ever took or shall take her part against Gods Church. But your blindness could
find no earthly Kings in the world but within these last 900. years: yea
none to be the Kings of the Earth, but those that be the Kings of the Church,
and their fornication to consist In humbly adoring her, Esa. 49.60.
and licking the very dust of her feet, which they are commanded by the
Prophet to do under pain of Damnation. Ar. 17. Discipline.
And thereupon D. Allen told you, that to be the true Church, Which exercises
Discipline upon offenders in all degrees, And that al true the Christian Kings
have and do obey her accordingly: which is an invincible argument for us
against you, in this Demand.

And yet you have Kings on your side, also since the Revelation of Antichrist:
Ar. 33.34.32.
The Grecian Emperors that were Image-breakers: Charles the great, who wrote a
book against Images, and called Bertrame to declare his mind upon the Real
presence and transubstantiation: and those Princes that defended their married
Priests. But least we should object, that it was but in one or two points, that
these did favor you: Edward the third defended Wickleue. Also Zisca and
Procopius defended the Bohemians: and George king of Bohemia was deprived of
his kingdom by the Pope, for defending the Protestants An. 1466. Which is well
toward an hundred years before ye name of Protestants (by your own confession
here Them. 8.) and much more before the religion of the Protestants, was coined.
For though you say, Wickleue, I wene, you will not deny but he was of our
Church and Religion, yet you may see in my 40. Them. that in deed he was not,
neither also the Bohemians or Hussits. But that Edward the third was a
Wickleuist, who ever heard? though I deny not, but that Catholic Princes are
often times passing negligent in their office and oath, to extirpate Heresies,
until by God and his Churches admonition on the one side, and by the wast (on
the other side) that Heretics in time do make both spiritually and temporally
of all Common wealths, they be spurred thereunto. The like absurd ignorance
in stories, or rather malice, you and your brethren declare, in saying that
fond book against Images to be Charles the greates, who was clean contrary,
Cop. Dial. 4. c. 18.19. Sander. de Imag. li. 2. ca. 5.
an enemy of the Image-breakers, as is at large and learnedly declared in M.
Copes Dialogues. Neither is it Carolus Magnus, but Carolus rex, brother to
Lotharius the Emperor An. 840. (by Trithemius) to who^ Bertrame wrote De
corpore and sanguine Domini. Neither was that (as the learned think for good
causes) this Heretical book which Oecolampadius set forth under Bertrames
name. And is not this a substantial reason, He declared that he liked not the
Real presence and Transubstantiation, in that he called Bertrame to declare his
mind of that matter? How much better may I reason, that both the Emperor or
King, and all Christendom held the Real presence and transubstantiation,
because this Bertrame durst not but so timerously and about the bush (after the
manner of all heretics in the beginning) go against it, as we see in that
book? No no, sir: As I said before of Nations, so I say of Princes: If any
were euerted, he might in some thing fall on your side. But those Princes in all
countries that were converted from Paganism, and also their Successors, that
continued in their steps, were in no point yours, but ours in all things.

20 In all Persecutions. Motive 15. Article. 7.

My 20. Them. is of the persecutions both before ye Emperors became Christians,
and also afterward when some of the^ were perverted again with Apostasy or
Heresy: saying, that the Religion which we read of in those times, being the
Religion of all Martyrs, and (by Fulkes confession here cap. 2. page 4. Pur.
258.312. Ar. 23.24.25.
) of ye true Church, is in all points ours, and in no one point ye Protestants.
And to this he has nothing, but only this, that all true saints held the
foundation Jesus Christ, (which we do in his sense, and he does not in the true
sense, as I showed cap. 5. and therefore forsooth it is proved that they all
were of his Church: notwithstanding he is feign to say, that some of them
builded straw and stubble upon the foundation, they were ours so plainly in
many things, as he confesses cap. 3. yea and in all things, as I show cap. 9.
In so much as they have scraped most of their names out of the Callender,
whereof I shall speak more Them. 46.

Motive 33. Article. 14.
21. Churches.
In the 21. Demand I challenge for ours the ancient Christian churches with
their furniture both before and after the conversion of the Roman Emperors:
also in our country namely, as in all others. And Fulke no less chalengeth
them to his side, here cap. 2. page 6. But before we come to the particulers,
let us see his answer to D. Allens argument: What if it were granted that all
Churches (that now remain, Ar. 53. Pur. 339.340.
that he adds, whereas D. Allen speaks generally) were builded by Papists,
and for Popish uses: what have you won thereby? As much as needs, I think.
Why not? For the same challenge might the Idolaters have made to the Apostles:
Show us a Temple in all the world, that was not builded by Idolaters and to
maintain Idolatry? Were that the same challenge, I pray you? The Apostles
renounced both those Temples, and that Religion: you renounce Popish religion:
but do you also renounce al Churches that now remain? If you do, then you
renounce also the Churches of the first 600. years, for innumerable of them (as
at Rome, etc.) now also remain. But because you may not leave to us the
Churches of that time also, for fear of afterclaps: you think good to come to
the matter, and to say: But for all your bragges, we are able to show, that
such Churches as were builded by true Christians, were not builded to such end
as yours are. Consta^tinus Magnus was a true Christian with you also, and of
him I told you erewhile in the 19. Them. out of Eusebius, that he builded
Apostolorum templum, A temple of the twelve Apostles, in his city of
Constantinople, appoynting his own body to lie in the middle of their 12.
shrines, Vt defunctus queque precationum, quae ibidem essent ad Apostolorum
gloriam offerendae, particeps efficeretur: That also after his death he might
be partaker of the prayers, which there should be offered to the Apostles
glory. And at his burial accordingly, Much people with the Priests, preces pro
anima Imperatoris Deo fundebant: made prayers to God for his soul. And
likewise to this day we see, says Eusebius, that he enjoys there the divine
Ceremonies, and the Mystical Sacrifice and the society of the holy prayers.
This was his end (among others:) and the same was the end of al our Church
founders, Pur. 338. to 347.
says D. Allen. Not so, says Fulke: for Pur. 339. Ar. 52.57. Fulk is no babe
you may see,
our Stories testify, that at the first conversion of this Land to
Christianity, the Temples of the Pagane Britons, and of the Idolatrous Saxons,
were converted into Churches of the Christians. Therefore these Churches forsooth
had Pagane founders, and not believers of Purgatory: as likewise Pantheon in
Rome. As though that they which converted them to the Christian use, were not
rather their founders: as now also king Henry the eight is called of you, a
founder of many places that he did not buyld, but only alter. So then here is
one end of their Churches, all one and of our Churches, to wit, to pray for
the dead.

But they were all builded in the honor of God, of Christ: Ar. 53. to 55.
and the most of yours in the honor of creatures, of Saints. Mary, well ymet.
The aforesaid Church of Constantinus was it not called, The twelve Apostles
Church? And does not S. Augustine De Ciuit. Dei talk of Basilicae Martyrum and
Apostolorum, Au. de Ciu. li. 1 ca. 1.4.
The Apostles and the Martyrs Churches or Palaces, calling the^ also Christi
Basilicas, The Churches of Christ, which you make to be opposite one to the
other? besides infinite like examples. And therefore your places out of S.
Basil and Didymus, and S. Augustine, Bas. ep. 141 Did. de sp. sanct. Au. ep.
174 Ench. c. 56. Cont. Maxim. Ar. l. 1. Titul. 11. De ver. rae. ca. 55.
that a Temple is only for God, make no more against our Churches now, then
against theirs at that time. But the places, where S. Augustine answers the
matter, for you to allege them against it, is most vain impudency. He Au. de
ci. li. 8. c. 27. and li. 22. ca. 10.
tells you and the Paganes for him self and for us together: But we do not
to our Martyrs build Temples as to Gods, but Memories as to dead men, their
souls yet living with God. Nec ibi erigimus Altaria, in quibus sacrificemus
Martyribus, sed vni Deo, etc. Neither in those memories do we erect Altars
(etiam super sanctum corpus Martyris, Not so much as them that are made over
the holy bodies of Martyrs) upon them to sacrifice to the Martyrs: But to the
one, both ours and the Martyrs God, do we offer the Sacrifice. Although at that
Sacrifice, they, as the men of God, be in their place and order named, and we
honor the Memories of them as of holy men of God. Ar. 55. Sozo. li. 2. ca. 2.
This is the meaning and none other of S. Peter's Church, S. Laurence Church, of
S. Peter's Altar, S. Laurence Altar. And even so of Angels Churches also,
Sozomenus telling of a Church in Constantinople called Michaelium, S. Michaels,
in memory of an Apparition of that Archangell there.

Pur. 344.345.
But in the third end you pay us home, for the great grauntes that Constantine
made to Syluester Bishop of Rome, he made to married Bishops of Rome. And that
were so, then cry on a Gods name, Viuat Iouinianus, Blessing upon Iouinian,
and Anathema to S. Augustine who called him a monster, yea and upon all the
Church of Rome, where not so much as one Priest would marry for all his
persuasions, but so faithfully resisted him, that out of hand they extincted
his heresy, here Cap. 8. page 149. Seeing this your impudent most false
assertion of Rome, who will marvel to hear you say as boldly of England? Many
of these Churches and Colleges, yea the most notable Cathedral Churches in
England, were builded, for Preachers of the Gospel, and their wives to Then
is the Q. Iniunction to blame.
dwell in, and they were first inhabited of married Priests. Is it possible?
Our stories are plentiful in that point: if you be skillful in antiquity, you
cannot be ignorant of this, which is testified of Ranulphus Castrensis,
Matthaeus Westmonasteriensis, the story of Peterburghe and many other. You
talk sometimes of a Whetstone as bygge as a Mountain? You have won it, you
must needs have it. This our Stories tell, that many of our Priests had
need sometimes of reformation, and that also with violence, such was their
obstinacy in that durte: as also in other Countries, too often. But that any
Churches were builded for such swine, or first inhabited by such, is a chicken
of your own hatching.

Ar. 55.56.57.
After this we have to consider what you say of Chauncells and the Roode lofte,
of Altars, of Chalices, and Uestmentes. The Church of Tyrus (Eusebius lib. 10.
cap. 4.) had (Cancellos) the Chauncell in the myddest: and the Altar being but
one, Fulk driven to confess altars in the Church.
in the myddest of the Chauncell. So also as the Priests and Deacons stood
round about it. Again, Many Churches have Cross Isles. Belike you are
suddenly become our Proctor. For Chauncelles, Altars, and Crosses were not (I
trow) in your fellows late buyldinges (which you mention Pur. 342.) at
Orleans, Antwarpe, and other places. And therefore as suddenly you change
again, and say, that the Chauncelles are but additions builded since the
Churches, of lykelyhood by the persons that disdayned to have their place in
the myddest of the people as the old manner was. Even as likely as that it was
of disdain, that Saint Ambrose by his Archdeacon commanded the Emperor
Theodosius senior, Theo. li. 5. ca. 17. Sozom. li. 7. ca. 24.
out of the Chauncell, telling him that it was for the Clergy only, solis
sacerdotibus. If you know that marvelous Story, you may better remember your
self, because you say, In the Oriental Church, as their Ceremonies are
diverse from yours, so no doubt the fashion of their Temples differs from
yours. You may there perceive that both in the East and West Church, the
diversity was not in the Ceremonies nor Temples, but in the Bishops, for many
were flatterers, or unskillful, every one was not an Ambrose. Howbeit some
little differences are in the Temples also of one City, but without jar, yea
all very sightly becoming our Church, Psalm. 44.
as variety in the Queens goodly garment. But your Religion may not bear any
Chauncels at all, neither in the myddest nor at the East end. It may not bear
the length into the East, which was and is the common and Apostolic form,
but will have all rather to be round, according to the example of those few
which before were lightly Temples and Synagogues of the Paganes and Jews: as
Saint Maria Rotunda in Rome, which was Pantheon, and those two at London and
Cambridge which you do mention. It may not bear the out Isles to make it in
form of a Cross lying along upon the ground. No it may not bear any Cross
or Roode at all, to be in the Church, although Consta^tinus had Eus. in vi.
Co^st. li. 2. c. 12. l. 4. c. 56 Soz. li. 1. c. 8.
Tabernaculum Crucis, a Tabernacle or moveable Church of the Cross, carried
about with him in the wars: and also in Jerusalem Eus. or. de laud. Co^st.
page 367.
dedidicated an holy Temple Salutari Signo Crucis, to the healthful sign of
the Cross: and also set up Eusebius. de laud. Co^st. pa. 368.388
Trophaea victoriae contra morte^ partae, Triumphant signs of the victorious
Cross, in the Churches and Temples consecrated to God. And in his Church of
our Lords Passion, the very Cross it self that our Savior dyed upon kept in
secret. Quam Episcopus vrbis eius quotannis, Paulin. ep. 11. ad Seu.
cum pascha domini agitur, adorandam populo, princeps ipse venerantium, promit,
The which most holy Cross, the Bishop of Jerusalem ( as S. Paulinus Bishop of
Nola, and S. Augustines great familiar friend writes) brings forth every
year to be adored of the people, him self being the first and chiefest of
them that worship it: and that at Easter, die qua Crucis ipsius Mysterium
celebratur, ipasque sacramentorum causa est, quasi quoddam sacrae solennitatis
insigne, Creeping to the Cross upon good Friday. ^ere cap. 3. page 9. and cap.
6. page 39.
Upon the day that the mystery of the Cross it self is celebrated, and it
self is the cause of the service, as it were a certain banner of the holy
solemnity. Your religion may not bear these things, as which (you say) the
ancient Church took of Ualentinian Heretics: nor so much as one Altar in a
Church, howbeit then also were many Altars in one Church. For the same Paulinus
in the same place writes, that the same Church was Auratis corusca
loquearibus, and aureis dives Altaribus, glistering with gilded Roses, and rich
with golden Altars. Beda hi. l. 5 c. 16.17.18.
And his Church of the Resurrection, tria Altaria continebat, had three Altars,
as we read in S. Bid.

And what do you talk again of Chalices of wood and of glass, and of selling
the golden and silver vessels, even the holiest vessels of all, to redeem
captives? seeing that you may bear no Chalices at all, Ar. 57. Pur. 69.
no holy vessels at all, but say plainly: Your vestme^ts are of as good stuff
as your Chalices, the old Church knew none such. Then belike you never read of
that Sacra Stola ex aureis filis co^texta, Theod. li. 2 ca. 27.
Holy Cope, wouen of gold thredes, the which Constantinus gave to the Bishop of
Jerusalem, Vt ea amictus sacrosancti Baptismatis ministerium obiret, to wear
when he did solemnly celebrate the administration of holy Baptism. Because S.
Fulgentius (out of Vita S. Fulg. c. 18.
whose life Ant. 2 p. hi. li. 11. c. 12.
your author S. Antoninus took it) had never an Hier. li. 1. con. Pelag.
holyday coat, but only one ^oate for all times, and for all things, you
imagine that he said Mass (sacrificabat) without holy vestments. When those
most perfect Monks are in Histories noted to have been monochitonos, do you so
understand it? How then was S. Sasill so commended of the Emperor Ualens, Quod
in Natali Domini tanto cum ornatu, tamque decenter sacerdotio fungeretur, For
executing in Christmas with such ornaments, and such comeliness? As also,
Sozo. li. 8. ca. 21.
when S. Chrisostomes Priests and Deacons were beaten at Easter by his enemies
in the Church, Et in ornatu (vt erant) per vim rapti, and in their ornaments
(so as they were) carried away violently. For though some in great poverty, as
commonly in times of persecution and spoil, as now also in England, used
either none or very simple vestmentes, and wooden, glasen, leaden, or copper
Chalices: and although you say, Ar. 57.
The service of God has small need of furniture in outward things, for God
being a spirit, is not worshipped with outward pomp: yet it is evident, that
the Churches then, in times of peace, were much richer in such stuff and (as
Paulinus calls it) in alma sacri pompa ministerij, Paulin. epi. 12. ad Seu.
in the magnificall pomp of the holy ministry, then they be now: in so much
that Acacius Bishop of Amida (of whom you talk) was able therewith to redeem
at once seven thousand captives, Socr. li. 7. ca. 21.
to feed them, and to give them to bring them home into Persia. There was
belike in England such necessity to redeem Captives, or to build Temples of
God, Ambr. off. li. 2. ca. ^8.
for the enlarging of the Martyrs monumentes, or to provide that requies
defunctorum might be at the burial of Christian men, which are the three uses
that S. Ambrose has in the place that you allege. Sane si in sua aliquis
deriuat emolumenta, crimen est. Marry if any man turn them to his own
commodity, it is an heinous fault. As you have done in England.
But it was not for that, it was for the foresaid causes: and then withal a
reverent choice was made first of non initiata vasa, unconsecrated vessel, and
after when necessity urged also to the consecrated, great respect was had, ne
Ecclesia Mystici poculi forma non exiret, that a Mystical cup went not from
the Church in his own form, ne ad vsus nefarios sacri calicis ministerium
transferetur, least the instrument of a sacred Chalice (which he there calls
also a vessel of our Lords blood, and Gold in which our Lords blood is powered)
might be converted (by the buyers) into wicked uses. Are you not ashamed to
cite such places out of antiquity, you that hate Chalices because they be
Chalices, and because they be consecrated?

After all this you say full wisely: We are content, Ar. 57.
that your Church by her gorgeous garments, as well as by other things, should
declare it self to be that woman which is prescribed to be clothed in purple,
gold, pearls, and such like ornaments, Apoc. 17. The true sense of which place
I have given cap. 8. page 126. But you in the mean time to give us a blow,
care not that the stroke lights withal upon the Primitive Church (for it was
not yours, why should you spare it?) as I have here showed, and as your self
confess in speaking above of those golden and silver vessels that Acacius
sold, Pur.. 342.
and elsewhere of those Princely buyldings, that by Constantine and other
Christian Princes were first set up, and must confess much like of those
former Cryptes, Caves or vaultes under the earth, if you know well the story of
S. Laurences martyrdom, namely that the Tyrant said to him. Prud. Him de S.
Laur. peristeph. ij.
Hunc esse vestris Orgijs

This is the use and order of your Ceremonies, as some have confessed, this is
the doctrine of your Testament, That the Prelates do sacrifice in gold: In
silver cups (they say) the sacred blood does smoke: and that the tapers stand
upon gold, at the sacrifice in the night.

Likewise by that little which I have said of the Cross and the Signs thereof,
it is evident that in your usual railing against dumb Images, Ar. 4. Pur.
20.21.22.460. 2. Cor. 6.
stocks, and stones, you do no more but utter that you are no more of the
ancient true Church, then of our Church now which you deny to be the true
Church. S. Paul in deed says, that the Temple of God and Idolles can not
agree together, speaking of Christians that did draw with Infidels, as
receiving of meat sacrificed to their Idolles, such as now receive of Caluins
bread. But that the true Temples of God, and Images belonging to the same God,
agree well together, you can not deny, but you must revoke your own
confession made here of those ancient Temples of Christ. And therefore you do
but like your self, to say: I care not what your fathers called or counted
Sacrilege. But God our heavenly father commanded us to break, burn, and
destroy al your Idols, and to deface all the monuments of them, Deuteronomy. 12. And
all the godly Patriarchs and Fathers both before Christ's coming and since,
have given us example hereof. What else? they gave us example to set up Crosses,
and you example to pull them down. You may roll in such Rhetorike before
fools that receive your absurd principles, to wit, that the Idols of the
Paganes were Images of the Christians. But when the simplest Catholic does no
more but deny your principle, you are by and by non plus. No sir, but to
avoid prolixitie, I could tell you plainly and at large who were your fathers
in these spoils that you have made of Christ's churches, to wit, the
Donatistes, the Arrians, the Eutychians, yea Iulianus Apostata, yea and that
you have out-shot them all, and left nothing to Antichrist him self but only
to fill up the measure, as I have sufficiently touched cap. 8. page 128. And
therefore neither will that serve, which again you say: Pur. 341.
Such livings as are appointed us by the Prince, and the law, we may enjoy
with a good conscience. No sir, it will not serve. For you may remember the
story in S. Ambrose, De Basilicis tradendis. Ambr. li. 5. post epist. 32. and
ep. 33.
He would dye rather then to deliver the Churches to the Emperor, and the
Arrian Empress his mother. And so you enjoy our Churches with as good a
conscience, as the Arrians should have done at that time: as you shall feel
when you come in your course, after your seniors, before the just judge our
mothers husband, whose Dowries they be.

22. Service. Motive 32. Article. 6.

The 22. Demand is of the Service, which Fulke in word chalengeth no less
then we, saying here cap. 2. page 4. Constantinus builded those Churches for
our assemblies and Service, and in the Cryptes also before that, our assemblies
were kept. But in deed he confesses that it was ours, and rejects it
accordingly: so that I must stand here to defend it rather then to claim it.
Pur. 377.
His defense of their new Communion book is this: Whosoever were children of
the true Church, would never find fault with our Communion, which can not be
condemned by the word of God: and therefore cares not for the comparison of
the custom of other men, which whether they used the like or not, in form of
words (whith is not material) so they used not other substance of matter,
except they did it besides the word of God. And yet it must be prejudicial to
our Mass book, (not that the hook was made since the Apostles time, Ar.
21.38. Pur.. 402.413.
but) that any piece was added since by certain Popes, yea though the very same
pieces be retained in their communion book also. Let al men therefore consider,
how just the defense is that I made in this Demand, to wit, that no piece, be
it never so new, neither in the Mass book, nor in our other Service books,
is contrary to the old faith of the Apostles contained in the word of God
written or unwritten: yea the same in substance, and commonly in form of words
also, was in the Apostles and Fathers Churches.

The Primitive Church had the same service that the church (...) has.
Let one example hereof be, Prayer for the dead, and that also in the Canon of
the Mass, as Fulke him self confesses here at large cap. 3. page 16. to.21.
And whatsoever he obiecteth against the Primitive Church and us for it, saying
they had it of the Devil etc. (cap. 3. page 22.) that it is against the
Scriptures, and contrary to the same Doctors them selves: I have answered all
cap. 6. page 47. to 56. and cap. 8. page 133. to 134. and cap. 9. page 161. to
164. page 193. to 214.

Let another example be, praying to Saints, as he also confesses here cap. 3.
page 10. And what he obiecteth against the Faters and us for it, I answer cap.
6. and cap. 8. page 138. saving one place of S. Augustines, Ar. 55.
upon which he says: Note that no Sacrifice ought to be offered to Martyrs,
but prayer is a Sacrifice, therefore it ought to be offered only to God.
Secondly, that Martyrs were not called upon in the time of the Sacrifice, but
only named for remembrance. Cunningly noted, as appears by these words of
his in another place: Aug. tract. 84. in Ioa. De ve. Ap. sermo 17.
Non sic beatos Martyrs, etc. We do not make such a commemoration of the
blessed Martyrs as of other that rest in peace: that we also pray for them, but
rather that they may pray for us. Was this, to be only named for remembrance?
Neither in the Aug. ciui. li. 22. ca 10.
place that you allege does he say, that they were not called upon in the time
of sacrifice, but, Non tamen a Sacerdote qui sacrificat, inuocantur, The Priest
that sacrifices, Aug. Ciuit. li. 8. ca. 27. Offerimus (domine pater) praeclare
maiestati tuae, etc.
does not invoke them. And what he means by his invocation that
sacrifices, he declares there before, saying: Which of the faithful ever
heard the Priest standing at an Altar, though also made upon the holy body of a
Martyr for Gods honor and service, to say in the prayers or Canon: Offero tibi
Sacrificium Petre, vel Paul, vel Cypriane, I offer sacrifice to thee, O Peter,
or Paul, or Cyprian? But otherwise for praying to Martyrs, S. Augustine is
very plain in the same work, the same book, and almost the same chapter,
telling certain Miracles, one in a woman, that prayed to the holy Martyr S.
Steue^, Aug. ci. l. 2. ca. 8.9.10.
in S. Augustines own Church, ad sanctum Martyrem orare perrexerat: another in
a poor man, that prayed aloude to the twenty Martyrs in the same town, ad
viginti Martyrs clara voce orauit. And such Miracles are done (he says) by
God, at the Martyrs suite and instance, eis orantibus and impetrantibus. And
therefore whether prayer be a sacrifice, or no: and how it is, or is not, we
need not stand here about it. As also, because he does not say, that no
sacrifice ought to be offered to Martyrs, as you pretend, but he speaks of
external sacrifice (the definition whereof you may conceive by that little which
I said cap. 6. page 49.) and of one certain external sacrifice, We offer the
sacrifice to the one God, Aug. de ci. li. 8. ca. 27. That prayer to Saints is
not a sacrifice to Saints.
who is both the Martyrs God, and ours: At which sacrifice they be named in
their place and order. In so much that by this one Sacrifice he answers the
Paganes, touching certain dishes of meat brought by some Chrystians to the
Martyrs churches, even as I answer you touching prayer made to them. Non autem
ista esse, etc. But that these be not sacrifices to the Martyrs, he knows
that knows the One Sacrifice of the Christians, which is there offered to
God. Those Christians do mean no more, but to have them there sanctified by
the merits of the Martyrs, in the name of the Lord of the Martyrs.

Let the third example be of ceremonies generally, such as he confesses here
cap. 3. page 15. to have been in the primitive church also. And two objections
of his against them, I have answered cap. 6. page 45. But now he will reprove
them out of Scripture also, and first by his usual argument ab authoritate
negative. Ar. 19.
Because they are destitute of God his word, which only is able to give the^
strength and estimation. And yet in other places, clean contrary, not only
Scripture, but also example of the Primitive church is sufficient for them: as
where he says: Ar. 21.42.
If any thing be allowed without controversy on both sides, it did either
proceed from the Scripture of God, or from the Primitive Church, Ar. 48. Just.
Apol. 2.
or else it is a thing merely indifferent. And to this purpose he cites
Justinius Martyr, who declares plainly (he says) what order of service and
ministration of Sacraments our Church used before Papistrie prevailed. As
though the book or books of service were no more then these few lines in
Justinius. And yet also to see ye blindness of this man, so little as he
brings out of that Martyr, yet is there plain against his Communion book,
Water mingled with wine, But no one word against the Mass book, yea it is the
very su^me of the Mass, unless you be so foolish to think, that the Bishops
sermon, the Receiving of all present, the Carrying of it to them that be absent,
and the Rich men's offering, may not be omitted in any Mass, nor for any cause.
Now let us here against Ceremonies, Ar. 19.
your authorities of Scripture affirmatively. We detest and abhor all your
beggarly Ceremonies which you count holy and solemn observations. For we know,
that God is not to be worshipped with such things, but that the true
worshippers must worship him in spirit and verity. Ioa. 4. Then belike you
detest all Ceremonies and all outward things, those also of the Primitive
Church, yea and of the Scripture it self, which erewhile you allowed. You saw
this reply and therefore in another place you would moderate the matter,
saying: The service of God has small need of furniture, Ar. 51.
in outward things. For God being a spirit, is not worshipped with outward
Pomp, but with spiritual and inward reverence. And as for other furniture
that is necessary, was decreed to the Church by the Emperor Constantine and
his Successors: Notwithstanding the Church was in better case before such
furniture was granted, then since. Like one that will not hold his peace, and
yet cannot tell what to say. If Gods being a spirit admits some outward
furniture well enough, then have you missensed that text. The meaning is, that
outward things, without the inward man please not God: But for all that the
inward man may use outward gestures, outward words, and other outward things,
as Christ him self, his Apostles, and all the Church ever did. For so to do,
is to adore God who is a spirit, in spirit and truth. And touching the other
text that you allege not, but allude unto, those weak and beggarly eleme^tes
Gal. 4. are the Ceremonies of the old law, specially after the death of Christ
whom they shadowed, and much more the Galathians being Gentiles, to whom they
never parteyned: and you wrest it against the Ceremonies that are used in the
administration of the gracious Sacraments of Christ, and that by the order of
them that could say, Visum est spiritui sancto and nobis: Act. 15.
It has seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to us. Like as against the Lessons,
Responses, Versicles, and such other distinctions or varieties in the Service,
you allege Matthew. 15. Ar. 20.
In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrine the precepts of men.
Such is your ignorance in the Scripture, by reason of your malice. The
precepts of men, are those which be of men, and not of God: as those
traditions of the two late Elders, Hilleb and Sammai, being partly frivolous,
as those vain lotions, partly also contrary to Gods Commandments, as that
of Corban, Tit. 1.
whereupon S. Paul bids Titus to be earnest wi^h the Cretensians, that
they listen not to Judicial fables, and mandatis hominum, and to the precepts
of men that turn away from the truth: Whereupon the inventions also of
Luther, Calvin, and all other Heretics, are the precepts of men, and their
followers worship they know not what, Joan. 4. Pur. 21.
and if they be also zealous, it is without knowledge, Romans 10. But so are not
likewise the precepts of them, to whom our Savior said, He that hears you,
hears me, and he that despises you, Luc. 10.
despises me. And therefore S. Paul commanded them of Syria and Cilicia,
Act. 15.16.
to keep the precepts of the Apostles and Priests, that were decreed in the
Council of Jerusalem. S. Augustine likewise (here cap. 6. page 45.) embraces
the Ceremonies decreed in Councels of Bishops, and much more them that are
used throughout the whole Church. And you falsify the Council of Laodicia,
when you say, It decreed, Conc. Lao ca. 59.
that nothing should be song or read in the Church, but the Canonical books
of holy Scripture. No Sir, that did rather your friend Paulus Samosatenus, who
rejected the Psalms and Songs which to the honor of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Eus. li. 7. c. 24.
decantari solent, are wont to be song (says Eusebius) tanquam recentiores, as
being but lately made, and set out by men of late memory: Renewing the
Heresy of Artemon against the Godhead of Christ, the which a certain
Catholic does there confute long before ex Hymnis a fidelibus fratribus
antiquitus perscriptis concentu quodam, Eus. li. 5. c. 27.
By the Hymns made of old in meeter by faithful brethren. He makes mention
also of Eus. li. 7. ca. 19.
the Hymns of Nepos: Theodoretus and Zosomenus of Theo. lib. 4. ca. 24. Zoso.
l. 3. ca. 15.
the Hymns of S. Esrem in the feasts of Martyrs, and S. Augustine very often
of Aug. retr. li. 1. ca. 21. Confess l. 9. ca. 6.7.12.
the Hymns of S. Ambrose. The Council of Laod. does no more but forbid
priuatos and vulgares Psalmos, private and vulgar Psalms (made by simple men)
to be said in the Church, as the Con. Mil. ca. 12. Con. Cart. 3. ca. 23.
Mileuitane Council also commands, that no other prayers, or collectes, or
Masses, or prefaces, or commendations, or handlayings be said in the Church,
nisi quae a prudentioribus tractatae. But such as have been examined by some
more skillful, or allowed in the Synod, least it chance something to be made
against the faith, or by ignorance, or by negligence. Likewise touching
lessons, the Council of Laod, does no more but forbid the Apocryphal
Scriptures, libros non Canonicos, to be read, sed solos Canonicos veteris and
noui Testimenti, but the only Canonical books of the old and new Testament:
Con. Cart. 3. ca. 47. Ar. 20.
as also the.3. Council of Carthage decrees, that beside the Canonical
Scriptures, nothing be read in the Church under name of the divine Scriptures,
for which cause both Councelles does there declare, which books be Canonical,
and the Carthage Council adds also, that the Martyrs Passions may be read,
when their anniuersarie days be celebrated.

These examples declare manifestly, that you detest in our service even those
things, which were in the service of the Primitive Church, and all without
cause: and that it is an horrible blasphemy, where you say: If you demand,
whence your Ceremonies, Why then do you keep them now.
festival days, feasts, and varieties of Service did proceed? I answer
plainly, out of the bottomless pit of Hell.

For touching days also (which may be the last example) of Fasting, and
Feasting: you confess (cap. 3. page 13. and cap. 6. page 43.) that Aerius and
Iouinianus were condemned in the Primitive Church for Heretics, because they
denied the days and merits of Fasting, and the Scriptures that you object
against the Fathers, and us for it, I have answered cap. 8. page 140. to.143.
Ar. 20.
Likewise you confess, that Festival days were used in the Primitive Church:
adding, to show of what Church you be, that they might have been omitted,
without any hurt of Christian Religion well. But they were not kept in honor of
the Saints as they are of the Papists (for that is great Idolatry, as also to
build Churches in the honor of Saints, but only for the memory of the martyrs
and other Saints, that their good life might be followed. Whether for that
only, let S. Augustine be witness, where he says: The Christian people does
celebrate together the martyrs memories with religious solemnity, Aug. co^tra
Faust. l. 20. ca. 21.
Et ad exitandam imitatione^, et vt meritis eorum consocietur, atque
orationibus adiuuetur, Both to stir up imitatio^, and to be joined in
fellowship to their merits, and helped with their prayers. Was not this to
keep their memories in their honor also? As again it is manifest not only by
certain places alleged before, but also in the very words that you allege,
de ver. Relig. cap. 55. Ar. 20.54.
The saints must be honored for imitation, not adored for religion. Honoramus
eos charitate, non seruitute, We honor the blessed Angels with charity, not
with service. Does he not here expressly avouch their honoring? As for your
note, that Seruitus is the same that Dulia is, contrary to the Papists which
will worship them with service called Dulia or Seruitus, it is but your
vnacquayntance in S. Augustines writings. Read De Ciuit. Dei li. 10. ca. 1.
Seruitus. Latria.
Latriam quippe nostri, vbicunque sanctarum Scripturarum positum est,
interpretati sunt Seruitute^: For whersoeuer in the holy Scriptures in Greek
is put Latria, our Latins have translated it Seruitus. And so you may see,
that he uses Seruitus for Latria, not for Dulia, as also he uses Religio for
thresceia being synonymum to Latreia. But says he, speaking of cultus Deitati
debitus, the worship due to the Godhead, Propter quem vno verbo significandu^,
quoniam satis mihi idoneum non occurrit Latinum, Greco, etc. Because to
signify it in one word, I find no Latin word apt enough ( neither Religio nor
Seruitus, although in that book De vera Relig. he so used them, being yet but
a Lay man) I do, where it is necessary, utter my mind by the Greek word,
Latria.

Lo I have alleged here no more but as an answer. And yet I have made it
manifest, that notwithstanding all his objections, yea also by his own
confession, the Service of the Primitive Church was ours, and not the
Protestants: defending it also easily against his vain cauils. Ar. 38.40.49.
Neither shall he ever be able to show that any Church, Latin or Greek, Brytish
or other, had authentical service, but it was ours, as D. Allen told him
before.

Now as for the Language in which the Service is, Service in Latin.
that makes no difference in the Service it self. For praying for ye dead is
all one, whether it be in Latin or in English. Yet because he holds, that it
ought to be in the vulgar tongues, let us see what be his grounds thereof.

Ar. 49.40.
We can easily show it out of the Scripture, so he says, but no word that he
alleges any where. But bylike he means the place to the Corinthians, by
which his fellows do commonly reject the Latin Service, as if it were that
miraculous gift which the Apostle there calls, 1. Cor. 14.
Loqui linguis, to speak with tongues. Which also he does not reject, but
moderate, for the variety of certain much like to Pur. 7.
some Protestants that think all learning to be the tongues. Now if any
learned man, seeing it is not the service that S. Paul there speaks of,
think yet that one may argue thence at the least a simili: Let him consider,
first, that so the manner of the simple Catholics, who pray to them selves
privately in the Latin tongue which they understand not, is not condemned,
but justified. For, He that speaks in a tongue, speaks not to men, but (
yet) to God. And, he that speaks in a tongue, does also edify him self ( in
spirit, that is, in affect.) For if I pray in a tongue, my spirit ( or
affection) prays, though my understanding be without fruit. And therefore If
thou bless, or give thanks in spirit, thou do it well. But if there be no
Interpreter, let him be silent in the Church, and speak to him self and to
God. The difference is only this, that those Corinthians received immediately
of the holy Ghost, such prayers in such a tongue. And these Catholics now
receive the like prayers of the same holy Ghost, but by ye Church. Secondly,
that the Church in her public prayers does not speak in a tongue, because the
Latin tongue is not in England a strange tongue, so, as it were if one
should say Mass at Rome in the English tongue. And so the question is not now
the same, as was between the Apostle and the Corinthians: but, whereas the
Church would do all things for edification, (as S. Paul commands,) the
question is, whether this be obtained in the Public prayers of the whole
world, rather by the Latin tongue, that is to say, by the Common tongue, or
else by the several vulgar tongues, that is to say, by the Private tongues, To
which question, the Catholics, drawing all to common or unity, have one
answer: Heretics and Schismatikes, drawing from the Common, and scattering
into many Priuates, have an other. At Corinth the case was otherwise, both
because the tongues were utterly strange, and also because the prayers were
not Set and Solemn, in writing and custom, but momentaneous, suggested of the
Holy ghost to some one for the time, so that of them they were not understood,
there was no profit at all in their publication. And therefore they should not
publish them, but speak to them selves and to God. Read the learned Latin
book of F. Ledesima the Jesuit upon this matter. He shows at large and
substantially, that it is neither necessary, no nor expedient, the Public
Service to be in all vulgar tongues, howbeit the Popes holiness may (by the
Council of Trent) do therein with any Nation as he sees cause.

And Fulke can not nor does not deny, but that in the Primitive Church all the
Nations of the Latin Church had the service in Latin, neither can he, or does
he deny, but many of the same Nations had vulgar tongues of their own which
were not Latin, as the Punike tongue, the Dutch tongue, the Brytish tongue
etc. What does he then? He holds, that all the people (and yet once he dare
not but add, For the most part, which is enough against him) of the said
Nations, besides their vulgar tongues, spoke and understood Latin. And how
does he prove this absurd position? By the German or French Councelles of
Towers, Turon. 3. c. 17. Magunt. c. 25.45.43. Rhem. c. 15.
Magunce, and Rhemes, in the time of Carolus Magnus. Whereas one of his places
is so plain against him, that it says, as we do now also, if any man cannot
learn (so strange and hard was the Latin tongue unto them) his Creed and
Pater noster in Latin, Vel in sua lingua hoc discat, Let him learn it at the
least in his own tongue. One other takes order for Homilies to be translated
out of Latin into the Rusticall The French is yet in some place called, the
Roman.
Roman or Dutche tongue, plainly: quo facilius cuncti possint intelligere quae
dicuntur, that al may more easily understand that which is said. Whereof he
gathers, that all the Dutch men understood also the pure Latin tongue, though
hardly and not perfectly. He might gather as well, that all English men
understand the Latin tongue, and the pure Latin tongue, if the Bishops should
say as they may, Let Latin Homilies be translated into the English tongue
plainly, that all may more easily understand what is said. Another does
forbid the Priest to say Mass alone, because some body must answer to Dominus
vobiscum, and Sursum corda, etc. as also at this time, and therefore he
gathers properly forsooth, that the people commonly understood the Latin
Service. Ar. 41.49. Cap. 9.
Last of all he alleges the great Council of Laterane An. 1215. as though it
commanded the Bishops to translate the Service into English and other vulgar
tongues, whereas it does no more but command them (because at that time the
Latins were Lords of Constantinople, Antioch, Jerusalem, etc.) to provide
ministers according to the rites and languages in which the Service presently
was, as it is evident by the words of the Council. And otherwise I ask him,
why it provides but only for those Cities and Diocesses, in which people of
diverse languages be mingled together, and not for all in general? Besides,
that in no place any such translating of the service was put in execution.
Amongst those 1300. Prelates, was there not one but he was either so negligent,
or so desirous of the peoples blindness? And that neither among those of the^
which procured the making of that Canon? This is the stuff that they have
against Gods Church, or rather this is the execation and infatuation of them
that have forsaken Gods Church.

Motive 34.
23. Apish imitation.
The next Demand shows them to be but the Apes of the Catholic Church, in
so much as they retain of her Service and other orders: leaving it to the
consideration of the learned in the Scriptures and other writings, that false
Religion was always the Ape of true Religion, as in the rest that they have
rejected, they show them selves to be Apostataes, according to that I noted
here cap. 8. page 144. Wherein the Puritanes are offended with their brethren
the Protestants, only because they will not proceed so far in this
Apostasy, as they and their master Antichrist who comes to meet them as it
were half way, would have them. Pur. 379.
And that is it which Fulke says to D. Allen: The civil Magistrates have
thought good in some outward ceremony or usage, to bear with the infirmity
of the weaker sort of your side, Fulke is no Puritant.
in hope to win them. Where he says further: All your doctrine is abolished,
and nothing left but a few rags of your robes to look upon. And therefore I
accord with you, that in deed they be infirm, or rather down and dead
already, that will be won from Gods Church to such companions by so babish
means. Whether that were the civil Magistrates meaning or no, I seek not, but
his meaning who mystically works in you, was and is, as I have said,
Apostasy. And therefore again, where you say: I will urge the Papists to tell
me, Pur. 295.
what we say or do in the celebration of the Communion, which Christ commanded
us not to say and do, or what Christ did or commanded us to do, which we do
not therein. I say that you be answered already, that whatsoever is therein
against the holy Mass, (of which we urge you in like sort) is against Christ's
commandment, who said expressly to his Apostles and their Successors, being
the orderers of the same: He that despises you, despises me. Luc. 10.
Insomuch that S. Augustine talking of such matters, condemns you (here cap.
6. page 45.) of most insolent madness, only for calling in question the Mass
or any part thereof that is universally received. Of which matter, and of your
said Apostasy, this Demand following gives further occasion.

24. Priesthood and Sacrifice. Mot. 21.38. Article. 13. Heb. 7.

In the 24. Demand, being of the Priesthood and Sacrifice, I touch your
Apostasy at the very root. For S. Paul says, The Priesthood being
translated (from Aaron and them of his order, to Melchisedec or Christ and them
of his order,) it is necessary that translation of the Law also be made. That
your Heresy of Caluinisme is not a mere Heresy, that is, a corruption of
Christianity in one or two points, but a mutation of the whole new Law almost
of Christ, it comes of this (I say) that you have made a mutation of the new
Priesthood. And that you have changed the new Priesthood, or Priesthood of the
New Testament, I show, because you have changed our Catholic Priesthood. For
this Priesthood wherein we serve, came to us from no other, but from Christ and
his Apostles. The Priesthood that they delivered, our forefathers and we have
to this day kept the same unchanged. To be perspicuous, I come to particulares.

First, the very Apostolic names, Episcopus and Presbyter, Note.
that is, Bishop and priest, we never went about to change them, you have
labored to change them into these, Superintendent and Elder. Whereupon it
follows that you have changed the Apostolic order, as it follows, ye
Apostles to have changed the Aaronicall order, because they changed the
former names, Pontifex and Sacerdos, for which we have no English. I touched
this here before in the.6. Them. page 231. and you have no where answered it. but
I find where you have helped it. For whereas the Fathers keeping those new
names, Isa. 66. s. 21.
yet (according to ye Prophecy of Esaias) used evermore also ye former names,
considering that ye new order no less then ye old, is a true species of that
genus, Sacerdotiu^: and whereas we accordingly do in translating put the English
word Priest not only for Presbyter, Pur. 283.
but also for Sacerdos: you sir translating a passage of S. Cyprians, do put
the Priests twice, where he puts Sacerdotes, but where he puts
Presbyterum, you shun the word Priest, which is the very same, and put your
new invented word, an Elder.

Secondly, you help another argument of ours, where you say: I would desire
none other place in all the scripture, Ar. 29. Pur. 297.
to overthrow the Popish Hierarchy (which is the gretest glory of their
Church) then this place of Paul Ephesians. 4. He speaks of Apostles, Evangelists,
Prophets, Pastors and Teachers. But where are Popish Bishops, Priests,
Deacons, Subdeacons, Exorcistes, Cantors (or Lectors) Acolytes, Ostiares? By
this you declare that you have changed the order, Hierarchy, or Priesthood of
the Primitive church, wherein, as it is infinitely Eus. li. 6. ca. 34.
witnessed, and you cannot deny, but the same degrees were, which here you
call Popish. And does not S. Paul him self in other places make express
mention of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons? And so you might as well by your wise
reason out of Ephe. 4. overthrow S. Paul's Hierarchies. Who also in the names
of Deacons. 1. Tim. 3. includes subdeacons and ye other inferiors, as in the
name of Priests. Tit. 1. he includes likewise Deacons themselves. And the
like is common in ye ancient Fathers, who yet because Deacons or Ministers is
a distinct order, Sup. p. 251.
do like better to call all under Priests by the name of Levites, Pur. 383.
because that was the general term in ye old Law, of all the varieties of
them that were not Sacerdotes, and to call all totogether Clerum the Clergy,
or in Clericos, or in Clericali ministerio constitutos, ^yp. ep. 66
or ad ordinatione clericale^ promotos. Al which terms S. Cypria^ has in one
Epistle, with ye names of Episcopus and Presbyter, and Sacerdos common to them
both. And it is but your ignorance, to think yt S. Paul should have named
them Ephesians. 4. considering that he speaks there only, of the ministry of the
word, only of preachers, vt iam non circumferamur, etc. that we be not now
carried about with every wind of doctrine, whereas these other are belonging to
the ministry of the Altar. Which are two distinct offices, as you may see
Act. 13. where some preachers had not orders as yet, and 1. Tim. 5. where some
good Priests do not labor in the word and doctrine.

Thirdly, the Apostles Bishops and Priests were made by other Bishops and
Priests, as also with us it continues to this day. But yours be only of Lay
men's making, as of Kings and other Civil Magistrates. I pass over the
difference of living Single and Marrying, as a thing extrinsical, and touched
before in the.21. Them. Page 250.


Fourthly, your selves confess our orders to be good enough, in that having
been ordered by us, you seek not to be reordered, as Cranmer, Parker,
Grindall, Sands, Horn, etc. whereas we (as you know) account your Orders for
no orders. Ar. 50.51.
To this you say: You are highly deceived, if you think we esteem your
offices of Bishops, Priests, Deacons, any better then the state of Lay men. For
we receive none of the^ to minister in our church, except they forswear your
religion, and so their admission is a new calling to the ministry. How true
it is that you receive none otherwise, I pass yt over. But sir, A new way to
give Orders.
we also make your ministers to abjure, and yet after yt, they be but lay men
still. And I would ask you, if two Catholics abjure with you, one a lay man, ye
other a Priest, are they both Priests ipso facto? O your divinity, O your
scripture As for the Sacraments of Baptism and Matrimony, we do not iterate
them after you (though we supply the Ceremonies) because a Bishop or a Priest
is not the necessary and sole minister of them, as he is of the Sacraments of
orders and of our Lords Body. Which is a sounder cause, then yours of
reteining the form of words, and for as much as the Sacraments take not
their effect of the minister, but of God. For herevppon you allow (you say)
our Baptism. If that be enough, what needs Abiuring? Yea belyke with you it
is the Sacrament of our Lords Body, if a lay man, or wooman also, reteyne the
words, for as much as the Sacraments take their effect of God. What is this
but to deny the Priesthood, and so to run hedlong to Apostasy. As that also,
where to defend Pilkinton not to be a mock Bishop, Pur. 343.428. Ar. 72.
you bring no more but his excellent learning, and diligent preaching: Inueying
against our Catholic Bishops, as unlearned or unpreaching, and therefore no
Bishops. Whereas in deed we that knew both sides by experience, can truly
testify that in Catholic Countries, where your Desolation could not yet
remove the Orders of seculare and religious Preachers, there is more preaching
(to say nothing of the stuff) in so many Churches for so many, in one year
then with you in ten, and namely to declare the effect of the Sacraments
(according to the Council of Trent, Sess. 8. c. 7.
which in another place you cite) to such as receive the^.

Fifthly, arguments need not you say plainly, The spiritual Priesthood is
common to al Christian men and women, Pur. 450.451.299.
1. Pet. 1. (as true it is) and against all other Priesthood of any Christian
men, you say in the same place: There is no Priesthood to offer sacrifice
propitiatory, but only the Priesthood of Christ according, to the order of
Melchisedech. Heb. 7. By and by after making us as in a great absurdity, to
say: Christ is not only our high Priest according to the order of
Melchisedech, For every hedge Priest is of the same order. Why you call the^
hedge Priests look you. But this cannot be denied, that in the Scriptures and
in the Primitive Church certain Christian men were Priests otherwise then Lay
men and women, as the Apostles, S. Timothy, S. Hierome, S. Cyprian, etc. And
therefore then there was some other Priesthood besides the spiritual
Priesthood which is common to all. And therefore again you have taken away the
Priesthood, by your own confession.

Sixthly and lastly if to salve this deadly sore, you will invent some third
kind of Priesthood: I say that the primitive or fathers Priesthood was
according to the order of Melchisedech, and to offer a sacrifice in bread and
wine, The sacrifice of the Mass.
as Melchisedech and Christ did. And therefore you be against ye Priesthood,
because you be against this Priesthood, arguing and railing at it all that you
can. But we Christians to whom this Priesthood is plainly descended from the
Apostles and Fathers, none of you all being able to show any later origin of
it, regard not your arguments, they be but objections. And yet to defend the
truth more fully, for our Fathers and not only for our selves, we solue them
every one.

But first, that the Reader may see whose adversary you be herein, he shall
hear S. Augustine. The Manichee had falsified S. Paul, making him to say, qui
sacrificant, Au. co^. Ad uer. leg. and prophet. li. 1. c. 19.20. 1. Cor. 10.
daemonijs sacrificant, They which sacrifice, do sacrifice to devils: quasi
omnes qui sacrificant, non sacrificent nisi daemonibus, as if all that
sacrifice, do not sacrifice but to devils. He therefore shows the Apostle not
to say, qui sacrificant, they which sacrifice, but quae sacrificant, the things
that they sacrifice, speaking of the Idolatrers. They do sacrifice to the
devils, and you therefore are communicantes with the devils, if you eat of
those sacrifices: even as Israel secundum carnem, the Judicial people, eating
of their sacrifices, was thereby partaker of the Altar in their Temple. Deinde
secutus adiunxit, ad quod sacrificium iam debeant pertinere, Then he follows
and adds, to what sacrifice the Corinthians now must pertain, being
Christians and Israel secundum spiritum, saying: The Chalice of blessing which
we do bless, is it not the Communication of the blood of Christ? The bread
which we break, is it not the participation of the body of our Lord? vt
intelligerent ita se iam socios esse Corporis Christi, quemadmodum illi socij
sunt altaris. That they might understand, themselves now to be Communica^tes of
the body of Christ, so, as the Jews are Communicantes of their Altar. And then
a few lines after: The Church, from the Apostles time, by most certain
Successions of Bishops, to our time and hereafter does continue, et immolat Deo
in corpore Christi sacrificium laudis, and does sacrifice to God in Christ's
Body, a sacrifice of praise. Psalm. 49.
For this Church is Israel after the spirit, from whom is distinguished that
Israel after the flesh, who served in the shadows of sacrifices, by which was
signified the singular Sacrifice which now Israel secundum spiritum does offer.
Iste immolat Deo sacrificium laudis, etc. Psalm. 109.
This Israel does sacrifice to God a sacrifice of praise, not after the order
of Aaron but after the order of Melchisedech. Nouerunt qui legunt, etc. Gene.
14.
The Readers know, what Melchisedech did bring forth when he did bless
Abraham. And now they be partakers thereof, they see such a sacrifice now to be
offered to God over all the world. Mala. 1.
Et quod Deum non paenitebit, etc. And where the Psalm says, God will not
repent him, it is a signification, that he will not change this Priesthood,
for he changed the Priesthood after the order of Aaron. And not only S.
Augustine, but the whole rank of the holy Fathers does teach the same, such a
Priesthood to be and to continue in the Church, to offer such a sacrifice in
the form of bread and wine, tearming it after the order of Melchisedech, Pur.
295.
in so much that you also confess, and say: Those of the old Writers which
compare the celebration of the Lords Supper with Melchisedeches bread and
wine, which, you say, they call sometime the Sacrifice of bread and wine,
noting that as though it made against Transubstantiation, (which vain
collection I have refuted here cap. 8. page 148.) and also adding further, And
yet but a sacrifice of thanksgiving. Whether but for thanksgiving, and not
also for procuring mercy, I have here at large examined cap. 9. page 196. to
204. But that is nothing to the matter which we have now in hand. For a
Sacrifice of thanksgiving, is, and in the old Law was a Sacrifice, no less
properly then a Sacrifice of propitiation. And the Sacrifice of the Cross was
both, I trow: and therefore the Sacrifice of the Altar to be the one, what does
that let but it may be the other also? Likewise a memorial Sacrifice of
Christ's passion, no less then a prefiguratiue Sacrifice, is a true sacrifice,
though it be not called his very passion, but by a similitude. And therefore all that you allege out of Augustine, Pur. 292.316.320.
Chrysostom, Cyprian, Irenee, Iustine, Ambrose, although they said all as you
would have them, that this is a memory of Christ's passion, and not his
passion but only in a mystery, is all nothing to the purpose.

Pur. 292.294.320.321.326.
And therefore you have yet a better answer in store: We confess (you say)
that of the old Writers it is commonly called a Sacrifice, but improperly. And
how do you show that? Because Ambr. ad virg. lapsa^. De virg. l. 1. orat. in
fr. Satyr.
one of them says of a virgin that to her death is unspotted, that her
Parents might count her Hostiam viuam, a living Sacrifice, propitiatricem
suorum videlicet delictorum, a Propitiatrix or procurer of mercy for their
sins, by making intercession for them to God in heaven. You might as well
argue, that S. Paul in saying, Christ's body by death to be made a Sacrifice,
Heb. 10. speaks improperly, because he also says, our bodies by
mortification to be made a living Sacrifice, Romans 12. To know what is properly
or improperly called this or that, you should see to the natures of the things
in them selves. And then seeing in Christ's death, open separation of his body
from his blood, and in Consecration mystical separation of them (because the
words do work that which they signify) you should say, in both those Christ's
body to be properly a Sacrifice (as I told you likewise before cap. 6. page
47.) but in perpetual virginity, and other mortification, because there is no
such separation of our substantial parts, but only of our affections from us,
they be called Sacrifices not properly, but only by a metaphore and similitude.

Well then, what objections have you now against this Priesthood and Sacrifice
of the Fathers and ours? Either that it is none at all: or that it is not a
Sacrifice in Christ's body, as S. Augustine said?

First, Out of doubt, Pur. 294.295.
if the bringing forth of bread and wine had been any thing parteining to the
Priesthood of Melchisedech, the Apostle, Heb. 7. would not have omitted to have
compared it with Christ. But the Apostle comparing Melchisedech with Christ in
all things in which he was comparable, never teaches it as any part of his
Priesthood. If it were no part of his Priesthood, what was it then? It is
plain by the text that Melchisedech being both a king and a Priest, as a king
liberally enterteined Abraham and his army, and as a Priest blessed him. The
text in our vulgar Latin translation is this: Proferens panem and vinum, erat
enim Sacerdos Dei Altissimi. In your vulgar English translation, this: He
brought forth bread and wine. For he was the Priest of the most highest God.
And in ye Hebrew, the poynting declares that also the Rabbis themselves take
it in the same sort, as also the very words do signify, specially standing in
such order. And all our Fathers do agree. Cyp. ep. 63.
S. Cyprian shall suffice for all, who declares the order of Melchisedech, De
sacrificio illo venire, to come of that Sacrifice, not of every Sacrifice, but
of that Sacrifice. And more distinctly, to descend of these three things:
quod Melchisedech Sacerdos Dei summi fuit, that he was (not a common Priest,
but) the Priest of the highest God, as S. John Baptists preeminence among al ye
Prophets is signified by this word, Propheta altissimi, the prophet of the
highest. Luc. 1.
quod pane^ and vinu^ obtulit, (having said before protulit, which two you
think cannot stand together) that he offered (not as other Priests, but) bread
and wine. Quod Abraham benedixit, that he blessed) not every body, but)
Abraham, the father of all the faithful of Christ. And in deed who is so
blind not to see the corresspondence in Christ, but you only that are not
Abraham's children? We Catholics, his children in faith, and soldiers in
confession of the same, do see plainly before our eyes, our true Melchisedech,
as first by him self at his last Supper, so still by his ministers to bring
forth bread and wine, and thereof, as our High Priest to offer for us this most
acceptable Sacrifice, and as our king of kings (who with so few loaves fed many
thousands) to prepare for us this most Royal feast which we can never enough
admire: Mat. 14. and 15.
so singularly by this, blessing both God and us, that the sacrifice and feast
it self is named Benedictio, and Eucharistia, Blessing, and Thanksgiving.
Which S. Cyprian does there prosecute very sweetly, saying: For who is more
the Priest of the highest God, then our Lord Jesus Christ? who offered
Sacrifice to God the Father, and offered the same ( against those Aquarij, who
offered water in the Chalice, and not wine) which Melchisedeth had offered,
that is, bread and wine, suum corpus and sanguinem, his own body perdie and
blood. Also that blessing going before about Abraham, ad nostrum populum
pertinebat, belonged to our people, says he as a Bishop and minister of the
true Melchisedech. To The end of bringing forth was to bless, as also S.
Augustine said above.
the end therefore that in Genesis the blessing about Abraham might by
Melchisedech the Priest be duly celebrated, there goes before an Image of
Christ's sacrifice, an image I say, consisting in bread and wine, etc. Where is
now your argument ab authoritate Heb. 7. negative, with your out of doubt,
contrary to your own Logike here cap. 8. page 134.

For besides all this, I ask you, whether Melchisedeth were a Priest without
all sacrifice at all? If you say, yea, your Divinity is contrary to Heb. 8. For
every high Priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices. Note.
Wherefore it is necessary, and hunc habere aliquid quod offerat, this (Priest)
also to have somewhat to offer. If you say, he had some sacrifice, tell us, I
pray you, how he was comparable to Christ in his Priesthood, unless he were
also in his Sacrifice, considering that his Priesthood consisted in his
Sacrifice? And so you see that he was comparable to Christ in some thing, to
wit, in his Sacrifice, (supposing also that it was not the sacrifice of bread
and wine) in which the Apostle compares them not. What a blindness is this in
you, not to see Melchisedech in his bread and wine, so expressly mentioned, to
be comparable unto Christ, whereas by the Apostle also the very omitting of his
father and mother and genealogy is in Genesis a shadowing of Christ? seeing
also bread and wine so notably used in the world by the institution of Christ.
Such is either your ignorance in the Scriptures, or also peruersenes against
your own knowledge.

Your second argument may be, where you take on like Caiphas, Mat. 26. and say,
it is a blasphemy, Pur. 298.299.
etc. for the Fathers and us to say that we have the Priesthood after the order
of Melchisedech, confirmed unto us by oath, Psalm. 109. For then (you say) we
must be Christ him self, with his eternal divinity and everlasting
nativity, and sitting on the right hand. Why sir, does not the Scripture
likewise say, that there is one Baptizer, Joan. 1. Mat. 3.
Hic est qui baptisat, and he such a one as upon whom the holy Ghost comes
and abides, and to whom the Father says, This is my natural son? Must we
then be said to blaspheme, What a doctor Fulke is
and take all that to our selves, if we say that we are baptizers? You are a
great Doctor forsooth, so to argue. No sir, we are baptizers and priests, Aug.
de ci. li. 17. c. 17.
but as his ministers (we offer Sub Sacerdote Christo quod protulit
Melchisedech, Under Christ the Priest, says S. Augustine:) and therefore he
singulerly is the one baptizer, and the one priest. So were not all the rest in
the time of the old Testament, the ministers of Aaron: but Aaron him self was
Priest only in his own time, and after him every one in his time was priest
as well as he: and therefore in that law were many Priests. So that the old
Testament was like to England since the Conquest, having successively many
kings. But ye new Testament is like to England during the time of one king: who
being but one, yet has many ministers, as one might say, so many ministerial
kings.

Your third argument: The Apostle to the Hebrews teaches us, cap. 10. Pur.
289.201.45.451.
that Christ offering but one sacrifice for our sins (and that but once, cap.
9.) has made perfect for ever those that are sanctified: that our sins are
taken away by that Sacrifice, and therefore there is no more sacrifice for
sins left. Do you understand ye words that you allege? Do you know what he
means by those that are sanctified? by their making perfect? by Sacrifice for
sin? Verily you do not, as by and by it will appear. The scope of that
Epistle is to exhort the Hebrews, that is, the Christian Jews (who were sore
assaulted of the other Jews, partly with objections, partlye with
persecutions) to persevere in the faith of Christ. He does therefore tell them,
that in the old Testament there was not Remission of sins, but continual
commemoration of them, Heb. 10. But now that Christ has offered him self upon
the Cross, Vna oblatione co^summauit in sempiternum, by that one oblatio^ he
has made perfect for ever, sanctificatos, the sanctified, Heb. 10. that is (1.
Cor. 6) the baptized. So that of their former sins there is now no more
remembrance, Iere. 21^ and therefore no more any offering for the same, Heb. 10.
but if they dye, they go straight to heaven. So mightily and so graciously does
that one oblation work in baptism. But what if after baptism they sin
again? For that S. Paul there does not (at the least, The true meaning of the
Epistle to the Heb.
directely) tell any remedy, because his purpose there was no more but to
exhort the standing to perseverance: and therefore he does rather terrify
them saying, If they fall again, Iam non relinquitur pro peccatis hostia, now
is not least Sacrifice for sins, that is to say, Christ's death will not
work with them in another baptism. This he tells them: but remedy he does
tell them none. But we by his other Epistles, and by the other Scriptures, and
by Tradition of the Church, do tell such also against the Nouations, that the
same one oblation of Christ has prepared for them also a remedy, though not
another baptism, yet the Sacrament of Penance. We magnify it yet moreover,
and say, that it has also prepared many other Sacraments besides these, to
other singular effects, and in one of these Sacraments, a Sacrifice also, in
which it works to sundry purposes. By this appears (I say) your ignorance
in things which yet you fear not to affirm, as that the Catholics should
say, Christ has not made them that are sanctified, Pur. 451.
perfect by a Sacrifice once offered for all: for the greatest part is left
to the Mass. As though when one comes to us to be baptized, we divided the
remission of his sins between Baptism and the Mass. This is your
blindness, to think that to be against the honor of this one Priest, and of
his one Sacrifice, which is highly for it, to wit, to have under him many
ministers, and many ministeries as it were co^duites, to derive his purchase
and redemption to his people. If we ascribed ought to any man, or to any thing,
but from that Priest, and from that Sacrifice, then you might well exclayme
against us. And we in the mean time worthily exclaim against you, for
Apostating from the ministerial Priesthood, the mystical sacrifice, and
gracious Sacraments, which he by his death purchased and left to his Spouse the
Church our mother for our salvation, and she has kept them to this day, and
deinceps, and will keep them (as S. Augustine said) hereafter even to the
end, at what time your vile tongue shall reap as now it sows.

Now after your Scriptures let us hear your Doctors against this Sacrifice, to
prove that there is none such, or at the least not consisting in Christ's body.
Pur. 316.292.
That Augustine by this Sacrifice means not the body of Christ, is manifest
in his book De fide ad Petrum Diac. cap. 19. Because there he calls it
Sacrificium panis and vini, the Sacrifice of bread and wine. The same writes
(being Fulgentius, and not Augustine) in the very like place (as you may see
here cap. 6. page 63. and calls it Sacrificium Corporis and Sanguinis
Christi, The Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ. By the first name, for
the matter: by the second, for the host. But he says further (you obiecte)
that In isto Sacrificio gratiarum actio atque commemoratio est carnis Christi
quam pro nobis obtulit, and sanguinis quem pro nobis effudit: In this sacrifice
is Thankesgiuinge, and commemoration of the flesh of Christ which he offered
for us upon the Cross, and of his blood which he shed for us. But what a
commemoration? In illis Sacrificijs, quid nobis esset donandum, figurate
significabatur: In hoc autem Sacrificio, quid nobis iam donatum sit, euidenter
ostenditur: In the Sacrifices of the old Testament, was figuratively signified
what should be given us. But in this Sacrifice is ( not figuratively signified,
but) evidently showed, what is already given us. In them praenunciabatur
occidendus, He was prenounced to be killed for us: in this annunciatur occisus,
he is announced already killed. In such manner as in Rome the martyrdoms of S.
Peter and Paul are, upon their feast co^memorated, evidently showed, and
announced by their very bodies and heads then seen and visited. For which cause
the Relikes of Martyrs be often in Aug. de ci. li. 22. ca. 8.
antiquity called The memories of the Martyrs. And yet no Martyrs Relikes or
body does so express the very species of his martyrdom, as the mystical
separation of Christ's body and blood in this divine Sacrament does express
the species of his passion.

Ar. 55.
But you have one wonderful place of S. Augustines. For if it were well wayed,
it will (you say) interpret and answer all places of the ancient Doctors,
where mention is made of sacrificing the body of Christ at the time of the
Communion. In that place go first the words which I put here in the 22. Them.
page that he calls it the one singular sacrifice of the Christians. Then
follow afterward the words that you mean: Ipsum vero sacrificium corpus est
Christi, And that same ( one singular) Sacrifice is the body of Christ, quod
non offertur ipsis, quia hoc sunt and ipsi: Which ( body) is not offered to the
Martyrs, for this be they also. This, to wit, the body of Christ. Hereof you
gather, that the body of Christ, which he says was the Sacrifice that was
offered, was not the natural body of Christ, but his mystical body: because
he says, the Martyrs and it were all one. He says not so, not that they are
all one or the same: but that they are of the mystical body of Christ, which
whole mystical body is offered there to God in the offering of his natural
body, (for there are special memories of every sort, of the Saints in heaven,
of the Souls in Purgatory, of the Catholics in earth. The bread and wine also,
in which his said natural body and blood are consecrated, are such things, Au
tract. 26. in Joan.
Quae in vnum rediguntur ex multis, as of many corns and grapes are brought
into one loaf and cup: Water also, Cyp. epi. 63.
to signify us again, being mingled with the wine: Hereupon he says in the
same Aug. ciu. li. 10. c. 6.20
work, that in the Sacrament of the Altar it is showed to the Church, that in
the oblation which she does offer, her self is offered. And that as well she by
him, as he by her is usually offered.) And therefore it can not be thought that
this natural body there offered, is offered to the Martyrs (or to the Church)
as the Paganes and Manichees did charge the Christian Catholics, upon their
offering of that natural body over the shrines of Martyrs. You might therefore
have gathered as well, that the Body which he offered upon the Cross, was not
his natural body, but his mystical body the Church, because in offering it
there for his Church, he offered his Church to God with it. Read De Ciu. li.
10. ca. 6. and there you shall see that he shows, how the works of mercy
are a sacrifice, item a person consecrated to God. Item, our body, Item our
soul, Item tota ipsa redempta Ciuitas, hoc est, congregatio societasque
sanctorum, the whole redeemed City it self, that is, the congregation and
society of the holy, which he calls universal sacrificium, An universal
Sacrifice. And that after all these metaphorical Sacrifices, he distinguishes
from them all, not only the Sacrifice of the Cross, but also the Sacrifice of
the Altar, which you confound with that universal Sacrifice, not considering
that he so often calls it the one and the singular Sacrifice of the
Christians.

Besides these, Pur. 361.293.
you have two places out of Tertullian and Ireneus. The former shows (you
say) what was the chiefest Sacrifice that they did offer, to wit, Prayer. The
other likewise shows, that by the name of the Sacrifice of the Church, he
means not the Sacrifice of the Mass (which they call propitiatory for the
sins of the quick and the dead) but the Sacrifice of thankesgeuing and
prayers. Tertul. in Apol.
Tertullian tells there the Gentiles in defense of the Christians, first,
what things they prayed for in the Canon of the Mass, to wit, for their
Roman Empire among other things (the place goes here before cap. 9. page
197.) Then, why not to their Gods: Haec ab alio orare no^ possum qua^, etc.
These things I cannot pray for, of any other, but of whom I know that I
shall obtain them, quoniam et ipse est qui solus praestat etc. For both he it
is who only does give them, and I am he to whom is due to obtain, being his
servant, which worship him only. Then also, why not with their blood
Sacrifices of fat calves etc. qui ei offero opimam et maiorem hostiam, quam
ipse mandauit, orationem de carne pudica, de anima innocente, de spiritu sancto
profatam, which offer to him a fat and greater host, that which he himself
commanded, to wit, prayer pronounced out of a chaste body, out of an innocent
soul, out of an holy spirit. Where in the name of that Prayer he
comprehends all that is said and done in the Mass of the faithful, which
to this day also the Priest therefore begins, saying unto us after the
Gospel, Dominus vobiscum: Oremus, Let us pray, and immediately goes to the
bread and wine, Hier. epist. ad Euagriu^.
etc. Because this pure Sacrifice is made and celebrated with Prayer ( ad
Presbyterorum preces Christi corpus sanguisque conficitur, Christ's body and
blood is made by the Priests prayers, says S. Hierome,) and because even the
old house of those Leuiticall blood Sacrifices also was called, Mat. 21. Isa.
56.
Domus orationis, The house of prayer.

And as Tertullian sets out against the impure Paganes, the purity of the
Church in her Sacrifice, so does S. Irenee set out the same against the Jews
and Heretics, Iren. li. 4. cap. 34. Mala. 1.
to show, that the pure Sacrifice in Malachie is offered by her alone, quoniam
cum simplicitate Ecclesia offert, Because the Church offreth with simplicity
of faith, hope, and charity, whereas the Jews hands are now full of blood,
and all the Synagogues of those old Heretics held the bread and wine to be
of an ill creation. For this cause he tells them, that the conscience of him
that does offer being pure, does sanctify the Sacrifice, and causes God to
accept it as coming from a friend. And that the Sacrifices do not sanctify a
man, Non enim indiget Sacrificio Deus, for God does not need a Sacrifice, so
as need should make him glad of it, as it makes a beggar glad, whether the
giver be a friend or a foe. And do not we say the same? Can any Heretic plead
as upon our verdite, that he pleases God in offering to him bread or wine, yea
or also the body it self and blood of Christ, so as all Priests do in their
Caluinicall Communion, no less then we do in the Mass? And yet the Sacrifice
of it self is such, as pleases God, and sanctifies the offerer, but for his
own indisposition. Like as Baptism of it self would cleanse the conscience,
Heb. 9.10.
though oftentimes it does not for fault in the receivers of it. For it is not
the worthiness of men, but the worthiness of Christ, whereof the own and proper
virtue of his Sacraments, and of his Sacrifice both of the Altar and of the
Cross, depends.

Motive 35.
25. Monks.
My 25. Demand notes, that these Heretics have cut off from the Church,
her best and perfectest member, to wit, Monks and Nuns, who were so common
in the Primitive Church, that to bring all to the fashion of the Primitive
Church, as they pretend, they should have made all to be Monks, rather then
none to be Monks. And Fulke does nothing here, but help our side, in that he
Ar. 29.85. Pur. 87.297.250. Hic cap. 9.
often rejects Monks, Heremites, Anachorites, Canons, Friars, Nuns,
granting them no place in the Church of Christ, partly by an argument ab
authoritate Ephesians. 4. negative, which I answered here in the 24. Demand,
treating of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, whom he likewise rejected
thereby: partly by a saying of S. Chrysostomes, which I returned clean against
him, cap. 9. page 193. And yet confesses, the first Colleges of Monks in
solitary places to have been of the Church of God, Ar. 52.
and namely them at Bangor in Wales. Saying further, that they were as occasion
served, taken to serve in the Church, as appears by Chrysostom in his book
De Sacerdotio, of Basilius, who was a Monk with him. Among the infinite
vtilities that come to the Church by the Religious, that is one to this day,
that the Church has out of them most excellent Pastors, as of late that worthy
Pope Pius quintus, who was a Dominicane, besides infinite more at all times, as
then S. Basil and S. Chrysostom. Of this utility, and of all the rest your
Heresy has spoiled the Church of God, in suppressing the Monasteries. As for
that you say, they were nothing else but Colleges of Students, any that is
skillful in antiquity can tell, that the number rather were no students at
all, and that their profession was then even as it is now. Witness S.
Augustine, telling of an evil Monk in his own Monastery, Au. de bono
perseue. ca. 25.
and saying: Vsque adeo profecit in malum, vt deserta Monasterij societate,
fieret 2. Pet. 2.
canis reuersus ad suum vomitum. He did so much proceed in evil, that
forsaking the fellowship of our Monastery, he became a dog that turns back
to his vomit. Of others also in another place, that enter into Religion, and
finding there some evil brethren, after their Vow go forth again through
impacience. Of such a one he says: Aug. in Ps. 99.
Paucorum hominum molestia irritatos du^ non perseuerauit implere quod vouit,
fit desertor tam sancti propositi, and reus voti non redditi. Being incensed
with the vexation of a few persons, whilst he does not continue to fulfill
that he vowed, he becomes a forsaker of so holy a profession, and guyltie of
not performing his vow. In Colleges of students they are not Votaries, I trow,
nor Apostataes when they give over. And therefore it is more wisdom for you to
stick to your old set song, Pur. 297.
that they have no testimony out of the word of God either of their names, or
of the signification of their names: as your friends the Donatistes said long
ago to our Catholic Fathers: Aug. in Ps. 132. Con. Petil. li. 3. ca. 40. Hier.
co^tra Vigil. Chrysostom. adu. vitup. vitae Monasticae
Ostendite vbi scriptu^ sit nomen Monachorum, Show us in what place of the
Scripture is the name of Monks. But it is well, that the Donatistes,
Vigilantius, and such like companio^s were the dispraysers of Monks and their
profession: And S. Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom, S. Paulinus, with
such like, were their defenders, yea and them selves Monks also. Of whom also
you may learn, in what Scriptures are found both their poverty, continency,
obedience, and also the vowing of the same. So wisely you have made your match.

Motive 14.
26. Fathers.
The 26. Demand notes, that none but Heretics refuse to be tried by the
Fathers, in such manner as I declared ca. 6. pa. 58. to wit, by their consent.
And that Fulke refuses to be so tried (though he confess them to have been of
the true Church, cap. 2. page 4.) I have showed out of his own words, cap. 7.
page 89. to 92. For the which he has two pretenses: the one, in charging the
Fathers with sundry errors, partly denied, partly confessed of us to be errors.
Which both sorts I have answered cap. 6. page 39. to 43. The other in holding,
that Only Scripture is of authority: for which point notwithstanding, I have
showed that he has neither Scripture to avouch it, cap. 8. page 109. to 116
nor Father. cap. 9. page 171. to 183.

We on the other side, as the Catholics always, are content to stand to ye
judgment of the Fathers: which is for us so plainly, that Fulke does confess
it in many points, here cap. 3. and is feign to refuse it, as I now said. And
for the Protestants in no point, no not so much as the judgment of any one
Father at all, as I have showed cap. 9. in answering all that he alleges out
of them against us. Or if any few testimonies be missing there, it is because
in some other Chapters they are answered more conveniently.

27 Councels. Motive 13.

The next Demand is of Councels confirmed by the Sea Apostolic, which (as I
have said here cap. 6. pa. 60.) can not err. And therefore none but Heretics
do obstinately resist such Councels. But Fulke here, to save him self,
charge such Councels with errors, those also which him self confesses to
have bin of the true Church, as the third of Carthage (for which I have
answered cap. 6. page 62.) and not only those that are without his compass of
the first 600. years, though for them also I have answered in the same chapter
page 63. to 78. Where I showed, that the Council of Basil was not so
confirmed as he pretends: and therefore it might err well enough in deposing
Eugenius quartus, Ar. 91.
howbeit also that is not such an error as he should bring us, to wit, an error
of doctrine. For who doubts, but also the Pope himself may err in deposing
a bishop, or a king? Who doubts also but a General Council may use that
prayer when it ends: Precamur vt ignorantiae parcas, and errori indulgeas:
Ar. 90.
We pray thee to spare our ignorance, and to pardon our error, fearing in their
conscience, least either ignorance has drawn them into error, or perhaps
rashness of will has driven them to decline from justice? As both every general
Council, and the universal Church uses this prayer, Forgive us our
trespasses. Of which also you would no less infer that the universal Church
may err. But you have the answer cap. 8. page 117. to wit, that they both do
so pray, by reason of certain ignorances and fraylties of their members, not
for any false decrees or beleeuings of their whole bodies. Ar. 89. Au. de bap.
co^t. Donat. li. 2. ca. 3.
And that which S. Augustine says even also of plenarie Councels which are
made of the whole Christian world, we say the very same, Saepe priora
posterioribus emendari, That the former oftentimes be amended by the later, yea
and by the Sea Apostolic alone, when they come to the Pope to be confirmed.
But what is this to prove that Councels already confirmed did err in doctrine?
Even in one Council sometime the later Session does amend the former, Cum
aliquo experimento rerum aperitur quod clausum erat, and cognoscitur quod
latebat, When by some experience is opened that which was shut, or is known
that which was unknown. This is done in the Catholic Church with holy
humility, with Catholic peace, with Christian charity. And much more do
Prouincial Councelles yield to the general, sine vllis ambagibus, without any
more ado: and much more again particulare Doctors. And yet you with your
swelling of sacrilegious pride, with your stubbernes of arrogant Ventositie,
with your contentiousnes of peuish envy, will not yield neither to Provincial,
nor to general Council, neither after their confirmation and receiving, so much
more desperate then those Donatistes of whom he speaks, as they had one
Doctor, to wit, S. Cyprian, plainly of their opinion, and you have nere a one:
and yet will neither yield to all the Councels together, but against them all
come in with your ambages, and ask, But where is their Scripture? as here cap.
7. page 89. thinking that you have a witty devise for this your tergiuersation,
when you say: Pur. 430.
The Councelles that are received, are therefore received because they decreed
truly: and not the truth received because it was decreed in Councels. Else why
is the determination of the Nicene Council which is but one, believed, against
ten Councels holden by the Arrianes, but that the Nicene decreed according to
the word of God, and all the rest against it? You might as well say: The
Scriptures that are received, are therefore received because they are written
truly, and not the truth received because it is written in the Scriptures. Else
why is the Gospel according to Matthew believed, and not the Gospel according to
the twelve, but that the former is the word of God, and the other is not? But
we say, that the Scriptures being once received into the Canon, and the
Councels being once received by the Sea Apostolic, what soever they say must
be believed to be truth, and that then none but Heretics do make exceptions
against them. And that you therefore be an Heretic, who not only against all
Councels so received for these 900. years, but also against the very Nicene it
self, which you your self receive, do take your exception of Only Scripture,
and that as it were by authority of S. Augustine, cap. 9. page 179. and
173.180.

Motive 12.
28. See Apostolic.
Now for the Sea Apostolic it self (which as it was the confirmer, so was it
both the gatherer with the Emperors help, and also the President by the
Patriarchs and other Bishops, and sometimes Priests also being her Vicares,
of all approved General Counsels: what soever Ar. 97.
you or any other Heretic affirm to the contrary without any testimony:) I
say in my 28. Demand, that none ever but Heretics and Schismatikes did
obstinately refuse either the faith or the communion of that See. Behold two
notable examples, one under Pope Victor about the question of Easter, the other
under Pope Stephanus about the question of Heretics Baptism. We shall catch
this Ratte in them through his own rumbling. Victor anno 200. Ar. 27.36. Pur.
373.
(says he) was the first that went about to usurp authority over other
Churches. He passed the bonds of his authority, in excommunicating of all the
Churches of Asia. Then many Bishops withstoode him, specially Ireneus of
Lions, and Polycrates of Ephesus, as Eus. li. 5. c. 23.24.25.
witnesses Eusebius. But who says, that he either usurped authority, or
passed the bonds of his authority? No doubt Polycrates and his fellows of
Asia would so have said if they had been of your opinion about the Bishop of
Rome, or if that Bishops authority over all* had not been in those
Primitive days a plain matter. The Story was thus: The Churches of Asia
minor had received of S. John Evangelist to keep our Lords Pasch or Easter
day not always upon Sunday, but with the Jews, upon the 14. of the Moon. In
which custom the Bishops of Rome (who had received of S. Peter and Paul the
other manner) did tolerate them, so long as it tended to the honor of burying
the Law, and not to the necessity of observing the Law. But when they saw
that a Niceph. li. 4. ca. 36.
necessity was put therein, in so much that the other manner was condemned by
the Iudaizing Heretic Tertul. d^ Praes. Eus. li. 5. ca. 14
Blastus, then lo they thought good to tolerate them no longer, but S. Victor,
after that his Niceph. li. 4. ca. 36.
predecessors Pius, Anicetus, Eleutherius, had sent out decrees against that
manner, and Eus. li. 5. ca. 22.
all Bishops had ratified Decretum Ecclesiasticum, the Ecclesiastical Decree,
seeing that they of Asia neither so obeyed to walk unto the truth of the
Gospel, using severity when it was high time, commanded them either to obey
without any more ado, or to be deprived of the Churches communion. Which
censure of his did seem to sharp to S. Irenee and other Bishops of his own
observance. As now also if he would excommunicate them which receive not the
Counsel of Trent, it would seem likewise to many, who notwithstanding confess
that he has authority over all. But what was the end of the matter? At length
followed the first Nicene Council, and confirmed the same that the Popes had
commanded: in their Epistle to them of Alexandria, writing this of the Asianes
also: You shall understand, Apud Theod. li. 1. ca. 9.
that the controversy of Easter is wisely pacified: in so much that all our
Brethren, that inhabit the East, will now hereafter with one accord in keeping
the same, follow the Romans, us, and all you. So they promised the Council.
And who so refused yet after that to do it, were counted obstinate Heretics,
Aug. Haer. 29. Soc. li. 6. ca. 10.20. Ar. 37.
both in the Greek and Latin Church, named testarescaidecaticai, that is
quartadecimane: some such being yet in Asia in S. Chrysostomes time, were by
him, as Bishop of Constantinople, turned out of their Churches, no less then
the Nouatianes.

Likewise (says Fulke, towching the other case) when Pope Stephanus threatened
excommunication to Helenus and Firmilianus, and almost all the Churches of
Asia, because they thought that such as were baptized by Heretics should be
baptized again: Diony. Al. ep. ad Xystum Papa^. Succes. Ste. apud Eus. li. 7.
ca. 2.3 4.5.
he was misliked by Dionisius of Alexandria and diverse other godly Bishops.
Cyprian also reproves him very sharply for the same opinion, accusing him of
presumption and contumacie, Cypr. ep. 74.
Epist. ad Pompeium. And in his Epistle to Cyp. epi. 71.
Quintus, he says plainly, that Peter him self was not so arrogant, nor so
presumptuous, that he would say, he held the Primacie, and that other men
should obey him as his inferiors. You would make the Reader believe, that he
there says Peter had not the Primacie, whereas he says expressly in the very
same Periode, Petrus quem primum Dominus elegit, and super quem edificauit
Eccleam suam, Peter whom our Lord chose the first, and upon whom he builded his
Church. Neither he, nor Dionysius, nor Firmilianus denies the Primacie of
Peter, or of Stephanus his successor and a most glorious Martyr. They thought
that they had reason and Scripture on their side, and the Pope nothing but
authority and custom. And thereupon when he had written and commanded to the
contrary, contra scripsisset atque praecepisset, they made much a do for a
while, and in anger (as S. Augustine writes, poured out words against him. But
in the end, Au. de bap. con. Dona. li. 5. ca. 23 25.
when they must needs either yield or be Schismatikes, because he would
tolerate them no longer, they did like Catholic men, they conformed their new
practice (for all their Councels both in Phrigia and in Africa) to the old
custom that the Pope observed, as I noted here in the 5. Them. page 272. And at
the last the Nicene Council also gave voice with the Pope, and condemned the
Donatists (who pretended to follow S. Cyprian) of Heresy for their obstinacy.

Therefore these are two notable examples of unity with S. Peter's chair, as a
thing most necessary. And generally al other Catholic writers that you do
(here cap. 9. page 218.) or can allege as it were against that See, did stick
unseparably to that See. Aug. epist. 166.
Which S. Augustine for that cause calls Cathedram vnitatis, The Chair of
unity, in which he says God has placed Doctrinam veritatis, the doctrine of
verity.

But you for all this have found a place in S. Hierom to break this bond. For
you say upon it: Lo Sir, here is Pur. 374. Hier. Euag. How agrees this with
him self here, cap. i. and ij.
a Church, and Christianity, and a rule of truth, without the Bishop of
Rome, without the Church of Rome, yea and contrary to the Church of Rome.
Notably gathered. For he says the clean contrary. Nec altera Romanae vrbis
Ecclesia, altera totius orbis existimanda est. We must not think that there
is one Church of the City of Rome, another of all the world. But both is one.
And why? because the Galls, and the Brytons, and Africa, and Persia, and the
Orient, and India, and all the Barbarous Nations, Vnum Christu^ adorant, vnam
obseruant regulam veritatis, Do worship the one Christ, do observe the one rule
of truth, and so be not divided from the one Church by any Schism, nor by any
Heresy. So perfect was the unity of all Catholics at that time, which
agrees handsomely with your imaginations of local yea and universal
corruptions, here cap. 3. Now in this unity of truth, yet was there
diversity of vsages. In Rome a Priest was ordained at the Deacons witness:
which is now observed every where. Thereupon, and specially for the great
estimation of the Archdeacons, some Deacons thought them selves higher in order
then Priests. S. Hierom says therefore: Quid mihi profers vrbis consuetudinem?
etc. What bring you me the custom of the City? If authority be sought, the
world is greater then the City. And who doubts, but the vsages of the whole
Church in unity, be of greter authority then the private custom of Rome
alone? He tells them also that a Bishop of the meanest City, is eiusdem
Sacerdotij, of the same order as the Bishop of Rome, of Constantinople, of
Alexandria. And consequently, that a Priest, who by his order may do all things
that be of order, saving only giving of orders, is of another manner of order
then a Deacon. All this is most true, and much for us, nothing for you.

You have also a few textes of Scripture against this head of the Churches
unity. But by the argument ab authoritate negative, which your own Logike
condemned here cap. 8. page 134. I would desire none other place in all the
Scripture, Ar. 29.
etc. but Ephesians. 4 of Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors, and Teachers.
And especially seeing the Apostle both there and 1. Cor. 12. by these offices
proves the unity of mind, he acknowledges no Pope as one supreme head in
earth, which might be very profitable (as the Papists say) to maintain this
unity. Which he would in no wise have omitted, Pur. 450.
etc. Again: We believe that the Catholic Church has no chief governor upon
earth but Christ, unto whom all power is given in heaven and earth, Mat. 28.
Supreme head and chief governor be terms of your own schole. Belike
therefore you would, as a Puritan, pull down also your own setting up,
specially Suppose also one Christian king or Emperor to reign sometime as far
as the Church reaches.
considering that Kings or Queens be no more then Popes named among S. Paul's
officers. And truly you might also as an Anabaptist pull down all Governors
no less then the chief, by that reason of Christ's power over all. You might
also deny Evangelists and Pastors (which are named Ephe. 4.) because they are
omitted 1. Cor. 12. Likewise Powers, Healers, Helpers, Governments, Tongues,
Interpreters, (which are named 1. Cor. 12. with Apostles, Prophets and
Teathers) because they are omitted Ephesians. 4. I must often say, you understand
not the Scripture, you do so often utter your ignorance. Our Savior did say
after his Resurrection to his Apostles, All power is given to me in heaven and
earth, to signify that he might with good authority commit what power to the^
he would, inferring thereupon, Ite ergo, Go ye therefore, and teach and baptize
Each of the twelve had Apostolic power over all.
all Nations. And to one of them singularly, Feed my Lambs, and my sheep.
Wherefore S. Paul also in those two places does say, that all diversity of
gifts and offices is, Secundum mensuram donationis Christi, according to the
measure that it pleased Christ to give to every one, and the holy Ghost to
divide to every one as him pleases. Therefore no cause why the lesser should
envy the greater, or the greater despise the lesser Schismatically, but all in
unity content them selves with Christ's distribution, specially being so made
by him for the necessity and good of the whole. He had therefore in such
places to express the diversity of greater and lesser: but not necessarily of
the greatest and least. And yet to stop such Heretical mouths, he says 1.
Cor. 12. expressly, Non potest caput dicere pedibus, The head (under Christ) can
not say to the feet, you are not necessary unto me. Also Ephe. 4. in the name
of Apostles, he includes the Successors of the Apostle S. Peter, whose See
for that cause is called The Apostolic See in singular manner, and their
Decrees and Acts esteemed of Apostolic authority, in all antiquity, I say
of S. Peter's authority, to whose Chair co^paring it with the Chair of
Carthage, S. Augustine does ascribe Apostolatus principatum, The principality
of Apostleship, Apostolicae Cathedrae principatum, Au. de bap. con. Dona. li.
2. ca. 1. Epist. 162.
The principality of the Chair Apostolic, which (says he) has always
flourished in the Roman Church.

All this considered, no reasonable man can doubt, but this present plague and
thraldom of the Greeks is fallen upon them (and the like or worse to fall
upon the like) for their departing from the Church of Rome, as it was foretold
them full often: though you count it false and unreasonable so to say. And
why? Pur. 396.
because the Affricanes were plagued and subverted for other sins. So
substantial are your reasons. As if you would say: Ten Tribes were not
subverted for their Schism, because the two Tribes were subverted for other
sins.

29. Traditions. Motive 9.

The 29. Demand mentions, that the Apostles left to the Church not Only
Scripture (as Fulke would prove by the Scriptures and Fathers here cap. 8. page
100. to 110. and cap. 9. page 171. to 183. which all I have answered,) but
also unwritten Traditions, whereof no one is against us, and many of them so
directly against the Protestants, that although he confess them, (as, for
example, the memory of the dead in the Canon of ye Mass) to have the most
approved Fathers testimony to be Traditions Apostolic, here cap. 3. page 15.
to 20. yet he is feign to deny that either they or any Traditions at al be of
the Apostle, ca. 7. pa. 80. to 89. So as never did the Catholics (I say in
this Demand) but only Heretics.

Pur. 383.409.412.
But against this I find that he alleges a saying of S. Irene, as though by
his judgment we rather be (Valentinian) Heretics, who (with the Fathers, here
cap. 3. and 7. page 19. and 84. besides Scripture do hold with Tradition of
unwritten verities. And Lord, how he croweth against D. Allen, for alleging
the same saying against the Protestants, upon their denying of the Machabees:
not considering, that by S. Irenee there they no more be Heretics, who will
have Tradition, then they who will have Scripture. Iren. li. 3. ca. 2.3.
S. Irenee him self, as all Catholics, will have both. But those old
Heretics would in effect (says he) have neither: Neque Scripturis iam neque
Traditioni consentire, etc. They would yield neither to the Scriptures nor to
Tradition. For when they be confuted out of the Scriptures, they turn to
accuse the Scriptures the^ selves, as though they be corrupted, nor be not
Canonical, and that they be ambiguous, and that out of them can not be found
the ( sincere) truth by such as know not the Tradition: because that was not
delivered by writings ( but a certain mingle mangle: and the sincere truth) by
word of mouth. Well then, says the Catholic, let us hardly try by Tradition.
What do they then? they say, that the Apostles either them selves knew not all
things, or that they taught their Successors of one sort in open place, and
these men's Patriarchs in secret of another sort. Cum autem ad eam iterum
Traditionem, etc. And when again to that Tradition which is from the Apostles,
which is conserved in the Churches, by Successions of the Priests, we provoke
those ( Heretics) who are adversaries to Tradition ( as the former were to
Scripture:) they will say, that they being wyser then not only the Priests,
but also the Apostles, have found the sincere truth. Aduersus tales certamen
nobis est, O dilectissime, Against such we have to fight, O my dearest, who as
slipery as snakes seek on every side to fly. What way shall we then take with
them? Traditionem Apostolorum in toto mundo manifestatam, in Ecclesia adest
perspicere omnibus qui vera velint audire He that list to hear lies, may seek
to these Heretics and the secret Tradition which they pretend. But all that
will hear the truth, may in the Church see the Apostles Tradition which was
published in the whole world. Et habemus annumerare, And we can rehearse them,
who were of the Apostles ordained Bishops in the Churches, and their Successors
even unto us. Who taught nor knew no such thing as these men dote upon. For if
the Apostles had known strange mysteries, which they taught the perfect
Seorsim and latenter ab reliquis, apart from the rest, and privily: no doubt
they would have committed them specially to those, to whom they committed also
the Churches. And then, because it is to long (he says) to rehearse al
Successions, he reckons the Successors of S. Peter and Paul in the greatest
and auncientest, and known to all men, in the Roman Church, Whose Tradition
which she has from the Apostles, coming even unto us by Successions of
Bishops, we reporting, confundimus omnes eos, do confound all Heretics and
Schismatikes. Et est plenissima haec ostensio, And this is a most full
demonstration, that it is al one quickening faith, which from the Apostles is
kept in the Church till now, and delivered in truth. Lo now Sir, who has
such ill grace to allege the Doctors against him self? For who denies (here
cap. 9. page 165.) the authority of such Scriptures as are Canonized by the
Church which himself confesses to be the true Church? Who also refuses the
Tradition and says (I say not, by those Heretics pretended, but even) of the
Apostolic Churches, even of the Roman Church, and not now only, but then
also when your self do grant that it was the true Church? As for us, we
reject neither ye Churches Scriptures, nor the Churches Tradition, but answer
all that you detort to maynteine your Heresies, and restore it to the right
meaning.

30 Their own Doctors. Motive 16.

That the Apostles, and all men and things that be of them, are against our
Protestants, and in no point with them against us, it is many ways showed by
the aforesaid. Besides all these, I note in the next Demand, also their own
masters and fellows, namely Luther and Calvin, to have condemned them: Such
leaders has our miserable Country chosen to follow, forsaking the sure
guydance of Gods Church, in which our Forefathers together with the Catholics
of all other Countries so many ages before prospered in earth, and atchiued to
heaven.

31.32.33. Universality, Antiquity, and Consent.
In three Demaundes following I do show that the rules of Universality,
Antiquity, and Consent, taught by Vincentius Lirinensis and the other Fathers,
do make for us, and against the Protestants. Which is so plain, that Fulke
is feign to refuse those rules, abusing a saying of S. Augustines, as it were
for Only Scripture against them (here cap. 7. page 80. and cap. 9. page 180.)

Motive 10.11.28. Arti. 15.26.
34. Authority
The Protestants finding the Primitive Church (which they dare not deny, but
it was the true Church, here cap. 2.) to be in many points so plainly against
them, that they must confess it them selves, (as here cap. 3.) do hold, that
the true Church may err universally, and also did err, cap. 3.4. And
therefore make their exception against it also, cap. 7. pa. 89. And that with
pretense of Scripture to warrant their so doing, cap. 8. page 117. unto which I
have fully answered. Hereupon in my 34. Them. I affirm, that the universal
Churches authority was always counted so irrefragable, that she would be and
was believed upon her only word in all matters, before she yielded or we
could conceive the reasons of her doctrine. And that S. Augustine wrote a book
upon this against the Manichees, which he called De vtilitate credendi, Of the
utility of believing first, before you understand. Aug. retra. li. 1. ca. 14.
Because his friend Honoratus being a Manichee, did irride in the discipline
of the Catholic faith, quod iuberentur homines credere, that men were
commanded to believe, and not taught by certentie of the grounds (certissima
ratione) what was true. Which to our Doctor Fulke is so strange, that of D.
Allen, saying he takes it to be the natural order of a Christian schole, Pur.
4.5.
he requires to show where he learned that method, and affirms S. Paul
Romans 10. to teach a contrary order, and calls it a blind faith which must be
thrust upon men's consciences, to be accepted before they see what ground it
has. Whereas S. Paul does not say, that men must understand the grounds of
every matter before they believe (for that were contrary to his own doing, who
did not always to all at the first speak wisdom, 1. Cor. 2. but that they
must hear first ye Churches preaching, to know which be the articles, before
they can believe them. And that is it which we say, that hearing what the
Church teaches, they may be bold to believe it forthwith, although they hear
not or can not attain to the grounds: even as they which heard Christ him
self, and his Apostles after him, might boldly believe them. As he also did
work those Miracles in the beginning to commend his own authority and
credit, and thereby to draw unto him a multitude, which multitude should
always after him move the world to believe, as Miracles did at the first. Au.
de vtil. cred. ca. 13.
S. Augustine in that book deduceth this at large, and concludes: Recte
igitur Catholicae disciplinae maiestate institutum est, vt accedentibus ad
Religionem fides persuadeatur ante omnia: It is rightly therefore appointed by
the majesty of the Catholic Churches Schole, that they which come to
Religion, be first and foremost moved ( or persuaded by certain general
motives) to believe.

Wherefore I say, that the Protestants can not possibly be the Church, because
they do renounce the claim of such authority. I say also, that neither they
nor no other sect in the world is so happy and sure of their faith, as we be,
having a School and Masters that we may boldly believe in all things, because
Christ has given them the Spirit of truth, Joan. 14.
and to us also accordingly (says D. Allen) the spirit of obedience. But
thereunto Fulke answers, as more at large, here cap. 7. page 90. That also the
Protestants will be ruled by their Superiors. What, simply? Ar. 58.
so far as their Superiors are ruled by Gods word. Any other submission they
allow not. O humble submission of yours, who will ouerrule your Superiors as
it were by Gods word: and O worthy authority of theirs, who by your own
confession may swerve from the truth of Gods word. But howsoever the
Protestants are affected to their Superiors, the Greek Church (with the
Moschouites and Russianes) in doubts will be ruled by their Patriarche of
Constantinople, and so will the rest of the Oriental Churches by their chief
Patriarchs and Bishops: though they be not of our fellowship and Catholic
communion: So you say. But if you knew the story of the Florentine Council,
wherein their Patriarchs agreed with the Catholic Latins in all things, and
yet could not for all that reduce their Countries from Schism, you would not
so say.

Ar. 83.84.
And as towching your grammaticatio^ upon the article of our Creed, I believe
the H. Catholic Church, I have showed plainly (cap 8. page 138) out of
antiquity, that the meaning of it is, according to this present demand, I
believe in the H. Catholic Church. And therefore you err where you say: To
believe all and every thing that the Catholic Church, by common consent does
maintain, is no article of our faith. And is not this a goodly interpretation
which you bring, We say and confess against all Heretics and Schismatikes, I
believe that there is a Catholic Church, or that God has an Universal
Congregation? For, what Heretic and Scismatike may not say the same? And what
Catholic may not also confess that there is a Lutherane Church? The meaning
of the Creed is as I have said, I believe that to be the true Church, whose
name is Catholic (as in the Articles before going, I believe that Christ which
is named Jesus, and that God who is the Creator) and I believe all which the
same Church does bid me to believe, as being the mouth of the Holy Ghost, and
by her (being the communion or company of the Holy, so that none be Holy which
do not communicate with her) I believe that we have remission of our sins in
the Sacraments, and shall have Resurrection of our bodies in glory, and for
ever afterward in Soul and Body together life everlasting. All which is the
work of our Sanctification, and appropriated in the Creed to the Holy Ghost,
as our redemption to the Son, and Creation to the Father. In calling this a
foolish and false interpretation, you do but utter your ignorance in the
ancient Doctors. They are the boys that you count worthy to have many stripes
for their construing it otherwise then thus, I believe that there is a
Catholic Church. Suppose the Apostles had said, Credo S. Romanam Ecclesiam,
how would you have construed it? not, I believe that there is a Roman church,
for so much you may confess being yet a Protestant, but, I believe the Roman
Church. And what should that mean, but as I have here said out of the Fathers?
As also, against all Apocriphalles, to say, Credo Sanctas Scripturas Canonicas.
I believe the H. Canonical Scriptures. Item against Manicheus, Montanus,
Luther, and all other falsenamed Apostles or Evangelists of Christ, to say,
Credo S S. Duodecim Apostolos, Credo S S. quatuor Euangelistas, I believe the
H. Twelve Apostles, I believe the H. Four Evangelists.

35 Unity. Motive 27. Arti 15.17.

Well, of this irrefragable authority of Gods Church over us, and of our
humble submission again and affection unto it, proceeds (I say in my next
Demand) our inseparable unity, Aug. co^tra Epi. Fund. ca. 4. Joan. 17.
which S. Augustine in his Motives to the Manichies calls Confentionem
Populorum, atque Gentium, Consenting of Peoples, and Nations in one. Which
Christ in his prayer for it, accompteth a most just motive for the world to
believe in him. But Fulke notwithstanding, because his Protestants have it
not, Ar. 93.
nor can not possibly atteyne unto it, tells us, that also the Mahometistes
and Turks have their Unity. As though Christ, or S. Augustine, or we, did
speak of any other then Unity of Christian People and in Christian faith. And
if any Heresy among the Christians have had their unity also, that does no
more but declare, that the same Heresy, whatsoever it were, might, for this at
the least, claim the true Church better then the Protestants.

For another shifte he says: Ar. 107.
that the Church may be called the house of peace, because there is in it peace
and agreement in the chiefest Articles of the Faith. By which reason he might
say, that very many of the old Heresies were within the House of Peace, because
they agreed with the Church in the cheifest Articles. But we say that any one
Article, be it of the cheifest or of the meanest, may break ye peace, as
quartadecimani did disagree only in the day of Easter, and many other like in
S. Augustines Catalogue of Heresies to Quodvultdeus. And therefore it helps
his side nothing, that he says to excuse their division, Ar.
63.61.62.10.58.96.103.
that the Lutherans and Zuinglians do differ but in one matter, and that not
the greatest, to wit, concerning the Sacrament, the one affirming a Real
presence, the other denying it. Be it so, that among them are no more but these
two Sects, and between these no more difference (which yet is most false, as
not only large tables of their names set out by Catholics, but also
innumerable Books about innumerable matters set out be them selves against one
another, and even their own Puritanes now at home do notoriously declare.) One
matter, I say, is enough, yea also if it be but a ceremony, though you say of
some of yours, They differ only in Ceremonies, which can not divide them from
the faith. Yes Sir, when they hold their own Ceremonies to be necessary, or
condemn the Churches Ceremonies as unlawful, as those Quartadecimani did, they
are Heretics, and therefore divided from the faith. Howbeit also division is
made sometimes without any disagreeme^t so much as in a ceremony, as when it
is a mere Schism, and not mixed with any Heresy at all. Such were the
Schisms that were toward among the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 3.4.
swelling one against another, only upon their Baptizars and Teachers. And
therefore what is the matter that you differ in, forces not. Only if you
divide your selves, and will not come to one another Churches, where is your
unity:

As for difference of opinions between our Canonists and Divines, or also
between our Schole Divines among them selves, it is (as I said in the 8. Them.
page 283. all without division, all in unity, Aug. co^tra Iul. li. 1. c. 2. De
bap. co^. Donat. li. 1. ca. 18.
all no otherwise then as S. Augustine says: Sometime also the most learned
and best defenders, regulae Catholicae, of the Catholic rule, do without
breaking the frame of faith not accord, and diverse be of diverse judgments
without any break of peace, until a general Council allow some one part
for clear and pure. Such was the difference of S. Cyprian and his fellows
from the other Catholics about Baptism (here in the 28. Them.) And such was
the difference between some about the Popes or Councels superiority, before
the Florentine Council, which by your own confession (here cap. 6. page 70.)
resolved the matter. But your differences, we say, are with division, with
pertinacie, without end: a general Council can not finish them: yea to
nourish them for ever, your very doctrine is, that in Church or General
Council is no authority of such importance.

36 Owners and keepers of the Scriptures. Moti. 8.30. Articl. 2.3.

My next Demand to the Protestants, is S. Augustines Demand to the
Manichies, which D. Allen does prosequute in two Articles. And it is grounded
upon the foresaid authority of the Church. Aug. co^tra Ep. Fund. ca. 5.
If thou should meet with one (says S. Augustine to a Manichee) who does
not yet believe the books of the Gospel, what would thou do to him saying
unto thee, Non credo, I do not believe them? As of his own self he there
says: Ego vero Euangelio non crederem, nisi me Catholicae Ecclesiae commoueret
authoritas. I verily should not believe the Gospel, but that the Catholic
Churches authority did make me. And then he gathers therevppon, and asks,
Quibus ergo obtemperaui dicentibus, creed Euangelio, cur eis non obtemperem
dicentibus mihi, Noli credere Manichaeo? Those therefore to whom I obeyed
saying, Believe the Gospel: Why should I not obey the same men saying unto me,
Do not believe Manicheus, do not believe Luther? Now to this what shifte has
Fulke? He can not deny, but that our Demand is upon that Churth which is
called Catholic, now (according to my sixte Demand, page 227.) as S.
Augustines Demand was upon that Church which was called Catholic then, and
as much maligned of those Manichees, as now of these Protestants. Neither
can he show, but that as it has still the same name, so it is still the same
Church, as I have defended against all his vain Cauilles either out of the
Scriptures (cap. 8. page 124.) or out of the Doctors (cap. 9. page 155.) And
therefore being still all one Church, you shall see, if you mark, that he
says in his answer nothing of the one, but it is common to the other: and
that it is all one for us to frame our Demand of the Catholic Church then,
Ar. 10.
and of the Catholic Church now. For thus he says: The Primitive Churches
testimony of the word of God we allow and believe. But I deny, that the
Primitive Church did affirm Luther to be an Heretic, or the doctrine which he
taught, which we hold, to be Heresy. Here you deny it, but in other places
you confess it, where you grant that they affirmed Aerius to be an Heretic
for denying prayer for the dead, and were feign thereupon to take exception
against the same Primitive Church by your cold shift of Only Scripture, cap.
7. page 79. Tell us then (we say) why we should obey the same Primitive Church
commanding us to believe the Gospel, and not obey it commanding us not to
believe Aerius, Iouinianus, Vigilantius, etc. (cap. 3. page 9. to 14.) and
consequently not to believe Luther, nor to care for all your carping (in these
two Artiticles) of her Images and Invocation of Saints, of her Sacrifice, of
her estimation of Customs, Traditions, writings of Doctors, Decrees of Popes
and Councels, of her ancient Latin Translation, of her corrupting either of
the text of the Testament, or of the true Religion contained therein, of her
not translating of the Scriptures into all vulgar tongues, of her works of
supererogation, Abbeys, Priories, and Chauntries. For touching all these
things, either it is evident in it self, or in sundry places either you have
confessed, or I have proved, or at least I have defended that they were the
Primitive Churches also, no less then they be the Churches now, answering
whatsoever objections you have brought against them.

Ar. 5.
Again you say, As for the Popish Church, she is so blind that she can not
discern between the Canonical books of the Scriprere, from the Apocryphal
writings: as appears by receiving the books of the Machabees,
Ecclesiasticus, etc. to be of equal authority with the books of the Law,
Psalms, etc. The Popish Church that Canonized those books, was ye Primitive
(although ye call them Heretics which did it) as I have showed plainly, Pur.
214.
and by your own confession, cap. 9. page 165. and that you are feign to say,
that also the Primitive Church therein did err. S. Augustine therefore, as he
says to the Manichie denying the Acts of the Apostles, Cui libro necesse est
me credere, si credo Euangelio: quoniam vtramque Scripturam similiter mihi
Catholica commendat authoritas. I must needs believe this book, if I believe
the Gospel: because the Catholic authority commends unto me both those
Scriptures alike: so he says unto you denying the Machabees, Ecclesiasticus,
Judith, etc. I must needs believe them if I believe the Gospel: because they
also be in the Canon of the same Church: as he tells you plainly here cap. 9.
page 165. And therefore they are but words, when you said erewhile, We allow
and believe the Primitive Churches testimony of the word of God. And again:
Ar. 10.9.
We have most steadfast assurance of Gods Spirit, for the authority of Gods
book, with the testimony of the true Church in all ages: and so we know it to
be true. You believe the Gospel for the Churches testimony, even as much as
the Manichies did: because you reject her authority and Canon in other books,
as they did in the Acts. And therefore again you do but condemn your self,
when you say: Ar. 4.5.
The Church of Christ commended the books of holy Scriptures to be believed of
all true Christians. And again: The Church of Christ has of the holy Ghost a
judgment to discern the word of God of infallible verity, from the writing
of men which might err. In so saying you both justify us, who as we confess
that Church, so we believe her Canon, and condemn your selves, who confess it
to be the true Church, and yet deny her Canon, yea and generally her authority
(here in the 34. Them.) holding stiffely, that she may err, and did err in
many things, and therefore making Only Scripture your ground for all things.
Wherein how contrary you be to your self, any man may see, and I must note it
in the next Chapter. In the mean time I note, Cap. 11. co^tradict. 33.34.35.
Ar. 8.
that you show your selves not to be the Church that commanded S. Augustine to
believe the Gospel, in that you say freely: We do not challenge credit to our
selves, in any point, so presumptuously as the Papists, that men must believe
it because we affirm it: but because we prove it to be true by the word of
God. By what place of Scripture did either the Primitive Catholic Church prove
to S. Augustine, or could you prove to the Manichee, the Acts of the Apostles
to be of Canonical authority? The true Church of all times is of like
authority, and therefore that which was not presumption then, is not
presumption now.

But what will not your term of Only Scripture serve you unto? when by it you
argue and say: Ar. 6.
Our Congregation has ever had both right and possession of the Scriptures: as
appears by this, that our Church and Congregation believes nothing but that
she learneth in them. And that be not a notable plea to prove a right and a
possession, yea and a continual possession, I report me to your Lawyers. What a
forehead and face have you, to say, A substantial lie.
that your company had evermore possession of the Bible? Is it not evident,
that Luther and all that are come of him, took their Bibles of the Papists?
Leave your impudent facing: it is not your new vpstart Congregation, it is our
Catholic Roman Church, which has continually kept her possession of this
Treasure, which she received of the Apostles. She it is that rejects no one
book thereof: she it is, that with Gods spirit has kept them from corruption
of all Heretics. Ar. 5.
If also the Arrians, Donatists, Nouatians, Eutichians, and other Heretics,
received all the books of Scripture, What does that prove, but only, that
those Heretics should rather be the true church, then you, and that we might
not use against them this piece of our argument, as we do against you: but
this rather, that they had those Scriptures of us, and carried them out with
them when they went out from us. So did also the Greek Church, Ar. 6.
and other Esterne Churches of Asia, and therefore If unto this day they have
kept them never so safely, they are not for all that the true Church. Every
Article of D. Allens is not to prove absolutely, that we be ye church, but some
only, that you be not the Church. When our Church was oppugned by other
enemies, she knew what she had then also to do. So she had, and has her proper
Motives against the Jews: and therefore it is a wise Demand of yours, when
you say, Why are not the Jews, the Catholic Church, which have kept the old
Testament in Hebrew, more faithfully then ever the Papists? We do not now
encounter with the Jews, but presupposing the Religion and Church that Christ
and his Apostles did institute, to be true, we give plain notes, how a man may
know, that the Protestants have it not, (as because they deny some Canonical
books of Scripture, and the Churches authority which is the foundation of the
Canon.) And therefore that no wise man should be moved when he hears them to
claim it (and that by pretense of Scripture, and false card of Only
Scripture) from us who do so faithfully believe, and have so vncorruptibly
keapt all the books of the same. As for the Jews old Testament, I towched
your blindness therein cap. 7. page 103. sufficiently, and also your desperate
impudency (page 103.) in charginge the Church with rejecting of the Scriptures.

37. Stoarehouse of all Truth. Motive 29.

As in our Church at this day a man may find all ye holy books which the
Church in old time laid up in her Canon thereof: so likewise all other Truths
(I say in my next Demand) which in any of her Councels or otherwise she ruled
over and canonized at any time against any Heresy of her rebels, or against
any error of her own obedient children: and that ye Protestants and all other
Heretics have no truth among them, but they had it of our Church: which Church
therefore, I say, is now and ever, and she only, the Stoarehouse both of
Canonical Scripture, Iren. co^tra Heraeses. li. 3 ca. 4.
and of all truth beside. And therefore again (as S. Irenee says) Non
oportet adhuc quaerere apud alios veritate^, quam facile est ab Ecclesia
sumere, No man must yet ( after all these most evident Demonstrations) seek
the Truth among any others, which they may so easily take of the Churth,
because it is Depositorium dives, the rich Stoarehouse of the Apostles.

38 Old Heresies. Motive 4.

Among the Protestants, on the contrary side, I say, that there are to be
found very many of the Old condemned Heresies. Which is so plain, that Fulke
confesses (here cap. 3.) Aerius, Iouinianus, and Vigilantius, to have been
counted Heretics of the true ancient Church, for sundry opinions of theirs,
now revived by the Protestants. And therefore is feign (cap. 7. page 80.) for
his own cause to go about to defend them, partly with his stale of Only
Scripture (cap. 7. page 80.) to the which I have made answer cap. 8. page
110. and cap. 9. page 171. partly with abusing sundry places of the
Scriptures, and of the same Fathers which condemned those Heretics, to the
which I have answered cap. 8. and 9. partly also with more insolency to charge
those Fathers rather as defending Heresy against Aerius, etc. (cap. 3.)
whereunto I have answered cap. 6. saving that the two Heresies which he lays
to them that hold with the Machabees and with Traditions (as the Fathers do
cap. 9. page 165. and cap. 3.7. pa. 12.85.) I have answered in this present
chap. in the 36. and 29. Demands. And so with one labor I have cleared both
the Fathers and our selves together, not to be Gnostici, Valentinians,
Carpocratians, Collyridians, Ossenes, Caianes, in our Traditions, in our
Crosses and other Images, in our Invocation of Angels and Sants and worshipping
of their Relikes: nor to be Manichees, Tiacianistes, Montanistes, Aerians, in
our Abstinence and Fastingdayes, in our single life: nor Gentiles,
Carpocratians, Origenists, Heracleonites, Montanistes, in our name of
Sacrifice, in our Purgatory, Anealing, and praying for the dead: nor Arrians in
our beeres for burying. For such is his modesty and Christianity and truth, to
charge the Pillars of Christ with such heresies, yea and moreover to say
generally, (as I noted cap. 3. page 9.) that if the Gentiles or Heretics had
any thing that seemed to have a show of piety or charity, they would draw
it into use: which was the great corrupting of those ancient times. That we
may now be more content to hear him charge us, and say with all generality
that is possible: Pur. 287.
In all times when soever, and wheresoever, was any peese of miste, or dark
corner (though all the rest were light) there were the steps of your walk.
Which two golden sayings of his, proceed of these two divine opinions of their
new Gospel, that the Primitive Church should prepare the way to Antichrist, and
that Christ's Vicare should be Antichrist. Whereof I have spoken enough cap. 8.
and 9. Such opinions must utter such sayings. And yet not able for all that,
truly to charge the Church either Primitive or of later time, with so much as
one point of Antichristianisme or Heresy, as partly I have declared cap. 6.
and now will declare for the rest. They are such matters as agree no otherwise
to us, then to them whom he dare not to condemn, and therefore not in the same
manner as to the old Heretics.

Ar. 21.22. Epiph. s. 3. Haer. 80. 1. Cor 11. Hier. in Ezech. 44.
Of the Messalians or Martyrians, you learned (says he) to shave your beardes,
and to let your locks grow long, Comas muliebres producunt, They keep their
hear long, like women. Do we so? Be our heads like women's long heads? women's
heads bylike are rounded heads: or S. Paul did mean that men should poll
their heads, Ita ad pressum tondentes vt rasorum similes videantur, Cutting
them so near the skin that they should be like to shaven heads. Or do not
some Protestants wear round heads and shave their beardes, as well as some
Catholics: and some Catholics, even also the Clergy in Italy and Spain,
wear beardes and polled heads, as well as some Protestants? Epiphanius
notes it in those Monks, because they did it, in contentione, of contention,
and at that time and in that place, when and where the Apostles statutes and
the Churches orders were to the contrary, as yet they be touching womanly
heads, but not also every where touching shaven beardes. It is a sign, that
you abound with substantial stuff against us, that you lay our hears to our
charge. Nothing was wont with you to be heresy, unless it could be proved
contrary to express Scripture, Sup. them. 36.
(so easily we might answer all, by your principles) and that also excepting
ceremonies. Yet now conformity and obedience to comely order for lack of
better matter must go for heresy. See, whether we do not more substa^tially
charge you with the Messalians heresy, for saying, that the Sacraments, and
namely Baptism, Theo Haer. fab. li. 4. Dam. Haer. 80.
Eucharist, and Orders, do not confer grace. Read Theodorete and Damascene.

Of the Pharisees you received your superstitious masking garments, which you
call Amictus, Dalmaticus, and Pallia, as witnesses Epiphanius in his Epistle
to Acacius and Paulus. Does not also your own order appoint special and
gorgeous garments in the ministrations? And that in the Primitive Church also
were such, I have showed here in the 21. Demand: and by name, if you will, you
may read of the Deacons Dalmatica and Alba, to be worn in the time of the
oblation, and lesson out of the Gospel, Con. Carth. 4. cap. 41. as also in
other places both of them and the rest. You might as well, or also better have
brought this against the Leuiticall garments in the ministeries of the
Judicial Temple. Epipha. ep. ante lib. de Haer. and Haer. 15.16.
You do not consider that Epiphanius there reports the seven sects of the
Jews, and describes them, namely the Scribes and the Pharisees, in their
common daily garments, being Stolae sieve Pallia, and Dalmaticae sieve amicula,
as we might say, cassocks and gowns or clokes upon them, with simbriae,
fringes commanded Nu. 15. Deuteronomy. 22. to have made for ostentation of holiness
certain superstitious additions and enlargementes, by which our Savior, Mat.
23. does note their hypocrisy. Does not this make sore against holy vestments
in the Service of God?

An other sect of the Jews were Hemerobaptistae (touched by our Savior Mar.
7. Epipha. ep. ad Acac. and Paulum. and Haer. 17.
) who said, Nemine^ assequi vitam aeternam nisi qui quotidie baptizaretur, None
to obtain life everlasting, but such a one as were baptized (or washed) every
day. Of these were derived your holy water, says Fulke to us, which you say
you use to put men in mind of their Baptism. O I see our fault: although we
baptize but once for life everlasting, yet we would have men to remember it
every day. S. Paul deceived us Romans 6. he was to blame. As also to tell us
that the Creatures of God are Sanctified by the word of God and by prayer, 1.
Tim. 4. Specially to attribute so passing much to the prayers of the holy
Ghost, that is, to the prayers of the Church, encouraging us, and saying: Romans
8.
the Holy Ghost also does help our weakness, praying for us with groans
unspeakable, as he that knows the hearts of the Catholic Church can tell,
howsoever blind Heretics do think, that God will do nothing by water for
prayer.

Epip. Haer. 19.
Again he says: Of the Ossenes (who were another sect of the Jews) you took
the great estimation of water, salt, oil, bread, etc. And use to swear by
them, as they did. You do not charge us, I trow, as teching this swering in
common talk without truth or without cause. Nor you be not, I trow, an
Anabaptist, to condemn either all swearing, or swearing by Creatures. What
besides these you should mean to charge us withal, I know not. But I know
what Epiphanius charge the Ossenes withal, to wit, for frequentinge oaths,
as we do prayers, and that for divine honor of septem testes, seven witnesses
prescribed unto them by their master Elxai, which were these: Salt, Water,
Earth, Bread, Heaven, Air, and Wind. At another time these: Heaven, Water,
Spirits, the holy Angels of prayer, Oil, Salt, and Earth, but in no case
fire. Therefore if Catholics be not plain Ossens, I report me to you.

The same Elxai prescribed a prayer, saying in the book of his fables: Let no
man seek the interpretation, but only say these words in his prayer: [Abac
anid moib nochile daasim any daasim nochile moib anid abac selam.] Of him
therefore we learned (says Fulke) to command the people to pray in an unknown
tongue. Epiphanius shows, that his prayer was nothing at all when it was
interpreted. Belike the Pater noster and Aue, are such: or else the Private
prayers of the Corinthians in more strange tongues then the Latin is to the
people of the Latin Church, which yet S. Paul commends, as I showed in the
22. Them. But he comes also to our public prayer and says: Epip. Haer. 34.
The Marcosians, when they baptized (after their strange manner mentioned here
cap. 6. page 50.) used to speak certain Hebrew words, quae magis admirationi
sint, that the ignorant people might marvel the more at them: as you do in
Baptism, Ephata, etc. Mar. 7.
Even as truly as S. Mark in his Greek Gospel says the same in the very
same manner with the interpretation, Ambro. de Sac. li. 1. c. 1. Apoc. 19.
as we do in Baptism, and as in S. Ambrose time also we did, to be (forsooth)
marvelled at the more: Epphatha, quod est, adaperire, which is to say, Be thou
opened. And as S. John in his Greek Apocalypse so often uses for marvel
(forsooth) the Hebrew words Amen, (which in other Scriptures also, yea and in
your own prayers is commonly used) and Alleluia, of which two S. Augustine
says (that I may note somewhat here against your Service, where you note
nothing against ours) not only that in the Latin translations of the Bible
they be retained Propter sanctiorem authoritatem, for more holy authority, Au.
de doc. Chri. li. 2. c. 11. and inter. Epist. 174.
although it was possible to interpret them, but also that all Nations do
sing them in the Hebrewe word, quod nec Latino nec Barbaro licet in suam
linguam transfer, Not being lawful neither for the Latin, nor for the
Barbarian to translate them into his own language.

Of the Marcionistes you learned to give women leave to Baptize. You do
therein your selves by order of your book, Epip. Haer. 42.
as much as we do. Marcion is noted for confounding all order, as
consecrating the mysteries in presence of Catechumeni: so likewise allowing
women to Baptize solemnly, as though they might have that office as well as
Priests. We say only, that for necessity Christ allows any person to
Baptize: Ruff. hist. li. 1. ca. 14.
in so much that the Primitive Church also has allowed the baptism which a
boy has given to his playfellowes. Which you would never carpe, but that
like a Pelagian Puritan, (here cap. 6. page 65.) you deny the necessity of
Baptism, Aug. Haer. 88. Pelagia.
saying that children, etiam si non baptizentur, although they be not baptized,
may come to life everlasting, and to the kingdom of God.

Pu. 13.405 Ar. 44.
So plainly you are proved to be Pelagians. But yet we in our consciences
forsooth must needs be Pelagians for holding Free will, and merits of works as
they did, and not Predestination and grace as Augustine did. How they did hold
it, either you knew not, or it was not for your hypocrisy to report it. Sure
it is, that Hier. pro. con. Pelag. Au. de fide con. Mani. ca. 9 10. Chry. hom.
45. in Io. 6.
Manichaeorum est, liberum auserre arbitrium, It is the Heresy of the
Manichies to deny Free Will. Sure it is again, that S. Augustine denying the
Pelagians merits, that is, such as proceed of man him self, and go before
grace: yet holds the Catholic merits, that is, such as proceed of grace.
Aug. epi. 46.
The Pelagian Heretics do say ( quoth he) the grace of God to be given
according to our own merits. quod omnino falsissimum est, Which is utterly
most false, not that there is no merit, either good of the godly, or evil of
the ungodly: but the grace of god does convert a man, that of a wicked one he
may be made a just one, and so may begin to have good merits, which God
shall crown when the world shall be judged. This is the doctrine of the
Catholics, and is most evident to be seen in the Council of Trent. Con.
Trid. Ses. 6.
But you denying all good merits, do like Hipocrites conceal from the people
that distinction of merits before grace and merits after grace, making as
though all which hold merits, so much as after grace, be Pelagians. But that
we hold also merits before grace, as they did, you will prove by the
distinction De co^gruo and condigno: For God is as much bound to congruity as
to dignity or worthiness: and as he can do nothing against worthiness, no more
can he do any thing against congruitie, which is a kind of equity. We also our
selves do hold, that a man of him self without Gods special help, can not
merit so much as de congruo, the grace of God (though we have no resolute
warrant to call the contrary Pelagianisme or Heresy) and that with better
arguments then this of yours, or else we might hold our peace, which you can
not. For you imagine that if God do not that which is congruous, he does
against congruitie. Not so, good sir, for it is congruous to his mercy to save
the simple, that follow you only of ignorance, and otherwise do live in good
works, especially his well-beloved servants also praying for them. Yet to damn
such also because they be out of the Church, is congruous to his justice. Yea
for God to save all the world, is co^digne to the merits of Christ: yet he
damneth innumerable, because that it is condign to their own merits.

Thus while you went about to stayne Gods Church in vain, it is fallen out
only by the way, yt you your selves are Messalians for denying the grace of the
Sacraments: Pelagians, for denying the necessity of Baptism: and Manichees,
for denying Free Will. This is all that you have gained.

39 In confessed Heretics only. Motive 46

When we make the Protestants to confess (as in the last Demand) that the
Primitive Church noted certain to be Heretics for holding their doctrine,
they set themselves against the Primitive Church also (such is their
obstinacy) and say, that those persons were not Heretics therein. We
therefore not leaving them so (if it be possible any way to open their eyes, or
at lest the eyes of the poor deceived people) do show them (as in this next
Demand) that the same persons were Heretics in other points also so plainly,
that we make them to confess that also. And neither yet will their hard stony
hearts relent. Ar. 44.
If Aerius had not been an Arrian (says Fulk) his opinion (against praying for
the dead could not have made him an heretic, though both Epiphanius (of the
Greek Church) and Augustinus (of ye Latin Church) do so register him. Then
what do we more? We ask them, Pur. 421.
Why God opens these mysteries always and only, to such as you your selves
(says D. Allen to them) can not deny to be Heretics: and not to Athanasius,
Epiphanius, Augustinus, or some other blessed men of that time? but
contrariwise leaves these his elect and doctors of his Church in ignorance,
yea and with pertinacie condemning those true mysteries for soul Heresies, and
has no body in the mean time to be their reformers, but such as are infamous
and of no credit by reason of abominable confessed heresies? And do they yet
relent? No, I warrant you. Such a yoke it is to be once wedded to heresy. And
yet they have no answer hereunto, that may satisfy any man of reason, as now
we shall see.

For thus says Fulke unto it: Pur. 409.422.424. Ar. 44.
What if any Heretic has affirmed some thing that is true? Is truth worse in
an Heretics mouth? The devils them selves confessed Christ. As though it were
agreed that it was truth which those Heretics affirmed, as it was agreed that
he was Christ whom those devils confessed. No sir, that is the question. But if
the devils had said one thing, and the Apostles the contrary: which then were
like to have been the truth? For so the Catholic Fathers said with us, and
the Arrians said with you: which therefore is like to be the truth? You say:
truth has testimony of Gods word, and whether it be affirmed or denied by the
devil, it is all one. Mary in deed, he that would defend the devil saying
against the Apostles, affirming that he can bring Gods word, must needs have
audience though he put us to our trumps. So you defending Aerius the Arrian
Heretic against ye Catholic fathers, and bringing Scripture do trouble us
forsooth, as the reader has seen here in the 8. chapter, where I have
answered al your Scriptures, as all must needs be answerable that is brought
against truth: and so they find which read our writings. But because yt way
(to read all, is long, we tell such as would not make so great a journey, that
they may be sure without more travel, that not to be of God the reuealer of
all truth, which Heretics held against the Catholics, as also yt which the
devils might hold against the Apostles, And the more, because we read that
Christ and his Apostles commanded the devil to silence, Luc. 4. Act. 16.
when also he confessed truth, for proceeding out of his lying mouth, it might
(as Fulke says well) the sooner be discredited. Whereas in our case (by the
saying of the Protestants) he commanded the devil and his Heretics to teach
the truth, and the Fathers to silence, or rather not to silence, but suffering
them to resist the truth all that they could.

Pu. 422.421.
But he can answer one question with another: Why was it first reueiled (says
he) to the Arrians in Council, that the Article of Christ's descent into hell,
was meet to be added to the Creed, which was not reueiled to so many godly men
as set forth the Symbol, nor to the holy Nicene Council? Answer me if you
can. He speaks so of this matter without any quoting of Author, as if it were
a thing notoriously known. Belyke it is received among them who would put it
out of the Creed again, as a principle of their Aristotle, and I (who read
not their books, but with leave and for necessity) am not so well acquainted
in their mysteries. Perhaps a friends guess of mine is true, that they say so,
because they find it in some Arrian Creed that is recorded in the
Ecclesiastical Story. Theo. li. 2. cap. 21.
For it is found in deed in Theodorete, that the false Nicene Arrian Synod
said in their new Creed, Crucified, dead, and buried, descended into hell,
whom hell it self did tremble at. According to the idle or rather
hypocritical diligence of Heretics, who use in Credes or confessions of their
false doctrines to infarse some nedeles truethes. Whereas the Catholic Nicene
Council thought it enough in their Creed, to repeat and explicate only those
Articles of the Apostles common Creed, of which Articles Heretics had as then
made question. Is not this then a substantial cause, to say that it was first
revealed to the Arrians to put it in the Creed: whereas it was before in the
Apostles Creed? Though also if it were true, that the Arrians did first put it
into the Creed, what is that to our case? They had not the Catholics in that
against them: yea it was a common Article of the Catholics faith. The Articles
of the Arrian Aerius were not such. As also the Article against Rebaptization,
which Article some Heretics perhaps held right, when S. Cyprian and some
other Catholic Bishops were deceived in it. But yet the Pope with the rest
of Christendom held it as they had it of the Apostles. What is this to your
Articles, which only old wicked Heretics did hold (we say) against all
Catholics: They were fit Articles for Heretics at all times (but never for
Catholics:) as at this time also for Anabaptists, Seruetians or Arrians,
Suenkfeldians, Pur. 421.
and all the others that you count Heretics as well as we do, says D. Allen,
because they are their inheritance as well as yours, descending from your
common father Luther.

But for that wound also you have a plaster, if not to heal it, yet to cover
it as you hope. Ar. 96. Pur. 423.
For there were many more Heresies at the first preaching of the Gospel, in
and immediatelye after the Apostles time: then at the last restoring of the
public preaching thereof unto the world in our days: when the Gentiles
continued constant, and the Jews without schism in their errors. This is
iumpe as I say in my 35. Demand, That you be not able to allege any excuse
for your division into so many Sects, which the Arrians, Donatistes, and other
old Heresies might not as well allege for excuse of their divisions: Aug. de
agone Christi. ca. 29.
and so, when S. Augustine notes, that as Donatus went about to divide Christ,
even so he him self is of his own ( Donatistes) divided every day into sundry
pieces, to tell him, as you do us, that also in the Apostles time the
professors of Christianity were rent and torn into an hundred Sects and
Heresies. You want but that (which is soon had, we know) figures and
prophets of another old Testament, and miracles of healing the diseased of
all sorts, of raising the dead, and such other petite matters, to make
demonstration, that Donatus then, or Luther now, is another Christ: and then we
must be forced to grant that you are as the Apostles, and they as you. And
yet for all that I think we should not be forced to grant that you have the
truth: but rather it would follow ( per impossible) that the Apostles had not
the truth. But it is well, that the Apostles were not the cause of those Sects
and Divisions, no more then we now, their heirs, be cause of your Sects and
Divisions. Your own Dividing of Christ (which is the Apostles and ours by
Senioritie in right possession) is the meritorious cause of them, as S.
Augustine told the Donatistes. And the efficient cause, is your denying of all
Catholic Principles, and holding of Only Scripture, and that but so much as
you list of your own heads, and to be interpreted by every ones private
fantasy, which you call the Spirit. Finally your Articles do fit them all
very well, in so much that their Sectiones lightly be not made by going from
any Article of yours, but from some more Articles of ours, as the Anabaptists,
from baptizing of Infantes, from lawful swearing, etc. If the case had been
thus with the Apostles, the world had never believed them.

Ar. 27.
40 They never before now.
Next after this I note, that the Protestants were never in the world before
our time. Fulk says: With the Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets, we
consent wholly in all points of Doctrine. No, not in one point at all (unless
it be such a one as with us also you consent in) as I have showed cap. 8. and
much less wholly in all points. He says further: With Justinius, Irenaeus,
Cyprianus, Athanasius, Hilarious, Ambrosius, Augustinus, etc. Gildas, we consent
(though not wholly in all points of Doctrine, yet) in the chief and most
substantial articles of faith. Neither with them in any one point (in manner
aforesaid) as I have showed cap. 9. Howbeit in this your own saying, you
confess my purpose. For Vigilantius, Iouinianus, etc. did much more agree
with them in the chief and most substantial Articles which you mean: and yet
were not of their Church, could not be, nor would not be. If you say, that you
were then in those Heretics, Vigilantius, and Iouinianus (for I trow, you will
not say, that you were in Aerius the Arrian, nor in the Manichees, nor
Pelagians, though they were your parteners in some points, as we saw erewhile
in the 38. Them.) that is a plain confession that you were not in the Church of
the Fathers. Yet also that you were not in those Heretics, is plain by this,
because they held no more of yours then the Fathers noted them for, who would
have noted them also for denying prayer for the dead, as they noted Aerius for
it, if they had denied it as he did.

If you say, that you were in that Church which went out of sight* an. 607. (as
you say here cap. 2.) it is a chimera only of your own imagination, you can
not show any company of Christians that departed from that Pope Bonifacius
the third and his adherents, much less that they were Protestants.

You come lower to Bertramus, Marsilius de Padua, Ar. 27.30.33.34.75.77.95.97.
Pur. 420.341.344.345.
Ioannes de Gauduno (al. de Gaudano, you call him) Bruno Andeganensis,
Wickleue, John Hus and Hierome of Praga with their Bohemians, etc. (as
Berengarius, Apostolici, Waldo with his French Waldenses and Pauperes de
Lugduno, and Albigenses, the Grecian Image breakers, the married Canons sometime
in England, and Emperors that defended their married Priests. Of these you say
as you did of the Fathers: We consent with them in the chief and most
substantial articles of faith: saving that in one place where you pass some
of them over with silence, least we should object that they held with you but
in some one or two points: Wall. tom. 3. ca. 7.8.9. Melan. epi. ad Fred. Micon.
there you say: But Wickleue, I wene, you will not deny, but he was of our
Church and Religion. Against this ignorant wene of yours the Catholic may
read Thomas Waldensis, that excellent writer our Countreyman, the Protestant
may read Philip Melancthon: who report sundry articles of Wickleues which you
your self will detest, namely human merits, as Pelagius held them, in so
much that Waldensis does exhort Catholics to say at every word, the grace of
God (as now we see used in our language) because Wickleue did teach his to
have always in their mouths merita propria, their own merits. And
Melancthon says, Prorsus non intellexit, nec tenuit fidei iustitiam, Verily
he did not understand, nor hold the justification of faith. He names five
other points of like weight: and besides them all, Deprehendi in eo multa alia
errata, ex quibus iudicium de eius spiritu fieri potest, Looking in Wicklefe, I
found in him many other errors, whereby one may judge of his spirit. Of Hus
the like is written by Luther him self: Luther apud Roffen. ar. 30.
Non recte faciunt qui me Hussitam vocant. Non enim mecum ille sentit. They do
not well that call me an Hussite. For he is not of my judgment: as there he
exemplifieth, in the Popes Supremacy, etc. And how say you to the seditious
article (as Melancthon calls it) of both Wickleue and Hus, Con. Constan.
Sess. 8. art. 15.17.
touching civil dominion, that it is lost immediately if the King do fall
into mortal sin?

Having showed this in them, whom you thought your self most sure of, I need
not to go particularly through the rest: which otherwise, and if it were not
too long, I might easilye do to your confusion. For what a poor and foul
shifte is this of yours? Whether Apostolici in Bernardes time, were sclaundered
for denying of Baptism to Infantes, I am not able to say. Bern. Ser. 66. super
Cant.
Saint Bernard himself (no meaner witness) at the very same time writes it:
and you doubt whether they were not sclaundered. But certain it is, that the
godly called Pauperes de Lugduno and Waldensis, were sclaundered with many
detestable opinions, which it is now well known that they never did hold. So
you say, but you show it not. I refer the Reader (for brevity) to Doctor
Saunders Monarchy lib. 7. page 493. who alleges his Authors, and them of
just credit, that these Pauperes de Lugduno were a very order of friars,
begun by one Valdesius, and that they held many detestable opinions (as you
do well term them) namely against all iudgeing to blood or to any other
corporal punishment, Item, all carnal commixtion, etc.

Finally therefore I note that you say: We have always abhorred the
(detestable) Heresies of the Anabaptists, Ar. 61.62.63. Pur. 19.420.
Libertines, Suenkefeldians, Dauidians, Seruitians, and all such detestable and
abominable Heretics of this time. None but fools will think them to be
Protestants. So say we, that none but fools will think those others to be
Protestants, although they agree with you in some things? For so do these
also in some things, yea and in more things, then any of the others.

41. Studying all Truth. Motive 31.

Having in these last Demaundes showed, that our Church is the Conseruer and
Keeper of all truth, and the Protestants contrariwise no more but brochers of
old and new heresies: I do in this Demand note what Schools and Universities
our church has erected, and what orders she has set for the Teaching and
learning of all divine truth, to defend all against all sorts of enemies,
whereas the Protestant students for the most part know not, what the course of
Divinity means. Touching this matter, I find where Fulke says, that of
late days, Ar. 52.53.
diverse Universities, Schools, and Colleges are erected by Protestants in
Germany and other Countries that have received the Gospel. Whereas Doctor
Allen demands of such erections as were any time before Luther began: them
he notes all to have been ours, and none of the Protestants, which is so
plain, that Fulke rehearses the first Colleges of Monks, saying, they were
Colleges of students, and like a blind man sees not, that to make with us,
as more at large I have showed here in the 25. Demand, being of Monks. Now
when certain Princes seduced by you, destroyed all Monasteries (with the which
also the Colleges of the Universities in England went together by the
Parliament, in such an hazard they were) was it not forsooth a gracious
provision of them, to set up a few petite Schools in steed of them, howbeit
that also no otherwise then by apish imitation of ye Catholic Churches
schools, nor before that they saw by experience all learning to be packed away
together with the Friars and other Catholics? And yet you brag that there was
never so great store of learning in any age, Pur. 7.8.
as there is now in these our days, in the Protestants. Wherein you show your
self to be still as we were when we were children in the Grammar schole,
where we thought that no man could be better learned then our Master: you may
brag so before babes. We that know both your and the Catholic schools, can
but laugh at your childishness. You speak of knowledge of the tongues and
rational sciences. There are more declamations in Greek, in one common schole
of the Jesuits, then in both your Universities (I dare say) being joined
together: and better Masters of Art, of two or three years teaching through
all Logic and Philosophy, then with you in seven years. And the very
Masters of such things with us, of Hebrew, of Greek, of Latin, of Poetry, of
Logic, of Philosophy, do they (think you) count themselves therefore
learned in Divinity, which they never studied? or better learned in it then
the professors of it, lacking the tongues or the eloquence of the^, as S. Thomas
Aquinus, S. Augustine, ye Apostles? What a madness were that. This rather is
rudeness and barbarousnesse, as in our Country to think a mere Grammar
Scholemaster sufficient to be Doctor of Divinity, yea and a Bishop also, not
for other qualities (of them I speak not) but even for Divinity. No, no, M.
Fulke, Regnum Grammaticorum is past date, all are not children as they were
when this gear began, your tongues will not now serve, no nor your study of
Divinity it self in Caluines schole. Come once to the Catholic schools (as
Gods grace can bring you, and I beseech him to do it) and you will be ashamed
of your self as many a one already is, that thought himself, and was thought
of others at home a jolly fellow. Peradventure you have read Francis.
Stancarus, (a Doctor proceeded out of your own Schole, and has his
Gnatonicos, Stanc. li. de Trin. and Mediatore.
as well as your other Gnatoes) where he writes thus: Plus valet vnus Petrus
Lomberdus, etc. One Petrus Lombardus ( who is, you know our Master of the
Sentences) is more worth, then 100. Luthers, 200. Melancthons, 300. Bullingers,
400. Peter Martyrs, et 500. Caluini, and 500. Caluines. Who all if they were
punde together in one Mortar, there could not be beaten out of them one ounce
of true Divinity, specially in the Articles of the Trinity, Incarnation,
Mediator, and Sacraments. He uses here his fellows, your Masters, very
boldly, but what remedy?

So ill were they studied in those Articles, and specially in the three
foremost, because their care and study was not to understand and defend
Christian truth, but only to pick vain quarrels against Gods Church in other
matters. And therefore you the petite Protestants, must needs forsooth be
great Doctors.

42. Unsent. Motive 21.

In my next Demand I note, both those your Masters, and you their Disciples,
to be such as God speaks of by his Prophet: They did run, and I did not
send them. A wise Church, Iere. 23.
that has no Preachers and Teachers, but only such as took the honor to
themselves, or at their hands who took to them selves the authority to send,
which no man gave them. Mere lay men are the root, the spring, and the giuers,
both of your Orders (as here in the.24. Them. I said) and also of your
Commission and of your spiritual jurisdiction. Who ever heard the like in the
Church of Christ? You have no answer unto it. You are (as the ancient writers
do term such) children without any Fathers. You are like the Poets men that
Deucalion made of stones, you do not descend of Adam.

Rail as long as you may at Gods Church and her spiritual external
jurisdiction in her Censures, penalties, Ar. 17.18.19.30.98.
and al other discipline, as Excommunication, Suspention, Interdighting, also
Dagradation, etc. you do no more but show that you understand not the things
whereof you speak. All is done still as it was in the Primitive Church with
the self same authority, and with the same affection and discretion, if the
Judges do not swerve from the Churches Laws.

43. Succession. Motive 22. Article 8.

Consequently in the next Demand I say, that ye true Church must be descended
by lineall and continual Succession from the Apostles, and that our Church is
so descended, and that the Protestants Church is not so descended. About this
Fulke does many ways contradict himself (as I will show in the next Chapter)
because he can not tell what to say unto it. Yet to help him as much as may
be, and as I do use every where, to frame his arguments to his purpose, and to
bring them into some order: He may say two things: first, that they may have ye
true Church, although they have not Succession: secondly, that we may lack the
true Church, although we have succession.

To the first he may refer these words of his own, unto D. Allen: Ar. 26.
You are never able to prove that any such orderly Succession according to
persons and places, was promised to the Church: that we should show you the
performance thereof in our Church. Whether that can not be proved, my first
Demand here will show, which declares that S. Augustine has already proved
out of the Scriptures for us, that the Church should begin at Jerusalem,
and from thence grow over all Nations continually to the worlds end: as also
with our eyes we see that unto this our time it has done. And even the place
which you go about to answer, proves it plainly: Continual Succession of
persons in the ministry (I say with D. Allen) even until Christ's coming
again. Ephe. 4.
Christus ascendens, etc. Christ ascending gave gifts to men: some to be
Apostles, some Evangelists, some Prophets, some Pastors and Teachers, to the
completing of the holy for the work of ministry, for the building of the
body of Christ: Donec occurramus omnes, etc. Until we meet all in the unity
of faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, in a perfect man, in the
measure of the age, plenitudinis Christi, of the fullness of Christ, that is
(Ephe. 1.) of his Church. He says so expressly, until the finishing of the
Church. But that you would not see: you thought better to cavil, and say: The
offices of the Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets, were not appointed to
continue always in the Church, but for a time until the Gospel had taken
root in the world. Why do you not say the like of the other two, Pastors and
Teachers? if they at the least, were appointed to continue always, you see a
Succession of Persons. And how can Saint Paul's saying be otherwise verifyed,
unless some of those five should always continue, if not all, as the words
do rather import? For you seem to deceive your self, by thinking that none
are Apostles but the twelve, none Evangelists but the four, none Prophets
but the foretellers of things to come. Whereas in deed all the Successors of
Saint Peter are Apostles (as I noted in the.28. Demand,) and also whosoever
else be the first conuerters of any Nation: and all the expounders of the
Evangelists and Prophets, are Evangelists and Prophets, which you will not
deny if you have any skill in understanding the Scriptures. No difference
being between these offices in the beginning and now, but only that then
they were given by miracle, and now by order.

As touching the second, you grant our Church to have such continual
Succession, and infer thereupon, Ergo it is not the true Church (here Cap. 2.
Page 5.) because the true Church should at some time or other be driven out of
sight. Whereunto I have answered Cap. 8. Page 144. showing that you do foully
abuse the Scripture to that false conclusion, and namely, that the time of the
Churches flying into the wilderness is not yet come. Again you argue: If it
be sufficient, Ar. 27.
or any thing worth to rehearse the names of them that have orderly succeeded
in all ages in the Bishops Sees, in an outward face of the Church: the Greek
Church is able to name as many as the Latin Church, and in as orderly
succession: What of that, but only this, that they therefore may better claim
the Church then you? And yet in truth these Heretical and Schismatic
Greeks can no more show Succession* then you. For your false Bishops are now
in the Sees of C. Pole, of B. Bonner, of B. Therlebie, etc. and yet I trow,
you will not thereby claim Succession. So these later Greeks have not
Succession but from them only, who began this Separation of theirs, and
their heresies about the H. Ghostes proceeding, etc. For in Saint Gregory's
time (which is enough) they were in unity. Nam de Constantinopolitana
Ecclesia, Greg. li. 7. Epist. 63.
quis eam dubitet Sedi Apostolicae esse subiectam? etc. For as touching the
Church of Constantinople (says he) who can doubt that it is subject to the Sea Apostolic? which thing both our most clement Lord the Emperor, and our
brother Eusebius Bishop of the same City, do daily profess.

44. Apostolic Church. Motive 23.

Next unto this I say, that it is we, and not ye Protestants, which believe ye
Apostolic church, because we believe ye Roman church, which has ye See of ye
two most glorious Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, and which was meant by those
Fathers who in their Counsel added to ye article of ye creed ye word
Apostolic, thereby to specify the better the Catholic Church against such
heretics, as durst challenge to themselves the Catholic Church, but had no
color to challenge the Roman Church, namely that Bishop of Rome which sat in
the Apostles chair, that is, which orderly and canonically succeeded the
Apostles. For otherwise the Donatistes and some others (we know) had their
mock bishop at Rome in a corner, whom they sent thither out of other
countries, to lurk there for a stale to their simple people, which thing
(among others) might cause the Fathers in their exposition of the Creed, to
say rather, the Apostolic Church, then, the Roman Church.

Ar. 96.
Unto this, Fulke has two shifts. First he says: You are never able to
answer the arguments that are brought to prove that Peter was never Bishop at
Rome. And then where is al your bragges of Apostolic Sea, and succession, etc?

See here cap. 2. page 3. how he confesses, that S. Augustine and many other
of the Fathers did likewise allege against Heretics, the succession of that
Apostolic See. And therefore consider to whom and for whom, it is that now he
says: And then where is all your bragges, etc I would not desire a better
cause to discredit quite these absurd Protestants, then that they deny S.
Peter to have been ever at Rome. For who knows not, that all the ancient
writers are against them therein? and that no man for much more then a.1000.
years together after the Apostles time, either denied it, Roff. in. li. A^
Petrus fuerit Romae. con. Vellaeum. Cochl. de Petro and Roma, co^. Velli. Wald.
li 2. Doct. ar. 1. c. 7. and tom 3. ca. 129. Cop. dial. 1 ca. 15.
or doubted of it? Besides sundry most manifest arguments to prove it:
whereas the Wickle^istes and Protestants arguments against it (which he says
can never be answered) are the most ridiculous things that ever man heard.
Though Fulke bring not forth any one of them, yet I have answered the very best
of them here Page 237. And most excellent authors among the Catholics have
already written whole Books of this question, as Roffensis, and Cochleus:
besides Thomas Waldensis, and many others that have chapters of it in other
books. Howbeit the scripture also it self is plain enough in it (if one be
not too contentious) where S. Peter himself does say that he wrote his first
Epistle in Rome, calling it Babylon, as I noted cap. 9. page 156. And for S.
Paul's being there (which is enough to prove the Apostolic See of that Church)
the Acts are most evident, Act. 28. In so much that also Fulke himself (after
this manner to contrary him self) does confess (here cap. 2. page 3.) that
the Church of Rome was founded by the Apostles. In which place also he
grants, that in the Fathers time it was an Apostolic Church, howsoever now
he would draw his neck out of the collar by denying Peter to have been there.

But be it that Peter was there (he says in his 2. shift:) except you prove
Succession of doctrine and faith as well as Succession of men, your Succession is
not worth a straw. Yes sir, in proving the Succession of men only, we do as
much as the Fathers did: unless you will say, that their doing also was not
worth a straw. For, a Succession of men there must be (the Scriptures are
plain therein, as the Fathers show.) But no company, saving the Romans
company, can show a Succession of men: Therefore no company but theirs, is
the Church. In so much also that the Scripture and Fathers together do say of
that Succession, and of that only: Ipsa est Petra, Mat. 16. Aug. in Ps. co^t.
partem Donati.
quam non vincunt superbae inferorum portae. That is the Rock, which the
proud gates of hell do not overcome. And your self with your master Calvin
do confess (here cap. 2. page 3.) that it continued in the Apostles faith and
sound doctrine for the first.400. years: which is enough against you, because
you also confess (cap. 3.) that within the same time in it was praying for the
dead, and many other points against your doctrine.

45. Changing. Moti. 24. Article 11. Them. 14.

But that you should not have any such evasion, I made my next Demand
expressly of that matter, noting, that the Roman Church as it has succession
of men, so also has succession of doctrine and faith, never to this day
changing the doctrine and faith which it received of the Apostles. Now, what
have you to the contrary? Of S. Victor who excommunicated the Asians, Ar. 47.
I have answered Them. 28. that it is nothing else but your blasphemous
audacitie, to say, that he changed from his predecessors and usurped
authority in that doing. Touching also S. Boniface the third, against whom you
allege the saying of his Predecessor S. Gregory, None of my Predecessors
would use this profane title, to call himself Universal Bishop: I have
answered Cap. 3. page 24. that you belie S. Boniface. For neither he nor any
since him, no more then they before him, used that title, but the clean
contrary title, Seruus seruorum dei, which S. Gregory of humility did begin.
Thirdly you say, that the same Gregory (as Hulderichus Bishop of Auspurge does
testify) was the first that compelled Priests to live unmarried. Which
afterward, when he saw the inconvenience, he revoked. And so you destroy your
own ensample: for if he revoked it, then is not he one that made a change from
his Fathers faith. You that will not believe all Antiquity saying that Peter
was at Rome, will yet have no man doubt, but S. Gregory saw such inconvenience
in so short a time, that six thousand Infantes were straight begotten by the
fornications of only Subdeacons, yea and cruelly murdered, yea and all their
heads cast into one certain poole, and therefore found and taken up by tale.
Witness of all this, one that being Bishop of Auspurge wrote to Pope Nicolas
the first, who was dead 56. Cop. dial. 1 cap. 22.
years before this man was made Bishop. He that will Laugh more at large at
the fable, let him read M. Cope. As for Priests Marriage, I noted cap. 3. page
12. and cap. 6. page 43. How they counted Iouinian an Heretic and a monster,
long before S. Gregory's time, for allowing of it.

These are all the chaunges, that you note in the Church of Rome: unless I
must count this another, where you note D. Allen to confess, Pur. 68.
that the old usage of the Church was, first to set satisfaction, and then to
absolve, though now of late, to absolve before satisfaction has been more
used. Both manners have been always used, but the first, of old more then the
second, and the second, of late more then the first. This says D. Allen, and
it is evident to them that are skillful in Antiquity: namely such as did not
make their confession before they fell sore sick, they were absolved
incontinently, and did their Penance afterward if they recovered. Heretical
Bishops and Priests were oftentimes received (upon cause) by only
absolution, without all satisfaction, yea and permitted to continue in their
honors also. The Churches care both then and now, was and is, to have all
sinners truly contrite, before absolution: and that is sufficient before God.
Nevertheless such as have offended before also, are caused to do their duty
accordingly. A strange matter that these Heretics, who have quite taken all
away, should control the Church although she also had taken all away: how
much less, considering that she has not taken any piece away, but only
puts that more often to the second place, which she was wont (as it is a
thing indifferent) to put in the first place more often: and that according to
her power to edify and not to destroy, seeing the people now so careless, that
rather then they will do such penance for satisfaction, they will not come
to confession, and so dying without absolution go to damnation: and seeing
withal, that whereas satisfaction is no satisfaction unless the party be
first in grace, his own contrition before was alone, but now it has the
help of absolution which of it self conferreth grace, that now his
satisfaction much more probablye then before, is not baren. And therefore
much less satisfaction now, like to be more auayleable then much more
before: and yet he is warned withal if he be a great sinner, not to think but
that he owes much more then he is enjoined: and therefore that he must
either pay it otherwise in his life, or procure pardon for it by greater
authority, or else most certainly it will be exacted after his death.

These (I say) are all the chaunges, to belong any way to the controversies of
this time, though you note some others, not so belonging. Which therefore I
might omit welynough. For it is enough for us, that we can say with S.
Augustine: Aug. epist. 165.
In hoc ordine successionis nullus Donatista Episcopus inuenitur: In this
orderly succession no Donatist (nor Protestant) Bishop is found. As for
other matters, if Iulianus Apostata changed into Paganism, what were that to
our purpose? Would that do any thing to prove a change against us, namely
that the Emperor which now is, Rodolph the second, is changed from the
Religion of Constantinus the great? So therefore if any Pope had changed the
Romans into Arrians, or into Monothelites, that were no vauntage for you.
How much less, considering you show neither so much as that. You tell us,
Pur. 376.
that Sabinianus condemned the Decrees of his predecessor Gregory, and
Stephanus the Decrees of Formosus, etc. Why then do not you make Sabinianus
rather the first Antichrist, but skippe him, and make the next to him the
first, to wit, S. Boniface the third? Both he and some other Popes are said
(I grant, though you allege no author) to have disanulled certain Acts of
their next predecessors, but not one to have condemned any decrees made of
doctrine. Again you tell us, Ar. 27.85.92. Pur. 344. Act. 23.
that many of them were tyrants, traitors, whoremongers, Sodomites,
murderers, poysoners, sorcerers, necromancers, warriers, and one whore also.
So you blaspheme the Princes of your people. But you show not, that any of
these (if they were such) did for all that change Religion at Rome. S.
Augustine long ago told us, where he reckeneth up the Bishops of this Chair,
that it were nothing against the Church, Aug. epist. 165.166.
Si quisquam Traditor per illa tempora subrepsisset, if any Traitor had crept
into it all the while, because our Heavenly Master has said unto us of evil
Prelates, Do what they say, but do not what they do, for they say and do
not, Mat. 23.
warning us thereby and assuring us: That for them the Chair of healthful
doctrine should not of us be forsaken, in which the evil also are compelled to
say that which is good. For it is not their own that they say, but it is Gods,
who in the chair of unity has set the doctrine of verity. Wherefore also if
any heretic creep into it, we are secure, because we are warranted that he
shall not teach his heresy out of it, much less shall he change them whom
he teaches. For none teach heresies, but you and such others, that separate
your selves from the unity of that Chair. Ar. 91. Pur. 376.
Therefore supposing that Honorius was a Monothelite, both in opinion and in
some secret writing, yet did he not change, nor go about to change the
Romans into Monothelites. Yea both he and the Church of Rome in his time and
after his time did faithfully resist and mightily overthrow that heresy, as
you may see in D. Sau^ders San. Mo. li. 7. pa. 418
Monarchy. Where you shall find also the case of Ib. p. 518. Ar. 91. Pur. 443.
John.22. truly reported (he was so far from changing the Romans faith,
that he utterly denied the error which his contentious enemies laid unto him:
Which was not, as you and Calvin do belie the story, against the
Immortality of the Soul, and resurrection of the body, but whether any Souls
do see God before the General Resurrection.) Also of S. Sand. ib. pa. 324. ad
336.
Liberius (of whom I also will report ye truth in the next Demand, howbeit,
your self likewise confessed Cap. 2. Page 3. the Romans long after his time
to have continued without all change.) Finally that fable of Sand. ib. pa.
436. Onuph. addit. ad Plat. in vita Joan. 8. Cop. Dial. 1.5.8.
the woman Pope clearly confuted, and more copiously by Onuphrius and others.
Mine own chance it was in England long ago, hearing a Protestant (who was
counted a great Historian) stand upon it, to say unto him, that it was marvel,
why among so many Historiographers not one made mention of her before Martinus
Polonus, who was.400. years after her time. He thereupon brought out the same
Martinus in a fair written hand, turned to the place, and behold, she was not
in the text, but in the Margin in an other hand. Now (quoth I, when I saw
that) I perceive, that also this Author fails you. He was confounded to see
it, and said, he would at leisure look his Books better. Therefore in
harping continually upon these most vnconsonant stringes, you do no more but
declare your selves to be such as the Apostle prophesied of: They will turn
their years away from truth, 2. Tim. 4.
they will not abide it, as that S. Peter was ever at Rome, etc. but unto
fables they will turn themselves most willingly, be they never so false,
improbable, and absurd.

46. Our Auncetors saved, and theirs damned. Motive 36.

To make it yet more plain, what a madness it is to forsake our Church, and
turn to the Protestants, I note in the next Demand, Salvation to be so
certainly in our company and Religion, that the Protestants themselves dare
not say, our people to have been damned for so many hundred years as they
lived and dyed in our side. Whereas we say boldly, with the holy Fathers here
Cap. 3. that whosoever is a Protestant, not only in all, but so much as in any
one point (as were Aerius, Iouinianus, Vigilantius, etc.) is therefore a
damnable Heretic. But they dare not so say, neither of our Masters, who
knowing the preaching of those fellows, condemned them, and therefore could
not be excused by ignorance. No not so much as of the very Authors of our
Monks and Friars, as S. Bernard, Saint Frauncis, S. Dominike, of whom what
Peter Martyr said, I reported Cap. 5. Page 33. the whole Chapter is also of
Fulkes own words to the same effect, specially Page 30. where he dare not
pronounce of manifest Papists but that they might be saved for building upon
the foundation in his sense, though no Protestant build upon the foundation in
S. Paul's sense, as there I show.

Therefore his Divinity makes with me in this Demand, rather then against
me: although he denies some particulare Saints of ours, Ar. 23.24.25.85.
and also the Canonization of Saints. An easy matter it is for Heretics,
when they can not prove the Catholic religion to be heresy against God, to
make it by their Parliament Treason against the king, and then when they put us
to death for it, Joan. 19.
to say, we be no Martyrs, but Traitors. Even as the perfidious Jews made as
though our Master could not be king over our Souls, but by Treason against
Caesar. So the Heretics say of his Vicare. In such casting of their
blasphemous mouths into heaven, they do but consent to the wicked that shed
the Saints blood. Those whom Gods Church has declared to be Saints, it is
not Fulke, nor his baudy Bale that with all their dirt can blotte them out of
the book of life. If S. Liberius were once an Arrian, might he not be
canonized for a Saint repenting afterward? Was not S. Augustine once a
Manichee? Yet the truth is (as D. Sanders shows at large) that he never was
an Arrian, nor never said of any so to be, but only by compulsion to have
subscribed to the Arrians against his own conscience, or rather not to the
Arrians, but only to the deposition of Athanasius: So one or two of the
Doctors wrote, being deceived with the false rumor that the Heretics had
spredde, before the truth was set out in the Ecclesiastical History. But
where was your wit, when you alleged against Canonization, the example of
burning Hermannus the Heretics boanes (who never was canonized) by
commandment of Bonifacius 8. in Ferraria, where they had worshipped him
twenty years Apocryphally? You say, king Henry the sixth should have been
canonized, but only for lack of money enough. When you bring your authors,
you shall receive your answer. We can not prove, you say, that the Pope and
our Church has canonized the Apostles and principal Martyrs. To make
holidays of them, and to name them among the Saints in Diptychis, in the holy
Canon of the Mass, is not this proof sufficient of their canonization? yea
and that the Primitive Church which did so canonize them was not your church,
because you have taken away their Dyptica, and their days, of S. Laurence (I
say) and of so many other most glorious Martyrs, which had such canonical
memories in the Primitive Church also. Yea and would take away the Apostles
days also, if you might have your will, as you uttered here in the 22. Them. in
speaking against all days of Saints. O but you have a better way to know
Saints, to wit, they whose names are written in the book of life. You might do
well to set out that book in print, that we might correct our Callendar after
it. If you have not the book it self, have you any more certain way to know
who are written in it, then is the Churches declaration? Or do you allow her
testimony in canonizing some Scripture for Gods word, Saint Fulke by his own
industry.
and reject it in canonizing some men for Gods Saints? But it is great injury
to the Saints of God, that they be not so accounted while they live. Belike
you would be called Saint Fulke, and that out of hand. But for ought that I
know you must tarry, until you extend your doctrine and certainty of
Predestination farther. For as yet you teach no more but that your self must
and do know your self to be predestinate, and so may canonize your self for
a Saint for ever: when you teach that others must know as much of you, then
blame them if they also do not canonize you. And in the mean time blame not
the Pope for canonization, nor compare it to the making of Gods which the
Heathen used: seeing it is no greater a matter then your self can do, nor the
title greater then men alive should have, and specially seeing John Hus and
Jerome of Prage have (as you say) as solemn feasts in your Bohemians
Callender, as Peter and Paul. No man else needs to take the pains, your
self build up again with one hand, that which you pulled down with the other.

47 Communion of Saints.
The next Demand is about The Communion of Saints, Moti. 43.
that is to say, of all Christians: to show our Countrymen to what a paucitie,
and against what a multitude they join them selves, and that in the matter of
salvation or damnation. So it is, that Fulke does brag of the most part of
Europe, here in the 9. Them. and cap. 9. page 177. naming England, Scotland,
Ireland, France, Germany, Denmark, Suetia, Bohemia, Polonia, Spain, and
Italy. I deny not, but there are Heretics in all these Countries, at the least
in corners. And therefore if all Heretics be of your religion and communion,
that you may brag as you do. But the truth is, that even those Heretics
also which be of your Religion out of England (if any be, for I doubt whether
any will allow a woman to be head of the Church, but only your selves, to name
no other of your peculiar articles) yet are they not, I say, of your communion,
nor you of theirs, as appears evidently by this, that neither in a General
Council, if you should hold any) you have authority one over another, no more
then two distinct Realms with their several kings have authority one over
the other in worldly matters. But Catholics in the mean time, whersoeuer they
are, they be al of one Religion and of one communion. Therefore to give the
ignorant some light in these matters: as S. Augustine said often against the
Donatists, Aug. de un. Eccl. 3. De pastorib. ca. 8.
so do I. I say two things: first, that in all Nations and parts of Nations
where any of al these Sects are found, Catholics also are found, and daily do
increase. One example for all, of our own Country, best known to our
Countrymen: where although they be turned out of all their Churches (as in
very few others) yet the multitude of the people is known to be still
Catholic, and in heart of our communion, though drawn against their wills to
the contrary, yea and innumerable of them reconciled, as all in manner would be
(who sees not?) if they were at their own liberty. Secondly I say, that
Catholics are in many Nations and parts of Nations, where none at all of the
Sects are, or so few that they are not to be counted of: as in all Spain,
all Portugal, all Italy, most parts of France, many parts of Germany,
etc. Whereby any man may easily conceive, that the Catholics at this day in
Europe are incomparably more then all the Sectaries put together, increasing
withal every day (specially by means of Seminaries and Jesuits for the
purpose) and they diminishing. How much more, adding to these ye Catholics
that be in Africa, and in Asia, among the old named Christians of those parts?
And more again infinitely, adding yet the innumerable new Christians in the
farther parts of them both, converted within these fifty years by the
Jesuits? And again the like in Nouo orb under the king of Spain, by the
Friars: in so much that many years since it is written of that alone: Surius
ad An. do. 1558.
Tot autem hominu^ millia in illo nouo orb Christi, etc. So many thousand men
have in that new world received the faith of Christ, as may be in this our old
world. So is the comparison at this present time. But how much greater yet is
the odds, if we look back to the times past, and consider, that in the
Nations where now the Sects are, a few years ago all were Catholics, they
occupied all ye Churches, so many hundred years together as from the first
conversion of each Nation. Yea generally in all other Christian Nations also
wheresoever and whenever, even from the Apostles time, all were of our
communion, because all at each time were of ye Popes communion, who for the time
was, and all the Popes from ye first to the last of one communion, no one of
them separating himself from his predecessors communion, as of purpose I
showed in the 28. Demand. This is the Communion of Saints in deed, and not
these scattered Sects, much less any one of them by it self alone as our
English Protestants, etc. Who also (as I showed in the 40. Them.) were never
before now: and therefore accordingly they profess to have no communion with
the Christians that lived before us, and be now in Heaven and in Purgatory:
whereas with them also we have communion of mutual prayer and help, even in
the same manner as S. Augustine had (whose communion is confessed to be the
communion of all Saints) as this one place of his shall testify for all,
where he shows, that to be buried in the Martyrs Church does profit the
dead, in this that their friends alive remembering the place, eisdem Sanctis
illos, Au. de cura pro mort. ca. 4. and vlt.
tanqua^ patronis susceptos, apud dominu^ adiuuandos orando co^mendent. do
pray and commend them to the same Saints, as clients to their patrones, to be
helped with our Lord. This is the most glorious infinite Christian company,
that our Country has forsaken, to follow a few miserable blind guides into
the pit of everlasting ruin.

48. By their fruits. Motive 39.

In the next Demand is noted (according to S. Augustines writing against the
Manichees, De moribus Ecclesiae Catholicae) the fruits of ye Catholic
Religion, that Christ works in this foresaid communion, both now and ever, in
the good life even of the common sort of our seculare people, and much more in
the perfection of our Religious. And contrariwise the waste of all perfection
and of all virtue, which the Protestants Doctrine has brought wheresoever it
reigns, by setting men at liberty to do what they list, with vain
security of Only faith, not the Catholic faith (which only is faith) but of
a new invented faith or persuasion for every one that he is predestinate. That
if ever any False prophets might be known by their fruits, Mat. 7.
these may. I need not repete the rest that I say in this Demand to this
effect, Pur. 1. to 31 241.459. Ar. 94.
whereof D. Allen also has in his Preface said sufficiently. Fulke in
comparing with us to the contrary, bragging at his fellows holiness, and
railing at some of our evil lives, thinks bylike that he can with words
turn midday and midnight, one into the other. He names London as it is now,
and bids D. Allen ( if thou can for thy guts) name any city in the world
that is comparable unto it. Who would require us to answer such beastly
impudency? With like audacitie he rayleth at Rome, as if it were hell it
self. I marvel then how it comes to pass, that nothing more confirms
our Countrymen in the Catholic faith, nor alienateth them from the
Protestants, then to go and see Rome. Whereof we have innumerable experiences.
2. Reg. 10.
At one word, we find there as the Queen of Saba did find with Salamon,
whatsoever we hear by reading in S. Hierome, etc. Also by revelation of our
brethren, when we come to the place, and see with our eyes, we are forced to
say, that half was not told us. I hope the world shall know Rome to your
confusion ere it be long, by a book that may with the grace of God be set
forth to report the truth. As for London, no true and godly English heart can
but fear unto it even as to Sodom and Gomorre. We need to name unto you no
other city, but London it self when it was Catholic: and let the Ancients
be judges between us both. They can tell you, that if any good orders be there
at this present, they are lightly but the relikes of the Catholic time, as it
were feathers stickt down by such as stole the geese. So can they tell you of
the whole realm, and the like of all other realms. Pur. 238.236.
You charge D. Allen, that he appealeth to the younger sort, who have not
known, etc. But you charge him falsely. He tells good young men, that they
must look back a great way, to learn their duties of the blessed times past.
Which (thanks be to God) great numbers have done, and dayle do, and thereby
return and submit them selves to their mother the Catholic Church: which if
the elder sort who know these things better then the younger, do not in like
manner, it is for no other cause, but that they be more entangled with the
world, then the younger are: otherwise if the world were not on your side, 2.
Cor. 5.
it is well known to them specially in whom God has put the word of
reconciliation, that your ministers might in all places almost read and preach
to the bare walls.

49 All enemies. Moti. 44. Article. 4.

The 49. Demand notes, that it is our Church, against which all enemies of
Christ have fought, and which has prevailed against them all. As it is evident
by this, that our Church holds still all those truethes, which Arrius,
Aerius, or any other of hell gates did ever impugn, and because it joins
friendship with no enemy, but defieth them all alike: whereas the Protestants
join in opinion with many old Heretics, and in friendship with all the
miscreantes of this time, because their endeavor is not against falsehood, but
only to overthrow our Church. Against this Fulke has nothing, but rather with
it expressly, where he says: Ar. 11.15.
The true Catholic Church has always resisted all false opinions, and by the
aid of God obtained the victory. The true Church of Christ has always stood
steadfast, when all Heretics have been, and shall be confounded.

50 Sure to continue. Motive 47

After this I tell the Protestants, that they were best to leave their vain
kicking with Saul against the prick, Act. 9.
because they can not prevail, as neither their prowders could. The Fathers
even so told those prowder and mightier Heretics in their time, that the
Church (I say) and namely the Church of Rome is the Rock, which the proud
gates of hell do not overcome. And we see, that time has justified their
saying. And so will it justify our saying also for hereafter. Even as Fulke
also him self says: Ar. 78. Pur. 298.
In despite of the devil and all her enemies, she is to this day preserved,
and shall be to the worlds end: and none other but she.

Moti. 48.
51 Apostasy.
Last of al I show, that it is not so much an Heresy, as a plain Apostasy
from Christ, that the Protestants have brought in under the name of ye Gospel:
Whereof also I have said enough ca. 8. page 118. So, that if it were ever
damnable to give ear to any Heretics, it is damnable to give ear to these.
Which it were good for all men to think earnestly upon, before it be to late.

The eleventh Chapter. What gross Contradictions Fulke is driven to utter
against him self, while he struggleth against Gods Church and the Doctrine
thereof.
BEsides all that has been yet said, another most just motive, not to follow
the Protestants, may be this to any reasonable man, because they know not
themselves what to hold nor what to say, and therefore do utter strange
contradictions in their books, by reason that they will say any thing rather
then yield plainly to the truth. A notable ensample hereof we have in Fulke,
specially about the question of the Church in his book of the Articles, as I
will here note very briefly, leaving to the discrete Readers consideration,
what I might enlarge upon every particular.

First, as touching the Church of Rome, on the one side, thus he says: Ar. 96.
You are never able to answer the arguments that Peter was never at Rome. And
then where is the Apostolic Sea, and succession, etc? Then on the contrary
side: The Church of Rome was founded by the Apostles, Pur. 373.361.374.
it was an Apostolic Church.

2 Pur. 373.374.
Those ancient Fathers ( whom D. Allen does name, the last of them is
Vincentius Lirinensis An. 420.) did appeal to the judgment of the Church of
Rome, against all heresies, and Pur. 373.374.
among the Apostolic Churches, specially named the Church of Rome: because it
continued in the doctrine of the Apostles. Yet contra, where Apud Au. de gra.
Chr. cont. Pelag. c. 43
Pelagius within that compass commended S. Ambrose for the Roman faith, and
most pure sense in the Scriptures: Fulke says thereupon, Pu. 405.
And by the way note here the Heretical brag of the Roman faith.

3 Speaking of the same Fathers and Church of Rome: Pur. 374.
It had by Succession retained eue^ until (their) days, that faith which it
did first receive of the Apostles. Contra: Ar. 85.
She (the Church of Rome) has had no orderly Succession of Bishops: except so
many Schisms as they write of, be orderly Successions. By the time of those
Fathers, there had been four Schisms.

4 Pur. 373.374.
It continued at that time in the doctrine of the Apostles, Pur. 373.374.
it retained by Succession that faith which it did first receive of the
Apostles. Contra: He charged it with sundry errors here, Cap. 3. and.4. namely
P. Liberius with Arrianisme, P. Innocentius for housling of Infantes, and eight
Popes for the Supremacy.

5 Pur. 374. Ar. 79.
It was a true Church, an Apostolic Church, Pur. 374. Ar. 79.
a faithful Church, true ( Pur. 374. Ar. 79.
and Apostolic) Faith and Religion have dwelled in her. Contra: Ar. 85.16
106.10.27.
The Church of Rome never preached the word of truth. She never had sense she
first arose, the ministering of Sacraments according to Christ's institution.
The true Catholic Church has overthrown Heresies of all sorts. But the
Popish Church was never able to encounter with Heretics. Ar. 85.16 106.10.27.
Rome may be a nurse of Antichristians, but never did good unto Christians. Ar.
85.16 106.10.27.
I am able to prove, that the Primitive Church affirmed, Supra page 29.
your Church to be the Church of Antichrist. He means the Supra ca. 9. page
155.
places of S. Irenee, S. Hierome, S. Augustine, calling Rome Babylon, which he
understands as though they had so called the Church of Rome in their time
also, as the Protestants do now at this time.

6 Ar. 102.38. Pur. 287.
The Popish Church is a puddle of all false doctrine and heresy, whereof the
whore bears a cup full, out of which all Nations have drunk. Ar. 102.38.
Pur. 287.
Even from the Apostles time the devil never left to set in his foot, for his
son Antichrists dominion, until he had placed him in the Temple of God, and
prepared the wide world for his walk, and then came Ar. 102.38. Pur. 287.
The General defection. Contra: Ar. 38.16.33.34. Supr. p. 117.
All Nations never consented to the doctrine of the Papists. For (as it has
been often said) the Greek Church and (all) other Oriental Churches (of Asia
and Africa) never received the Popish Religion, in many chief points, and
specially in acknowledging the Popes authority, they will not unto this day
acknowledge her doctrine to be Catholic, nor her authority to be lawful. And
yet we shall now hear that the prevailing of the Popes religion, and his
Antichristian exaltation consists specially in that point.

Ar. 36.
7 The religion of the Papists came in, and prevailed in the year of our Lord
607. in which the Pope first obtained his Antichristian exaltation, to wit,
Bonifacius the 3. of Phocas the Emperor, that the Bishop of Rome should be
called and counted the head of all the Church. Contra in the same place:
Because you speak of the first entering of Popish religion, which depends
chiefly upon the Popes authority: it first began to advance it self in
Victor, about the year of our Lord 200. And likewise in diverse others before S.
Bonifacius the third, as he confesses here cap. 3. and withal, that the
Church of Rome all that while was the Church of Christ, and not of Antichrist.

Ar. 102. Pur. 287.238.
8 The Popish Church is a puddle of all false doctrine and heresy. Even in the
Apostles time, and from that time, in all times, whenever, and wheresoever
was any piece of myste, or dark corner (though all the rest were light) there
were the steps of your walk. It may be a shame for you Papists, to leave
and condemn for heresy all that is true in the Fathers writings, and agreeable
to the Scripture. Ar. 43.
Contra, where he distinguishes the Religion of the Papists, from the great
heresies, and open adversaries, that sought to beat down the chief
foundations of Christian faith, as the Valentinians, Marcionistes, Manichees,
Arrians, Sabellians, and such like monsters.

Ar. 43.36.38. Supra c. 10. page 223.
9 We say not that the Religion of the Papists came in suddenly, but that it
entered by small degrees at the first: and therefore was less espied by the
true Pastors being earnestly occupied against great heresies, not preached
against, winked at because it had a show of piety and charity, and at length
allowed of Augustine and others, who followed the common errors of their time.
Specially when a General defection and departing from the faith was
foreshewed, what marvel were it, if none could preach against it as it first
entered? Ar. 92.36.37.
Contra: The Church of Christ in such places as she is, suffers no man
damnably abusing her Religion, without open reprehension.

Ar. 11.
10 The true Catholic Church has always resisted all false opinions,
contrary to the word of God, as her duty was, and fought against them, and
obtained the victory, and triumphed over them. Pur. 419. Ar. 35.36.
Contra: In those ancient times ( they of the true Catholic Church) did not
always weigh what was most agreeable to the word of God: but if Heretics had
any thing that seemed to have a show of piety or charity, they would draw
it into use. So they took into the Church of Christ, many abuses and
corruptions, until at the length, An. 607. the religion of the Papists
prevailed. And (c) since that time, that devilish heresy has always
increased in error, until the year 1414.

11 That blasphemous heresy of Purgatory, To the Reader. Pu.
26.166.184.177.269.362.363.419.186.
which is most blasphemous against Christ, against the blood of Christ,
against his merits and satisfaction for our sins, and against Gods
unspeakable mercies: and occasion of most licentious wickedness in all the^ that
believe it, nothing convenient for the disciples and members of Christ. No
suffrages were made for the dead by the Apostles or their lawful successors.
Contra here cap. 3. he confesses that the Fathers held it, and yet
notwithstanding that they were members of the true Church (ca. 2.) and held the
foundation Jesus Christ (cap. 5.) and all the substance of true doctrine. Pur.
393.405.
And also that they did invoke Saints: denying in other Supr. pa. 139.140.
places, that such be true Christians. The like Su. p. 141.
of Fasting.

12 Pur. 51.26.166.177.184.
The opinion of Purgatory and satisfaction of sins after this life, is the
very doctrine of licentiousness, to maintain wicked men in their
presumptuousnes. For what have will they make to amendment and newnes of life,
when they have hope of release after their death? Contra: As S. Augustine
says, Pur. 448.
it is but for small faults: or as M. Allen says, for great faults that by
penance are made small. And is God such a merciful father to punish small
faults so extremely in his children, whom he pardons of all their great and
heinous sins? O blasphemous helhoundes. See how vehement he is in
contradicting him self, to justify that saying of D. Allens, [ I am well
assured there dare no man, Pur. 150.
though he were destitute of Gods grace, yet not for shame of him self,
affirm that the doctrine of Purgatory is hurtful to virtuous life.]
Considering that people with us are told, that to escape hell it self, they
must do much more then the Protestants require, and more again to escape
Purgatory, according to S. Augustines threatening here cap. 9. page 212.

13 How long soever the true Church were hidden, Ar. 73. Supra ca. 1.
whether it were a 1000. years, or 2000. years, this is certain, that out of
this Church none could be saved. Contra, here ca. 5. he counts it enough, if
the faith of their salvation were in the only foundation Jesus Christ, and
that in such a sense, as agrees to men in deed out of the Church.

Ar. 61 74. Pur. 238.
14 They which hold the foundation that is Christ ( to wit the Article of
Justification by the only mercy of God, and of the only Son of God) are
doubtless members of the true Church of Christ. Contra here cap. 10. page
where he says, that the Anabaptists are abominable heretics, and that they
are not Protestants: who yet do hold that article iump as the Protestants do.

Ar. 36.38. Ar. 71.78.79.80.
15 A general departing from the faith, was foreshewed: and it was fulfilled
An. 607. Contra: The Church was never lost ( neither when the departing was
General) but hidden ( in the wilderness, that is) from the eyes of the world.
She is to this day preserved, and shall be to the worlds end. Christ has never
wanted his Spouse in earth, he has never ben a head without a body.

Ar. 2.96.26.27.
16 The Primitive Church of the Apostles has continued unto this day by
succession not of persons and places, but of doctrine, faith, and truth. These
very words contain a manifest contradiction. For how can a Church, or
doctrine, faith, and truth continue, but in persons and places? in so much that
he says also: We doubt not, but God has always stirred up some faithful
teachers, that have instructed his Church in the necessary points of
Christian doctrine.

Ar. 15.79.
17 The true Church of Christ has always stood steadfast and inseparable from
Christ her head, though the blind world, when they see her, will not
acknowledge her to be his Spouse, but persecute her, as if she were an
adulteress, Contra in the same place: The true Church under the Emperors
Constantinus, Constans. and Valens, was greatly infected with the heresy of
Arius. And in another place: Ar. 79.
The visible Church may become an adultresse, and be deuorced from Christ. And
so is that faithful Church of Rome become an harlot.

Ar. 79.
18 The true Church consisting of Gods elect, and the lively members of the body
of Christ, shall never commit such adultery, etc. But the visible Church may
separate her self from Christ. As though there were another Church besides the
visible Church, and so two Churches. Ar. 65.
Contra: Wheresoever the Catholic Church be in parts, it is one body of
Christ. And therefore in deed there is never no Church, but the visible Church,
the other is but an imagination of the Protestants to delude the world withal.
As though Luther and the rest that appeared with him, had before their appearing
been secret Protestants, whereas in deed they were open Papists.

19 Anno 607. the Church fled into the wilderness, that is, Ar. 16.27.79.36.
out of the sight and knowledge of the world, there to remain a long season:
where all this while God has preserved her until such time as he thought
good, now in our days to bring her out of her secret place in the wilderness,
into the open sight of the world again. Contra: Ar. 77.
Diverse times it was bold to challenge preaching and ministering of the
Sacraments, yea and so boldly, that it cost many of the chalengers their lives.
As Berengarius, Bruno, Marsilius de Padua, Ioannes de Gaudano, Ioannes
Wickleue, Walden, Ioannes Hus, Ieronymus de Praga, etc. Where besides his
manifest contradiction, I note two things against him: one, that it cost not
all these, yea very few of these, their lives, as by the story it is certain.
The other, that neither these before their appearing were secret Protestants
or Heretics, but open Papists or Catholics, as I noted before of Luther. And
so he has not yet found his Chimera or invisible Church.

20 To bring her again into open light. Ar. 16.96.
Which is now brought to pass in our days. Contra: From the year of our Lord
1414. Ar. 36.
(being the time of the Council of Constance) the bright beams of the Gospel
have shined in the world.

21 The Revelation of Antichrist (with the Churches flight into the wilderness)
was An. 607. when Bonifacius the third, etc. Ar. 38.36.16.
For until then the mystery of iniquity was preparing for his revelation and
coming, and for the General defection. Contra: Ar. 16.
She has not decayed there in the wilderness, but been always preserved, until
god should reveal Antichrist, which is now brought to pass in our days.

22 The Churches being in the wilderness, was, Ar. 27.95.
to be out of the sight and knowledge of the wicked. Contra, speaking of the
same space, She was narrowly persecuted of the Romish Antichrist for a long
season. Again: Although it were unknown to the Papists, yet it was in Italy
when Marsilius of Padua preached: in France, when Waldo: in England, when
Wickleue: in Bohemia, when Hus, and Ierom of Prage did flourish. Why? all these
were well known to the Papists.

Ar. 80.
23 A rule of the Logicians: No man knows a relative, except he know the
correlatiue thereof: Therefore though Christ had a body in earth, yet could it
be known of none, but such as knew Christ the head of that body, of whom the
Papists were ignorant. Ar. 96.
Contra: Our Church is now again brought to light and knowledge of the world.
So that now bylike the Papists know Christ: Pur. 450. Ar. 77.79.80.
or the Logicians rule is verified only for the time of the Churches being in
the wilderness, according as in other places he moderateth the matter, saying:
We believe that the Church is not always known to the wicked upon earth.

Pur. 405. Ar. 95.82.74.80.
24 We believe that the universal Church is not seen at all of men, because it
is in heaven. Contra: Our Church, when it was most hidden, might rightly be
called Catholic (that is universal) etc. Here cap. 10. Them. 6. And whereas
you say, that no man alive could name the place where it was, you make an
impudent lie: For although it were unknown to the Papists and enemies
thereof, yet was it known to the true members thereof.

Pur. 377.
25 And as for our Mother Church is no certain place, or company of men in any
one place upon earth, but Jerusalem which is above, is mother of us al. Contra:
Ar. 95.79.82.106.
That no man alive could name the place where it was, is an impudent lie. It
was in Italy, when Marsilius preached, etc. Vt supra in contrad. 22. Ar.
95.79.82.106.
Chrs;s;t has never wanted his Spouse in earth, though the blind world when
they see her, will not acknowledge her to be his Spouse, but persecute her as
if she were an adulteress. Ar. 95.79.82.106.
She was known to them that were her children. Ar. 95.79.82.106.
The Church of Christ is the nurse of Christians. Jerusalem that is from above,
is mother of us all.

Ar. 95.
26 It is not called Catholic because it should be every where. For that it
never was, nor never shall be. Contra: Ar. 73.83.80. Sup. pa. 117
It should ouerflow and fill all the world with righteousness. Esa. 10. Ar.
73.83.80. Sup. pa. 117
That God has an holy universal Congregation, it is necessary to believe.
Ar. 73.83.80. Sup. pa. 117
It is dispersed in many places over all the world.

27 Ar. 12.3.69.
Christ's Church is now by God enlarged farther the^ the Popish Church. Contra:
Ar. 73.80
It is but a small flock in comparison of the malignant Church ( of
Antichrist) whose number is as the sand of the sea. Apoc. 20.

28 It is a good argument that the Popish Church is not the Church of Christ,
Ar. 27.
because it was never hidden since it first sprang up: in so much that you can
name the notable persons in all ages in their government and ministry, and
especially the succession of Popes, you can rehearse in order upon your
fingers. And it were a token that our Church were not the true Church, if we
could name such notable persons in their government and ministry. Contra:
Ar. 28.27.9.6.5.52.11.74.75.26.82.
Such officers as are necessary for the conservation of Gods people in the
unity of faith and the knowledge of Christ, our Church has never lacked,
notwithstanding that through injury of the time Ar.
28.27.9.6.5.52.11.74.75.26.82.
(because our Church had not so many Registers, Chroniclers, and
remembrauncers) the remembrance of all their names is not come unto us. Ar.
28.27.9.6.5.52.11.74.75.26.82.
For the authority of the Bible we have the testimony of the true Church in
all ages. Ar. 28.27.9.6.5.52.11.74.75.26.82.
Our Congregation has ever had possession of the Scriptures. Their invisible
Church had alvvayes the Scripture in the vulgar tongues
Ar. 28.27.9.6.5.52.11.74.75.26.82.
God has never suffered the true Church to be destitute of the necessary use
of the Scripture: Which the Popish Church has so keapt in an unknown
tongue, that the people could have no use, much less the necessary use
thereof. Ar. 28.27.9.6.5.52.11.74.75.26.82.
The Church of God has always had Schools and Universities for the
mainteinance of godly learning. Ar. 28.27.9.6.5.52.11.74.75.26.82.
The true Catholic Church has always resisted all false opinions. Ar.
28.27.9.6.5.52.11.74.75.26.82.
It was never so secret nor hidden, but it might be known of all those that
had eyes to see it. Ar. 28.27.9.6.5.52.11.74.75.26.82.
That thousand years there was gathering together for preaching, ministering,
and correcting. Ar. 28.27.9.6.5.52.11.74.75.26.82.
God has always stirred up some faithful teachers. Ar.
28.27.9.6.5.52.11.74.75.26.82.
The Church has never been afraid to do her office toward her children and
true members, in teaching, exhorting, comforting, confirming, etc.

29 The Popish Church was never hidden since it first sprang up. Contra: Ar.
27. Ar. 85.
The Church of Rome has not always practiced open preaching, and never
preached the word of truth.

30 Touching the text Mat. 5. of a City builded upon an hill, Ar. 100.
which can not be hidden, after he has given his sense of it, he says: Hereby
it appears how fondly some Papists ( and some of the Doctors in their error)
do expound this place to prove, that the Church must always be visible. Contra
even in his own exposition there: It is properly meant of the Apostles and
their successors the ministers of the Church: he teaches them above al other
men, to look diligently to their life and conversation: for as they excel in
place and dignity, so the eyes of all men are set upon them. As a city
builded upon an hill, must needs be seen of all that come near it, so they
being placed in so high an office and dignity, shall be noted and marked
above all other men. One part of the Church is always visible to the eyes of
all men, and can not be hidden: and yet the whole Church, and so also that
part, is not always visible, but may be hidden, and was hidden for a 1000.
years. So he says.

31 Ar. 35. Pur. 458.
The true Church decayed immediately after the Apostles time. And so the error
of praying for the dead was continued from a corrupt state of the Church of
Christ, unto a plain departing away into the Church of Antichrist. Contra: The
Primitive pure Church for the space of an hundredth years after Christ. Again:
Ar. 16. Pur. 458.
An. 607. The Church fled into the wilderness, there to remain a long season,
where she has not decayed, but been always preserved, until God should bring
her again to open light now in our days. Pur. 364.
The true Church shall never decay, but always reign with Christ. The false
Synagoge shall daily more and more decay, until it be utterly destroyed with
Antichrist the head thereof. If this be not contradiction, it is much worse, to
wit, that Luther and his Apostles have given us a visible Church which shall
not decay, Whereas Christ and his Apostles gave us a visible Church which did
decay, yea and plainly depart away into Apostasy.

32 At every word he calls the Pope Antichrist and the head of the malignant
Church. Contra: in some places he makes two distinct heads and their
distinct companies. Ar. 16.95.
As, when Mahomet in the East, and Antichrist the Pope in the west, seduced the
world, then the Church fled into the wilderness. Again: The Popish Church is
not in every part of the world: for Mahomets sect is in the greatest part.

33 That the true Church may err, and has erred, notwithstanding any
privilege it has by Gods Spirit, we hard him say cap. 3. Now to the
contrary. Ar. 82.81.93.99.62.77.100.108.62.
Neither has the Spirit of God failed to lead her into all truth. Ar.
82.81.93.99.62.77.100.108.62.
There be some prerogatives of Gods Spirit, that are necessary for the
salvation of Gods elect, as the gift of understanding, the gift of faith, etc
And these the Spouse of Christ has never wanted. Ar.
82.81.93.99.62.77.100.108.62.
True Faith etc. might be signs of the true Church. The Spouse of Christ
hears the voice of Christ, and is ruled thereby. The Church of God is the
pillar and stay of truth, Ar. 82.81.93.99.62.77.100.108.62.
so called because that wheresoever the Church is, either visible or invisible,
there is the truth. Ar. 82.81.93.99.62.77.100.108.62.
S. Paul by this title does admonish Pastors and preachers, how great a burden
and charge they sustain, that the truth of the Gospel can not be continued in
the world but by their ministry in the Church of God which is the pillar and
stay of truth. This their duty true preachers considering, are diligent in
their calling to preach the truth. Ar. 82.81.93.99.62.77.100.108.62.
As our Church is the pillar and stay of truth, so is she also the house of
truth, which knows nothing but him that is the truth it self Jesus Christ,
and his most holy Scripture, in which this truth is signed and testified. Ar.
82.81.93.99.62.77.100.108.62.
We require you to believe the true Catholic Church only: and immediately
again to the contrary: We require you not to believe any one company of men,
more then another.

34 The error ( of Purgatory and praying for the dead) is continued from a
corrupt state of the Church of Christ, Pur. 458.
unto a plain departing away into the Church of Antichrist. Contra: The true
and only Church of God is so guyded by Gods spirit, Ar. 88.
and directed by his word, that she can not induce any damnable error to
continue: No, nor suffers any man damnably abusing her religion, without open
reprehension: and yet Purgatory, etc. came in with silence.

35 Ar. 5.4.9.
The Church of Christ has of the holy Ghost a judgment to discern true
writings from counterfectes, and the word of God of infallible verity, from
the writing of men which might err. Ar. 5.4.9.
She has commended the books of holy Scripture to be believed of all true
Christians. Ar. 5.4.9.
We persuade us of the authority of Gods book, because we have most steadfast
assurance of Gods spirit for the authority of it, with the testimony of the
true Church in all ages. Contra: Pur. 219.
All other writings are in better case then the Scriptures are with you. For
other writings may be counted the works of their authors, without your censure:
the holy Scripture may not be counted the word of God, except you list so to
allow it. Other writings are of credit according to the authority of the
writers: The holy Scriptures with you have not credit according to the
authority of God the author of them, but according to your determination.

Ar. 65. Ar. 82.
36 Those that by true Christians have been called and counted for Heretics,
have proved so in deed. Contra: This Demand has a false principle: that the
Church ought to be a Christian man's (only: it is not in D. Allens principle)
stay in all troubles and tempests.

Ar. 65.
37 And therefore the Papists, being called and counted Heretics of true
Christians ( that is, of the Protestants) without doubt are Heretics in
deed. Contra: He is a foolish Sophister, Ar. 66.
that reasons from names to things: as you do most vainly and childishly.

Ar. 86. Pur. 367.
38 There is never Heresy, but there is as great doubt of the Church, as of the
matter in question. Contra: Augustines argument of the public prayers of the
Church, took no hold of the Pelagians by force of truth that is in it, but
by their own confession and grant, of that prayer to be godly, and them to be
of the Church that so prayed. But now the controversy is not only of the
substance of doctrine, but of the Church it self also. The Donatistes
challenged the Church to them selves.

Ar. 60.61.
39 But for the chief points of Christian Religion, and the foundation of our
faith, that is, Real presence, etc. the most approved writers are utterly
against you, and therefore can not be of your Church. Contra: But the
Lutheranes and Zuinglians (as it pleases you to call them) are of one true
Church, although they differ in one opinion concerning the Sacrament, the one
affirming a Real presence, the other denying it. Out of the same place may be
deduced also many other contradictions, in that among the same chief points
and foundation he reckons also, the honor of God, the offices of Christ, the
fruits of his passion, the authority of Gods word, Images, saying that the
Fathers in these also were against us, and therefore not of our Church, and yet
grants that the same Fathers held with us even those very points which in
us he counts contrary unto these and to the foundation, to wit, Honoring
of Relikes, Invocation of Saints, Merits, Traditions unwritten, Images of the
Cross: as by his own words appears here cap. 3. and 7. And them so
earnestly also, that they condemned the contraries for Heresies. Yet says
Fulke: Pur. 412.
Whosoever is not able to prove by the word of God any opinion that he holds
obstinately, he is an Heretic.

40 Ar. 10.61. Pu. 403.
We know that Luther did not obstinately and malicious^y err in any article of
faith, concerning the substance of Religion. Ar. 10.61. Pu. 403.
Luther, Calvin, and Bucer, shall come with Christ to judge the world. Ar.
10.61. Pu. 403.
As for Illyrians, if you call them of Flaccius Illyricus, they be Lutherans in
opinion of the Sacrament, and differ only in Ceremonies, which can not divide
them from the faith. Contra: What Flaccius, or any such as he is, has said,
Pur. 147.
neither do I know, neither do I regard, let them answer for them selves: But
whereas you charge M. Calvin, etc.

41 There is never Heresy, Ar. 86.
but there is as great doubt of the Church as of the matter in question.
Therefore only the Scripture is the stay of a Christian man's conscience.
Contra: Pur. 367.
The Church is the stay of truth. If that argument of the Church without
trial which is the Church, might take place, it would serve you both for a
sword and a buckler. The Church says it, and we ( or they of the first 600.
years: for that needs no trial, you confess it your self) are the Church.
Therefore it is true.

42 Among the arguments that Augustine uses against the Pelagians, one (though
the feeblest of an hundred) is, Pur. 349.367.
that their Heresy was contrary to the public prayers of the Church. Contra:
All other persuasions set aside, he provoke only to the Scripture, to try
the faith and doctrine of the Church, namely in beating down the Schism of
the Donatistes, and the heresy of the Pelagians. Where also he contradicts
him self again, in showing the reason why he argued against the Donatistes of
only Scripture, but against the Pelagians of the Churches prayers also: The
Pelagians granted them to be of the Church that so prayed. And therefore when
Augustine had to do with the Donatistes that challenged the Church unto them
selves, he sets all other trials aside, and provoke only to the
Scriptures.

43 Pur. 432.
We stand for authority only to the judgment of the holy Scriptures. Contra:
Ar. 9.5*10
The ground that we have to persuade us of the authority of gods book, is,
because we have most steadfast assurance of Gods spirit, for the authority of
that book, with the testimony of the true Church in all ages. Ar. 9.5*10
The church of Christ has a judgment to discern the word of god, from the
writings of mem. Ar. 9.5*10
The primitive Churches testimony of the word of God we allow and believe.
Pur. 364.^31. Supra ca. 7. page 89. Ar. 21.39.42.
You should bring a great prejudice against us and passing well proved for the
credit of your cause, and the discredit of ours, if you could bring the
consent and practice of the primitive pure Church for the space of 100. years
after Christ, or some thing out of any Authentical writer, which lived within
one hundred years after the Apostles age.

Pur. 362.
44 S. Paul 1. Cor. 11. declares without cooler or couerture, the only right
order of ministration. Contra, in the next line: I know the Papists will fly
to those words of the Apostle, The rest I will set in order when I come. That
is manifest to be spoken of matters of external comelines, and therefore (say
we) of the order of ministration.

Pu. 438.
45 The old Doctors never heard Purgatory named, nor, prayer for the dead.
Contra: About S. Augustines time the name of Purgatory was first invented.
Pur. 356.
And long before that also, Montanus had in all points the opinion of the
Papists. etc. Here cap. 3. page 23. And yet again, Before Chrysostomes time
it was but a blind error without a head.

Pur. 54. Pur. 161.
46 In S. Augustines time, Satan was but then laying his foundation of
Purgatory. Contra: That error of Purgatory was somewhat rifely budded up in
his time. And specially here cap. 3. page 14. saying: And this I think is the
right pedigree of prayers for the dead and Purgatory, where he puts the
very last generation of it to have been in S. Augustines time, and the
foundation long before Christ's time.

Pur. 242.243.
47 M. Allen affirms, that after men's departure, the representation of alms
by such as received it, shall move God excedingly to mercy. O vain
imagination, for which he has neither Scripture nor Doctor. Pur. 236.^37.
Contra: Chrysostom allows rather alms that men give before their death, or
bequeath in their Testament, because it is a work of their own: then that
alms which other men give for them, howbeit also such alms are auayleable for
the dead, he says.

48 Here cap. 5. page 31. Fulke says, that The ancient Doctors did hold the
^oundation. Contra: cap. 4. page 28. He says, The third Council of Carthage
did define, that it is unlawful to pray to God the Son, and God the holy
Ghost.

49 Here cap 8. page 127. he says, that the just of the old Testament went not
to Limbus Patrum after their death, but to heaven immediately. Contra: Pur. 183.
The fiery and shaking sword that was set to exclude man from Paradise, was
taken away by the death of Christ, when he opened Paradise, yea the Kingdom of
Heaven (whereof Paradise was but a Sacrament) unto all believers, so, that the
Penitent thief had passage into Paradise.

50 Who so denies the authority of the holy Scriptures, Pur. 214.
thereby bewraieth him self to be an Heretic. Contra: I say not this ( here
cap. 9. page 170. Pur. 218. Ar. 10.
that Eusebius was not accounted an Heretic) to excuse them that doubt of the
Epistle of S. James. As Martin Luther and Illyricus, for I am persuaded that
they are more curious then wise in so doing.

Lo here are 50. Contradictions, and diverse of them more then single ones. Yet
do I find in him many others besides these which I omit for breuities sake,
and because these may suffice to show what a writer he is, and what a Religion
it is, that agrees no better, he with him self, and it with it self. As also
because I have in sundry places up and down noted no small number over and
above these: As (to repeat a few) that Origin acknowledged no Purgatory
pains, And yet he it was that brought in the Fire. And the like of Tertullian.
Item that the definition of the 3. Carthage Council was the definition of the
Church: And yet the Church does not that which the same Council did, Yea he is
an Heretic that admits the Machabees, etc. for Scripture, Pur. 214.
as that Council did. Item that to conclude negatiuely of one place of
Scripture is no good Logic: and yet he concludes so him self very commonly.
Item that to conclude negatiuely of all men's authority, is a false argument:
and yet he uses it him self very often, yea and of one man's authority. Item
that pistis is never, and yet twice taken for a promise. And that widows (1.
Tim. 5.) shall be damned for forsaking their widowhood, and yet not for
marying. Item that they choose to them selves no new names, and yet these two,
Protestants and Gospellers. Item, that the first Religion of our Saxons was in
some points Popish, and yet against all Popish Doctrine. Item, that the
Primitive Church did affirm Aerius to be an heretic, and his doctrine against
prayer for the dead to be Heresy: and yet did not affirm Luther to be an
Heretic, nor his doctrine to be Heresy.

This is he, that charge the holy Fathers with contradictions, both of the
Greek Church, as S. Chrysostom, S. Epiphanius, S. Basil: and also of the
Latin Church, as S. Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Leo, S. Bernard: and some of
them with many contradictions: partly unawares, I grant, but for the most part
wittingly and willingly, though always unjustly and falsely, as I have showed
in every particulare. And so in conclusion, he has in so charging ye Fathers,
done nothing else but added to the heap of his own contradictions, and
declared his double blindness, that he has neither eyes to see when he
contradicts him self, nor when others do not contradicte them selves. And
of the same sort also be the Contradictions, which here and there he charge
D. Allen withal. Let the Reader consider them but a little, and he shall
straight perceive, that either they be not contradictions, or (which is more
common) that to make a show of a contradiction he falsifieth D. Allens words.
One example for all: Pur. 135.133.
To this, that Purgatory serves, but for venial sins, or else such Mortal
sins as were forgeuen in this life, He makes D. Allen contrary thus: He
that not only leads a loathsome life but also contemns all those means
that Chritst has wrought to redeem him to the perfection of a Christian godly
life. (I use his own words, says he) and therefore can not have remission of
his sins in this life, shall notwithstanding by tolleration of the bands in
the Prison of Purgatory recompense his debt, and come from thence into the
blessed Presence of Christ. This Proposition neither in form nor in sense, is
D. Allens. Does he say, He that leads a loathsome life? Yea does he not
plainly speak of him that now leads a Christian godly life, but will not be
reduced to the perfection thereof, by repentance or satisfaction of his
loathsome life past? Lo, such are those Contradictions. And therefore to
conclude, It is not M. Allen, but M. Fulke, that has the most passing faculty
of any that ever I heard, to build one thing in one leaf, and to overthrow it
him self again in the next.

A Nosegay of certain strange Flowers picked out of Fulke, that they which
delight in such a Gardener, may see his handy work. The twelfth Chapter.
NOw remains only the last Chapter of my promise, which I made in my
Preface: Wherein I have to note certain examples of his passing ignorance, and
foul erring in the Scriptures, in the Histories, and in Doctrine.

First, Pur. 283.
as for the Sacrifice propitiatory (says he) it was offered in the Law, only
by the High Priest once in the year. And besides this, he finds none but
Sacrifices of thanksgiving in the Law. Whereas Sacrifice propitiatory and pro
peccata, for sin, are all one: Leu. 16.
and Sacrifice for sin was offered not only that one day in the year which he
means, to wit, in the feast of expiation being the tenth day of the seventh
month, but also in many others of the Feasts ordinarily. Nu. 28.29. and
extraordinarily whenever occasion was ministered by sin of the Priest,
prince, multitude, or any one private person. Leu. 4.5. and upon sundry Leu. 6.
other occasions besides. And touching the division of Sacrifices, there were
four kinds of them, as S. Paul shows out of ye Psalm, Heb. 10. Psalm. 39.
Leu. 1..23.4.7. Pur. 455. Pur. 224.456.
and it is to be seen plainly in Leuiticus: Hostia, Oblatio, Holocaustum, and
pro peccato. For these other two, Sacrifice for thanksgiving, and pro delicto,
belong to the first, and the last. I will not here say to you as you do to D.
Allen: But you that so like a proud fool, take upon you to help his
ignorance, bewray your own intolerable arrogancy and more then beastly
blindness. For if you had read the Law whereof you make your self such a
Rabbine, etc. So to say to any man, is not for modesty. But whether it might
not be more justly said to your self, I report me to this point of your
ignorance in the Law, on the one side, and to the point (on the other side) for
which you so take up D. Allen, whose right understanding of the Law you call
ignorance, as I have declared cap. 8. page 136.

Another point of your ignorance is, where to deface the Sacrifice that both
the High Priest at that time was a wicked and ungodly man, to wit, either
Jason, Menelaus, or Alcimus, and namely Menelaus, the worst of them all three:
and also that the other Priests of that time were given to the practices of the
Gentiles. 2. Mac. 4. In so much that it is like, that Judas Machabeus, if he
devised not that sacrifice of his own head, yet took it by imitation of the
Gentiles. I marvel how you could read that Story, and yet think that Judas
Machabeus had any communion or society with those Gentilizers, against whom
all his fighting was. And when he had gotten Jerusalem and the Temple, is it
not written plainly, 1. Mac. 4. verse. 42.
that for the repurgation thereof he chose Priests without spot, having their
heart in the Law of God? After which time he made 1. Mac. 5. 2. Ma. 12. v. 3.
many expeditions from Jerusalem against the Gentiles: In one of which
expeditions or voyages, 2. Mac. 12. ver. 9.
being to Iamnia, certain of his soldiers did take De donarijs Idolorum,
some of the presents of the Idols of Iamnia: for the which God suffered 2. Mac.
12. ver. 32.40.
the^ to be overthrown after Pentecost by the soldiers of Gorgias. And then
Judas sent that money to those unspotted Priests at Jerusalem to offer
Sacrifice for their sin. The chief of which Priests in the absence of Judas
him self, were his brethren Ionathas and Simon, and not Menelaus, nor any of
those other Apostataes. You might have learned by those books, that the
succession of the true Pontifices or High Priests for that time, was this: 2.
Mac. 3. ver. 1. 2. Ma. 4. ve. 7.10.14.26 2. Ma. 4. ve. 33 34. 2. Ma. 5. ve.
5.7.9.
Onias, 1. Mac. 2. ver. 1.70.
Mathathias, 1. M. 3. v. 1. 1. M. 9. v. 18
Judas, ( i) Ionathas, ( k) Simon. And that these others, 2. Mac. 3. ver. 1. 2.
Ma. 4. ve. 7.10.14.26 2. Ma. 4. ve. 33 34. 2. Ma. 5. ve. 5.7.9.
Jason, 2. Mac. 4. v. 24.29. 2. Ma. 13.
Menelaus, 2. Ma. 4. ver. 29.41.
Lysimachus, g Alcimus, were but Antipontifices, or false usurpers against
these: to wit, 2. Mac. 3. ver. 1. 2. Ma. 4. ve. 7.10.14.26 2. Ma. 4. ve. 33 34.
2. Ma. 5. ve. 5.7.9.
Jason (the author of the Apostasy from the Law) against his brother Onias,
and secondly Menelaus against the same 2. Mac. 3. ver. 1. 2. Ma. 4. ve.
7.10.14.26 2. Ma. 4. ve. 33 34. 2. Ma. 5. ve. 5.7.9.
Onias, and thirdly Lysimachus brother to Menelaus. After ye Apostasy thus
begun, that lively Image of Antichrist king 1. Mac. 1. 2. M. 5. v. 11
Antiochus Epiphanes takes Jerusalem, martyreth the Law-keepers, and finally
sets up in the Temple the abomination of Desolation, being a Statuee of
Jupiter. Against him and his rises the foresaid 1. Mac. 2. ver. 1.70.
Mathathias, and after him, his son 1. M. 3. v. 1. 1. M. 9. v. 18
Judas Machabeus, who repurged ye Temple the same day three years that it was
polluted, Anno 148. And the next year Antiochus dies, his son Antiochus
Eupator succeeds: with him strives for the kingdom g Demetrius Soter, An.
151. to whom fled the wicked of Israel, and Alcimus their Captain. (qui
volebat fieri Sacerdos) to complain of Judas. 1 Mac. 7. ver. 1.5.9. 1. Mac. 9.
ver. 54.55.
Which Alcimus dyed of Gods hand ye next year after the killing of Judas, 1. M.
9. ve. 31.10. v. 18.13. v. 23.
and could never get Jerusalem and the Temple: but always after the
repurgation it continued in the government of Judas, and of Ionathas after him,
and then of his other brother 1. Mac. 13. v. 8.36.41.43.
Simon. Of whose Priesthood also and High priesthood, the text is plain in
their several places here noted in the margin. I will recite the words that
are written of the last: 1. Mac. 13. ver. 42.
The year 170. the people of Israel began to write in their Court-rolles and
Records, thus: Anno primo sub Simone Summo Sacerdote, magno Duce and Principe
Iudaeorum. The first year under Simon the High Priest, the great Duke and
Prince of the Jews.

Certain other points of your gross, or rather malicious ignorance

Again, that the body of Christ is not offered to him self, but Pur. 316.
Why Sir, did not he upon the Cross offer his own body, as a man and a
priest, to him self as to God? You noted others (here cap. 4. page 28. and
cap. 6. page 63.) as for saying, that it is not lawful to pray to God the
Son: and there S. Fulgentius told you as the Fathers Creed does, that each
person of the blessed individual Trinity, Simul odoratur and conglorificatur,
Is with other at once adored and conglorified: no sacrifice, neither that of
Christ's body, whether it be upon the Cross, or upon the Altar, being private
to one, but common to all three.

a vain amplification and fond supposition, Pur. 155.
to extend the force of Christ's death beyond the limits of his will. As though
it were not of force to work any whit more then it works in act, as to save
so much as one of them that shall not be saved. Contrary to this express
Scripture: He is the propitiation for our sins, 1. Joan. 2.
and not for our sins only, but also for the sins of the whole world. And
contrary to this saying of your own in another place: Pur. 34.
Concerning the sufficiency of Christ's Redemption, there is nothing can be
spoken so magnifically, but that the worthiness thereof passes and excels
it.

to remit sins is proper unto his Divinity. As though he, Pur. 26.
that is to say, our Savior Christ, does not remit sins according to his
humanity also. No marvel to see you deny this power to his ministers, when
you deny it to the Son of man him self. Mat. 9.
The people in the Gospel understood him otherwise, when your fathers the
Scribes called it a blasphemy for any to remit sins but only God, and the
people contrariwise, seeing his mirable that he wrought to prove his and his
Churches doctrine herein, did glorify God for giving such power to men,
hominibus. Whereupon he, when the time was come, gave commission to his
Apostles, Joan. 20.
saying: As my Father sent me, I also send you. Whose sins you forgive, they
are forgiven them.

Pur. 274.127.128.135.283.
There be sins for which the Church ought not to pray, even of men remaining
in this life: Pur. 274.127.128.135.283.
for which it is not lawful to pray: Pur. 274.127.128.135.283.
which by the mercy of God are not pardonable: for Pur. 274.127.128.135.283.
it is false, that so long as men are in this world they may repent. And how
many such sins are there, and which? In one place you name two: Obstinate and
wilful Apostasy, and blasphemy against the holy Ghost: and after them you
add there, etc. Therefore looking in other places which be those caetera, I
find where you name Pur. 274.127.128.135.283.
Contempt of all that preach Christ and repentance of our loathsome life past,
and say, then the which no vice is more mortal, nor farther from forgiveness.
In another place you name Saul, 1. Sam. 16.
for whom Samuel was not heard when he prayed: and the obstinate Jews, Ier.
7.11.14. Ezech. 14.
for whom Jeremy is often times forbidden to pray, and the wicked generally,
because the Lord testifies, that if Noah, Daniel, and Job prayed for them,
they should not be heard. And you conclude thereupon: Therefore there be sins
for the which the Church ought not to pray: and though she should pray, yet she
should not be heard, even of men remaining in this life. Whereby it appears,
that in sum you say, that it is unlawful to pray for any wicked person, of
what sort soever his wickedness be, so long as he continues in his wickedness:
yea and that Pur. 274.127.128.135.283.
it is impossible for the wicked but to continue in his wickedness. Such wholesome
doctrine you teach, and that so often and so constantly: yea also abusing the
holy Scriptures for the same, not only in those places before noted, 1. Joan.
5. Mat. 12. Heb. 6.
but also three places more: There is a sin unto death, for which we ought
not to pray. and, He which sins against the holy Ghost, shall never be
forgiven, (whosoever prays for him.) and, There be some which sin so
horribly in this life, that it is impossible for them to be renewed by
repentance.

We were wont to match you with your fathers the Nouatians, Another old
Heresy of the Protestants.
for denying the authority of Priests to remit either all sins, or some
certain sins, and reserving it to God alone. But now, when you say, that
some sins neither by the mercy of God are pardonable, we must needs confess
that you have outshot them, and therefore won the game from them.

What Acesius a Bishop of the Nouatians said to Constantinus the Emperor in
the Nicen Council, yielding the reason of their Schism, you may see in
Socrates, who as a fautor of the Nouatians, does report it for their praise,
Soc. li. 1. ca. 7.9.
That they who after Baptism fall into that kind of sin, which the holy
Scriptures call, Peccatum ad mortem, Sin unto death, ought not to be admitted
to receive the Divine mysteries, ( as other sinners customably were and are
admitted, after confession and the Priests absolution) but to exhort them to
repentance or penance, and that they look for hope of forgiveness not of the
Priests, but of god, who both can and has authority to forgive sins. But
with you it is unlawful, as to pray for them, so also to exhort them to
repentance and hope of forgiveness at Gods hands. Well, it is enough for a
Christian man, that it is the heresy of the Nouatians which you hold, yea, a
maiori also, and that the Catholic Church did then also practice as now, The
Protestants also admit al to their Caluines bread.
by her Priests to forgive all sins without any such exception, and so to
admit all to our Lords Body. Yet for more comfort against all desperation, I
will answer to your places particularly.

1. Joan. 5.
I say therefore, that Sin unto death, (for the which S. John says not as you
make him, but only thus: Non pro illo dico vt roget quis, I bid not any man
to pray for that) is when one is dead in Mortal sin, and therefore now
damned in hell: which I showed (cap. 8. page 134.) out of the text it self. If
that be not enough with you (because you say, Pur. 273.274.
It is a new exposition, and not only void of all ancient authority, but
also has all the old writers against it, and yet you do not, nor can not
allege so much as one) I say further, Au. in r. 19. de Cor. and gra. ca. 12.
it is S. Augustines exposition in diverse places, and namely in his
Retractatio^s (which is much to be noted) where to take away occasions from
such Nouatians, having aforetime written that he thought, Peccatum fratris ad
mortem, The brothers sin unto death, to be oppugning of the Brotherhood, and
envying at grace it self, he says, Addendum fuit, Si in hac scelerata mentis
peruersitate finierit hanc vitam: It should have been added thereunto, If in
this wicked peruersenes of mind he finish this life: quoniam de quocunque
pessimo in hac vita constituto non est vbique desperandum, For because no man,
be he never so wicked, is to be despeired of, so long as he is in this life:
Nec pro illo inprudenter oratur, de quo non desperatur, Neither is it
indiscreetly done to pray for him, who is not despeired of. Which is all one,
almost word for word also, with that which D. Allen says, Pur. 274.
and you gainesay, where you say twice, I deny your antecedent.

Heb. 6.10.
Of S. Paul's place also I gave the right sense ca. 10. Them. 24. He speaks of
Lapsi by name, that is, of such as deny their faith in persecution. Of whom
alone, the Nouatians Heresy against the Priests Power of forgeuing sins,
was in the first beginning, Soc. li. 4. ca. 23. and li. 7. ca. 25.
as we read in Socrates and others. Now will you that all such despair? But
the Catholic Church in time of the Nouatians would not, no nor the Nouatians
them selves would so much (as I have showed,) neither would S. Paul. He says,
Impossible est eos qui prolapsi sunt reuocari ad paenitentiam, It is
impossible for such denyers to be renouated again unto repentance. To be
renouated again, what is that, but all which he there said was done once
before, to be done again, eos qui semel sunt illuminati, they who once have
been baptized, (for that Sacrament the Greeks call Illumination) have also
tasted the heavenly gift and been made partakers of the holy Ghost (in the
Sacrament of confirmation, Act. 2. ver. 33.38.
) and have tasted (in the Sacrament of the Altar) the good word of God and the
puissances of the world to come. For these Sacraments were and are ministered
adultis together with Baptism. And even so the Fathers constantly expound this
place against the Nouatians, that it says no more, but that a sinner can not
be rebaptized, can not be renouated ad inchoationem Christi, to begin Christ
again, or ad fundamentum paenitentiae, etc. to the foundation of repenting
from dead works and of believing in God, of Baptismes and of Hands imposition.
They be the Apostles words in the same place, and to them is linked your place
with enim, Impossible est enim, for it is impossible, etc.

And that which our Savior says to the Pharisees and Scribes, Mat. 12. Mar. 3.
of Sin or blasphemy against the holy Ghost, because they said, Spiritum
immundum habet, He has an unclean spirit, even Belzabub the prince of the
devils, to cast out devils by: does he say it, to drive them to desperation?
yea, does he not plainly speak it, to move them the more and to the greater
repentance? As your self also, contrary (after your manner) to your self,
Pur. 461.
though in express words counting D. Allen and his fellows such as Heb. 6.
can not (by you) repent, having sometime been lightened, As though D. Allen had
ever been a Protestant.
and tasted of the good gift of God: do yet exhort them, truly to repent, and
to return to the acknowledging of truth once known and professed, and do
beseech God that so many among them as are curable, may have grace so to do. So
the whole circumstance shows, that Christ there exhorts them to most humble
penance. For, neither does he otherwise say, that such sin and blasphemy
shall not be remitted, then he says, that all other sin and blasphemy shall
be remitted. And yet, I trow, many a one, yea above all number, may be and is
damned in hell for other sin and blasphemy. Even so many a one, yea and
above all number, may be and is forgiven the sin against the Holy Ghost.
Whereby it is evident, that he does no more in that place, but report the
ordinary rules of Gods providence: to wit, To forgive al other sin
ordinarily, by giving the party grace to repent: and, not to forgive
ordinarily the sin against the holy Ghost, that is, when one maliciously
calls the Miracles of Christ and of his Servants, the works of the Devil,
or the lying signs and wonders of Antichrist. Which sin, your new Gospel
has made very common in these days. But yet that no such also should
despair, one of these Act. 23.26. Philip. 3.
Pharisees, and he the very worst of the^ all, says most comfortably: 1. Tim.
1. Act. 7.9.
A sure saying, and worthy of all embracing, that Christ Jesus came into the
world to save sinnerss of whom I am the principal. But to this end I had
mercy, that in me the principal (who before was a blasphemer, and a
persecuter, and an oppresser in my Vide Au. expo. inch. ad Romans prope fine^.
blind incredulity) Christ Jesus might show all clemency, for a samplar to
all that should after believe in him.

Now for that which you alleged out of Samuel, Jeremy, and Ezechiel: it is
all spoken (in one sense) of temporal matters, to wit, of casting Saul from
his kingdom, and the Jews into captivity: in another sense, of the Jews
general reprobation in which they presently be, since their crucifying of
their Messiah and ours. But to pray for the salvation of Saul or the Jews no
man was forbidden: no, nor for their temporal felicity to continue, until it
was quite past. So did Samuel mourn for Saul, even to the moment that he was
sent to anoint David in his place. So did Jeremy still continue praying for
ye Jews, as appears in the same Chapters, Romans 10.
and as Saint Paul writes of his own doing afterward, when the time of
their reprobation was now present. Finally, there is in Ezechiel a notable and
a comfortable rule for the wicked also by name, how to take and understand
the comminations of God, to wit, not simply (as you do) and absolutely, Ezech.
33. Iere. 18.
but with a condition: If I say to the wicked, Thou shall die the death, (see,
as it were absolutely: but yet it follows nevertheless,) and he repent him
of his sin, and work judgment and justice, and make restitution of pledge
and of robbery, and (generally) walk in the commandments of life, nor do
any evil: he shall live the life, and shall not die.

of our Creed: Christ descended into Hell to redeem us out of Hell by
suffering the wrath of God for our sins. Hebr. 5. In that place is never a
word of that Article, and much less of that interpretation: neither that
Christ suffered the wrath of God, although that may be said, so as the
Scriptures do term pain or punishment by the name of wrath. But then what
other wrath did he suffer, then that which is expressed plainly in the words
before, passus, crucifixus, mortuus, He suffered, was crucified, and dyed?
Belike you mean the padde that your Master Calvin leaft in the straw: Pur.
451. Call. Insti. li. 2. ca. 16. sect. 10.
that all this which I have said, was nothing, Nihil actum erat si Christus
corporea tantum morte defunctus fuisset, It had auayled nothing if Christ had
dyed bodily death only. And so you will bring us when you reply, Aug. ep. 99.
how he dyed some death of Soul also, either that which mortal Sinners do
dye here in sinning, or that which they dye afterward in Hell when they be in
damnation for their sin. You say, Pur. 63.
that Calvin affirms his descending into Hell to be understood of the wrath
of God, which he sustained for our sins before his death, at that time
especially when he that was God, complained that he was forsaken of God. What
other forsaking was that, but that he did not deliver him from the Cross,
which was to forsake by the judgment both of natural desire, and especially
of his most wicked enemies, who said there in their diuelishe insultation:
Mat. 27.
He trusted in God: let him now deliver him, if he will have him: for he said,
That I am the Son of God. Neither was it a complaint, as you say, but a
prayer, as you might have seen even Hebrews.5. if you had not been blind: Who
in the days of his flesh with a myghtie cry and with tears offered up
prayers and supplications to him that was able to save him out of death: and
was heard for his reverence, to wit, being raised by him again. Whereby you
see, that in deed he was not forsaken neither corporally. Where now is your
S^^ipture, or Caluins, for any other but bodyly death of Christ, for any other
wrath, for any other forsaking? Or what Ch^istian man did ever think, that
Christ's bodily death alone was nothing, yea or that it was not the full
sufficient and abundant ransom or redemption of the world? All the world must
go to schole again to Calvin, to learn, that Christ's soul (besides his
bodily death) was in such horrible distress of conscience, in such meruellous
anguish, horror, frayeur, yea and damnation, that his case was for the time
(despairing and blaspheming excepted) even the self same that the case of the
damned is for ever: yea, that he was in fear least he should have been damned
Fulke vvil avouch this out of Heb. v. in his Reply.
for ever also. This is the doctrine of that beast (as D. Allen does most
worthily call him for it) against our Saviors corporal death, which was his
only death: and that in many of his impious books, and namely in that
Catechism which they have joined with their French Bibles in the end, belike
that it may among fools creep in time into Canonical authority, as already
Luther with the Lutherans, and Calvin with the Caluinistes is peer to the
Apostles them selves. And for touching of this doctrine it is, that Fulke, more
zealous for Calvin then for Christ, goulpeth up such gear against D. Allen as
the Reader may see in the place: falsifying also D. Allens words, because
otherwise he had no mark to shoot at, as though he had said, Calvin to
affirm that Christ went down into hell after his death. Whereas D. Allen
says nothing of the time when he descended by Calvin, but only of the hellike
torments which Calvin builds upon his descending. Howbeit I would ask
Fulke, why it is such a mystery, that Christ's soul was in damnation for the
time upon the Cross, and not also and rather after his death for the time
until his resurrection, specially considering, that in the Creed, Crucifixus
goes before Sepultus, and Descendit ad inferos follows Sepultus, as also
commonly in the Scriptures the time of his Soul in hell, is made concurrant
with the time of his body in the grave? And who sees not thereby, that the
Catholics interpretation is also most natural and proper, that after Mortuus,
which signifies the separation of his body and soul by death, follows
Sepultus to show where his body was afterward, and Descendit ad inferos to
tell where his Soul was afterward, (though not in damnation, according to
these men's new blasphemy) until both were conjoined again in his
Resurrection, as there it follows immediately, Tertia die resurrexit a
mortuis. Thus I am feign to stand long upon every point, be it never so absurd
and impious against our Lord God him self, and against our only Redemption in
his blood. For they can wrest the Scriptures to such points also. We should (I
think) before now, if this point of Christ's damnation for our Redemption had
not been by diverse Catholics so handled to their shame, have had that other
point likewise of some Caluinistes made more common, that Christ also did
despeire in God, or blaspheme God, or commit some other sin against God for
our Redemption. Synod. Ge^. 5. Ses. 4. and Ses. 8. ca. 12.
For I see not but they are already come to say with that old most detestable
blasphemous Heretic Theodorus Mopsuestenus master to Nestorius, that he had in
him fomitem peccati, inclination to sin, and that he was not from his
conception impeccabilis, that is, vnsinable, considering they say he feared to
be damned for ever: unless they will say, that he was so ignorant to fear a
thing that was impossible to befall unto him. Which yet them selves can not
fear, because of their Special faith forsooth. Pur. 290.296.298.
O Lord these blasphemous helhoundes are more worthy to be beaten down with
thunderboltes, and so forth, as Fulke knows how to amplify, but that before
he lacked matter.

It is no marvel now after this, to see this man so cold for the Heluidians
and Antidicomarianitae, August. ad Quodvult. Haer. 84. Epip. Haer. 78. Pur. 453.
who were by the Primitive Church condemned as Heretics, for denying her
perpetual virginity. But he notwithstanding says: As for the perpetual
virginity of the Mother of Christ, as we can think it is true, so because the
Scripture has not revealed it, neither pertains it unto us, we make no
question of it. No, it pertains not unto you to accurse old Heretics: but to
join with old Heretics, that pertains unto you, and also to forge new
principles, as that same of Only Scripture, in their favor, yea and also to
contradict your self for the matter. For but four lines before you say: All
truth may be proved by Scripture. And now of this, We can think it is true:
and yet the Scripture has not revealed it. You might with more honesty have
said, that it may be proved by Scripture, namely where she says, Quoniam virum
non cognosco, Because I know not man: that is, Luc. 1. Au. de san. virg. ca. 4.
because I have made a vow of virginity, how therefore ca^ I have a child? But
this place you could not aleage (you wot) for another cause: neither do I say
that it proves inuincibly her perpetual virginity, although it so prove her
vow. For I know, that besides her vow, it should be proved that she never
sinned against her vow, nor had a dispensation of God for it. Secondly you
control D. Allen, Pur. 86.87.
where, saying, that the iustest person sins, he excepteth Christ, and for
his honor his mother. You think, it must then be said, that he was not savior
of his Mother, and she had no need of his salvation. If you had been a reader
of S. Augustine, as you be of Calvin, you might have easily remembered that he
says the very same that D. Allen does. A piece of Pelagius his heresy being
that a man may live without all sin, Au. de not. and gra. c. 36.
he alleged for it the example of so many just persons commended in the
Scriptures, and among the rest, our Lord and Saviors Mother, saying, that to
confess her without sin, necesse est pietati, It is necessary for him that
will not be impious. How you would have answered him, we see: specially
thinking you have Scripture for her sinning, because Christ said unto her: Why
did you seek me, Luc. 2. Joan. 2.
etc. and, What to me and thee, O woman? etc. you think that Christ here
reproves her, and that he had done her wrong herein if she did not sin. You
might do well to tell us what were those sins of hers. S. Augustine could not
see any there, nor else where, but says plainly in his answer to Pelagius*
although the contrary had been for his vantage against him: Excepting the holy
Virgin Mary, of whom for the honor of our Lord, I will have no question in the
world, when we talk of sins.Inde enim scimus, for by this we know, that
more grace was given to her to overcome sin altogether, because she was
worthy to conceive and bring forth him, whom it is certain to have had no
sin. The honor of our Lord is by Fulke his dishonor.
Where also you see, that her not sinning does not argue (as after your
Divinity) that she had no need of Christ's grace, Con. Tri. Ses. 6. can. 23.
but the clean contrary, that she had so much the more of his grace, then any
other of all the Saints: as you may also see in the Council of Trent.

Pur. 12.
you bring forsooth the right definition or description of an Heretic, and
say, that an Heretic is a man in the Church, etc. Whereof what pretty
conclusions do follow, you may consider: as because Papists be Heretics with
you, Ministerlike conclusions of Fulke.
therefore they be in the Church: item Anabaptists, Seruetians, etc. and of
old, the Arrians, Pelagians, etc. again on the contrary side, because these
are not, nor were not (by you) in the Church, therefore they be not Heretics.
It follows in your definition, That obstinatly mainteineth an opinion
contrary to the doctrine of the Scriptures. And then you add: Which if any of
us can be proved to do, then let us not be spared, but condemned for
Heretics. We say to you the same of any of us also. But you should have
defined also who is obstinate. You bring no Scripture against us, but we
answer it clearly, much less do you prove us to be obstinate. But we bring
plain Scriptures against you, to prove that also the doctrine of the Apostles
Traditions is the doctrine of the Scriptures, with very many particular points
of controversy, expressly against you, as namely, that neither the Church of
Christ should ever fly out of sight, much less any thing near the year 607.
nor Antichrist reign so long as from that time, nor the day of Judgment to be
so long after the coming of Antichrist. Again for the Real presence, This is
my body: and so forth. And if you also go about to answer some of our
Scriptures, it is no otherwise then the Arrians, Pelagians, etc. did in old
time, who notwithstanding were obstinate against the truth, because they
yielded not neither when the Church had given her sentence. So do we prove you
to be obstinate, and much more then any, because you neither yield after
sentence, and also do hold that the Church has no such authority to end
contentions.

Your ignorance in so wondering at D. Allen for saying, that

Of the like ignorance it is, where you wonder to hear, that is a likeness of
the Sacrifice of Christ's death upon the Cross, and say, Pur. 200.
that it is contrary to the whole See here cap. 10. Them. 24.
scope of the Epistle to the Hebrews, that there should be now any shadows,
or resemblances, when the body and substance it self is come. As though we had
now no Sacraments at all. Do you not know, that all Sacraments be liknesses
of other things? as S. Augustine, (whom your self somewhere allege) says: Si
enim Sacramenta quandam similitudinem, etc. Aug. ep. 23. Pur. 292. Sup. de. 24.
For if Sacraments had not a certain likeness of those things whose
Sacraments they be, they should not at al be Sacraments. And so you may
remember that S. Paul him self will have Baptism to be a likeness or
similitude of Christ's death, Romans 6.
burial, and resurrection. As again S. Augustine in the foresaid place notes
that it is truly said, Christum immolari quotidie in Sacramento, Christ to be
sacrificed every day in the Sacrament, although he were but once sacrificed, in
seipso, in him self, that is, in his own visible and not sacramental form:
because of the likeness in the Sacrament, to that immolation upon the Cross.
For, there was visible separation of his Body and Blood, the one from the
other: Here is mystical or sacramental separation of the same, as the
sacramental words do signify. And therefore this separation is but like to
that, if we attend the manner of both: and yet it is the very same separation,
if we attend the things that were and are separated. Which D. Allen uttered
very aptly in these few words: It is the self same in another manner. Pur.
198.201.
Whereunto you say, that Every boy in Oxford can tell him, that by Logic,
like is not the same. An high point: D. Allen knew it not. How then did he say,
in another manner? Did he not thereby give you the meaning of that Logical
Principle, to wit, that like is not the same with the same manner. But otherwise
what boy has not heard it said of one and the same man, being changed by
age, sickness, apparel, shauing, etc. He is like, or unlike him self? Against
so plain a declaration you could not replye, and yet you must needs say
something, but yet that which neither boy, nor man, nor your self can
understand. This it is: to say, It is the self same in another manner, will not
help, so long as the same respect remains. Which same respect, I pray you?
for I am not so quick, to understand him who understands not him self. For
who can imagine that the very same respect remains, when the same manner does
not remain

Pur. 20.21.
Again, where you attribute that to diuorsement, which the Scripture in many
places both Mat. 5. Mar. 10. Luc. 16. ^. Cor. 7.
deny to diuorsement, and does Romans 7.
attribute only to death, to wit, to make her no wife that was a wife: there
you utter your great skill in many matters. As in saying, that such marriage
after diuorsement is dispensed withal by the Pope. Item, that the Popes Canon
Law has far many more causes of diuorsement then for adultery, which only
Christ allows and we, Mat. 5.
quoth you. As though also the Canon Law allow not that only as a cause of
perpetual divorce, in such sort that if the Adulterer become afterward never
so chaste, yet the innocent cannot be compelled to receive him again. But
otherwise if the man's fury be such, that the wife in his house is in
continual fear and danger of her life, do not you also allow her to dwell
away from him until such time as his amendment do appear sufficiently? Item,
you speak there as though Moses judicial Law ought to be still observed.
Leu. 20.
We wish that adulterers were punished as God commanded in his Law: it
follows, and then the other question of Marriages were soon answered. As
though the man were punished by death, if he sinned against his wife with a
single woman. If not, how then is the question of his wives Marriage with
another resolved by his punishment? Such is your skill in the Law. I note here
your ignorance, but I mislike not your moderation in saying, we wish. Why then
do I charge you with such an opinion of that Law? For this, that you there
charge the Catholics, to allow dispensation for such persons to marry, as the
Law of God and nature abhors. What Law of God do you mean, but Leui. 18?
Do you think then, that Law to bind Christians? and that so straightly, as
neither to allow any dispensation in it, be it otherwise never so just? As for
any Law of Nature, you can allege none against the Churches dispensations, no
otherwise then against Gods own dispensations in ye time of the old Testament:
yea and if you remember your self well, they were allowed then, some of them
at the least, by law also, and not only by dispensation sometimes, which you
mean now to be against the Law of Nature.

Being so many ways ignorant in Gods Law, it is less Pur. 35.
that the Pope gives his pardons by the Sacrament of penance. As though the
Pope being at Rome might be minister of a Sacrament to one in England. You
might as well think that he does excommunicate by the Sacrament of penance. So
great a Doctor does not know, that the power of binding and loosing is
exercised many other ways, besides that Sacrament.

Yea not only in our divinity, but also in your own, you be so ignorant,
Pur. 13.
that you wonder, that a Catholic should say, that God sometime punishes
sin with sin: which is a position common to be seen in all Catholic
Doctors: Thom. 1.2. q. 87. ar. 2.
and complain, that when you say but half so much we charge you, to make God
the Author of sin. Why? is not that a common position, and long discourses
upon it, in your masters books, that God is the author of sin? Call. Insti.
li ca. 14. number. 17.18. Melanct. in Epist. ad Romans
If you be ashamed thereof, and therefore do say, not as an evil author, but
as a righteous judge, I do not reprehend you. But if you say it of ignorance
in your own Schools learning: you must know, that your Masters hold it of all
sins alike, as well of that sin which goes first in any man, as of that
sin which comes after in him and is sometime the punishment of the former
sin. And therefore they hold it of God otherwise then as of a righteous
judge, Ergo (by your own division) as of an evil author. For the difference
between them and us, is this: They deny our Freewill, and make God to work
all sin in us, in the same sort, as he works all good in us, to wit, per
se, willing, appointing, and predestinating us to sin: even no less, then he
which leads a blind man to fall. But we say no more, but that when a man has
sinned against him mortally, God takes away his inward grace, and sometime
also his outward assistance, more or less according to his most just will. So
as if a blind man's guide should for his desert, as because he will needs fall
when he might stand, forsake him either quite or for a time, and he afterward
fall, the cause of that fall, per se, he only is himself, as of the former,
and his guide, only per accidens, though of the former neither per accidens.
Even so does God, who is both the light of our eyes by his grace infused, and
also our guide by his infinite helps external. Howbeit he deals not with us
all and always according to his justice: but of his infinite mercy commonly
he will not let us fall when we will needs fall, and when we be fallen, he
will not let us fall farther, yea he raises us often again when we would lie
still, yea also when we resist him and fight against him rebelliously: a
notable example in S. Paul's conversion, Act. 9. Iac. 1.
that most worthily S. James is so vehement to hold and affirm, that all good
is of him, but no evil at all, not so much as tentation to evil.

by that you say, Supra. ca. 2. and ca. 10. Them. 11.3. Ar. 15.16.
the Britons to have kept their Easter so as the Asians did: and the Latins to
be departed from the Grecians, in this present Schism. Which both I noted
before. Again, because you say (as it seems) that Iulianus the Apostata was
Emperor after Valens the Arrian. Again, speaking of the Estern Churches of
Asia at this present: that the new Testament is printed in the Syrian tongue,
at the Emperors charges, Ar. 6.
for the increase of Christian faith among them. What Emperor and what faith,
I pray you, but Catholic or Popish? Pur. 373.
Again, that the Fathers alleging Succession of Bishops against Heretics,
specially named the Church of Rome, it was because those Heretics for the most
part had been sometimes of the Church of Rome, as Valentinus, Marcian,
Nouatus. Those Heretics yt D. Allen speaks of, were not only the
Valentinians and Nouatians, but also the Donatistes, the Arrians, yea and all
Heretics in general. Now, had the most part of these been sometimes of the
Church of Rome? Yea Nouatus him self, Supra p. 16
was he not a Priest of the Church of Carthage under S. Cyprian? Who can read
S. Cyprian, and be ignorant thereof, specially now a days, after that so many
have noted the error of some Greek Historians, who in old time and being
far of, could not distinguishe Nouatus of Carthage, from Nouatianus of Rome?
And also of Valentinus and Marcion, where have you that they were of Rome?
unless all that go to Rome be of Rome: For so we read in Ireneus, Iren. l.
3. ca. 4. and li. 1. ca. 29. Philast. in Catal.
ye time noted when Valentinus came to Rome (for by Philastrius, he was of
Cypres) and that Marcion was of Pontus, being therefore called Ponticus. You
might in another sense say, that they and all other Heretics were sometimes of
the Church of Rome, because all lightly were first Catholics, and al
Catholics were (as all ought to be) of that Churches communion. And that to
have been the cause, why the Fathers named that Church specially. But so you
would not say, because you would not condemn your self for a Schismatike.

Last of all, where you must show us, wherein the Communion you show your self
again a great clearke. Pur. 199.200.
The Scriptures make the Communion of Saints to be, as is the Communion of our
members in our body. Yet you say, One can not merit for another, no not for
him self, but every man has his worthiness of Christ. As though neither
Christ could merit for any other, no nor for himself, because he had his
worthiness of God. Again granting, that some of the members be here on
earth, and some elsewhere, and yet denying that they may either by prayer also
help one the other: you so define the Communion, that you allow it no place
for the prayers also of the members alive to be made for others alive. But only
for the dispensation of the grace and gifts of God, which as every one has
received of God, so of charity he is bound to employ the same, to the profit
of his fellow members here on earth. And why is he not of charity bound as
well to pray for them? And if he be, why are not those members in heaven as
well? or have not they also received of God some gifts? If they have, why are
not they of charity bound as well? or does not the Scripture say plainly, ye
Christ's friends in heaven, do rejoice with his penitentes in earth? How then
could you pretend, Luc. 15.
as though the mutual offices of love whereby one member has compassion with
another, can by no means touch the state of the dead? Is not the state of ye
holy Angels, now the state also of some that be dead? Be not they also among
Christ's friends in heaven? So much you say touching the Communion of the
Church militant here on earth. For you have another besides it, which you call
the communion of the whole body, and that you make to be the participation of
life, from Christ the head. If that be all, then is there no Communion. For
what communion were it between the members of your natural body, if they did
only receive life, from your head, and could not use their said life to profit
one another, but lived every one to himself alone? How much better had you
been to follow D. Allens most proper and true description of it, then to utter
thus you know not what? at ye least, if you could not correct him, yet you
could belie him: as to say, that he will have other works and ways of
salvation, beside the blood of Christ. He says, that in this Communion all
works, and all ways of salvation, are common to the whole body, and al
grounded in the blood of Christ. But of any beside the blood of Christ, he
says not. Yea it is clean contrary to that which he says.

The.13. Chapter, or Conclusion. That in his two writings against D. Allen,
there is yet stuff enough to make another Book as big as this, to the
further discredit of his party.
THus at the length with the help of God I am come to the end. And yet the
Reader must understand, that I find in this man such store of this stuff, as
would suffice to make another volume as big as this: partly by enlarging these
two last Chapters with many more of his like contradictions, and errors or
ignorances (for all the former Chapters be full freyted) partly by making many
new Chapters upon new matters. As one, to show how he behaueth himself in
all places where he charge either the Catholics doctrine or D. Allen
himself, with contradictions. Another, to lay together all his falsifications
of the Scriptures, Doctors, and D. Allen, by adding, diminishing or changing
their words. Another, of his most impudent facing lies without any color of
truth. Another, of his detestable raylings not only at D. Allen, but also at
the old Doctors, and at Rome, and at the whole Church, which he can not avoid
(the Scriptures, with his own confession, are so plain for it) but it is the
true Church his own Mother, and Spouse of Christ. Another of his ridiculous
answers to many of D. Allens Demaundes, sometimes like him that answered a
pokefull of plumes when he was demanded the way to London: sometimes to
answer the very same thing that is in question, etc.

Moreover, diverse others chapters yet of Purgatory, about his answers to D.
Allens allegations, to see, whether he have so answered the^, as I have here
answered al his allegations against it yea and against any other Article of
ours. One of those Chapters might be, to gather all the Scriptures alleged by
D. Allen, and the ancient Fathers before him, and Fulkes answers unto them,
with my replies which are e dispersed in this book: like as in the 8. chapter
I have gathered al Fulkes scriptures, and answered the^. Another, of such
books in antiquity, as he denies, namely the works of S. Dionysius
Areopagita, and the Constitutions of ye Apostles by S. Clement: because he
could not otherwise avoid their plain testimonies for prayer for the dead,
they also living even in the Apostles time, and familiarly with the Apostles.
Of which books notwithstanding there are such probations as can not possibly
be answered. Read the Preface of Fr. Turrianus in his new edition of those
Constitutions: and the Preface of Mat. Galenus ad Areopagitica, Cop. Dial. 2.
ca. 5.
as also the Preface and Scholies in the Greek edition by Morelius at Paris
Anno. 1562. In another Chapter I might show, how vainly he labors to answer
certain testimonies of the other Doctors, considering that he grants other
testimonies of the very same Doctors them selves, or of their several times,
to be so evident for it, that they can not be answered: for which cause also he
passes by many of them with silence: as, that S. Augustine in one place prayed
for his mothers soul, and yet to stand with D. Allen about other places of
his, that they prove it not: as though Doctors opinion and judgment being
confessed, there needs any more to do to be made about his sayings. And yet
it is nothing also which he answers to those other places, as I have showed
in very many of them. Another might be, to lay together all D. Allens
arguments or reasons for it, with my replies to Fulkes answers, such as I
have made in diverse places of this book. In another I could show, that Fulke
has made no answer lightly to these Scriptures, Doctors, or reasons, but D.
Allen did foresee it before hand, warned the Reader of it, and made so just a
reply unto it, as stands still upright, even after that Fulke has done the
worst he could. Another might be, to show out of Justinius Martyr, Ireneus, and
Clement Alexandrinus, in how many things they also make with us most evidently
(as in nothing against us) because he does so often require us, to prove prayer
for the dead by any of them, as though he would yield to them, although he will
not to their fellows: whereas in deed he excepteth against them no less, as I
have showed, then against the rest. Another might be by occasion of his zeal
for Calvin, Luther, and such other his Masters and fellows: to show more
copiously, that they are worthily charged, not only with those shameful
opinions by D. Allen, but also that they may be likewise charged with very many
more no less, yea and much more shameful then those.

These matters are such, as being so handled, would work the further
discredit of Fulke and of his side, and yet being no more handled, then
already, do leave no blotte in our side, no nor so much as in D. Allen
particularly. For which cause I mind not neither hereafter, to prosecute them,
unless I have greater occasion given then yet I see. But presently I omitted
them, to avoid more prolixitie, and specially because in this book I took in
hand to defend, not D. Allen, but the Church: and therefore whatsoever this
Heretic pretended against the Church or against any thing of hers, I have
answered it all and every whit, omitting nothing to my knowledge: and so shall
be able (with the grace of God) and also ready, to answer him hereafter also,
if he harden his heart yet further to make more resistance against the truth.
Counselling him rather, yea and beseeching him in the bowels of the mercies of
Christ, to be better to his own soul, and to so innumerable other souls
redeemed with the most precious blood of Christ, then to stand any longer
against the Church of Christ, to the damnation of so many souls, specially
having neither any text of Scripture, nor any other authority Catholic,
against the same Church, as I have here most evidently declared. But if he
list still without cause to blaspheme the Holy City and Tabernacle of God, let
him know, Apoc. 13.22.3.
and all such as he is, that his name will be stricken out of it to his
eternal confusion, when our names, that through the mercy of God be of it,
shall before all the world to our unspeakable glory appear written in it
together and in the book of life of the Lamb and Son of God, to whom be
glory in the Church throughout all ages for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
The Printer to the Reader.
In two things I am to desire thee (courteous and friendly Reader) to extend
thy accustomed gentleness in perusing and reading of this godly work: One is,
that thou will friendly correct with thy pen these faults, and what others
else thou shall therein epsy committed in the Printing: for although I have had
great care and been very diligent in the correcting thereof, yet because my
Compositor was a stranger and ignorant in our English tongue and
Orthographi^, some faults are passed vnamended of me. The other, that thou
will not like the worse of this learned work, because it has not the
variety of letters which is requisite in such a book, and as the Printers in
England do customably use, my ability was not otherwise to do it, and having
these Characters out of England, I could not join them together with any
others, and so was forced to use one Character both for the words of Fulke, and
for all Allegations. Remember that when man can not do as he would, he must do
as he may.

John Lion.

The Errata.
Cap. 3. Fol. 11. for, man read men

Page 80. for anima read omnia.

Page 54. for anima read anna

Page 66 for obnaxius read obnoxious for lanacri lauacri

Page 190. for milenis read milleuis

Hag. 355. for Ephata read Epheta for Ephphata Ephpheta.

The contents of this Book at large.
Chapter. 1. Fulke confesses, out of the true Church to be no salvation.
Chapter. 2. He confesses the known Church of the first. 600. years after
Christ, and the known members thereof. Chapter. 3. He confesses, the foresaid
true Church to have made so plainly with us in very many of the controversies
of this time, that he is feign to hold, that the true Church may err, and also
has erred. The first part of this Chapter. That the true Church may err. The
second part. That the true Church did also err: and that in the same points
as we now do err in. i. Where he charge them with many points together.
ii. As touching Vigilantius, and Invocation of Saints, by it self. iij. As
touching Iouinian: of Fasting, of Virginities merit, of Votaries Marriage.
iiij. As touching Ceremonies. v. As touching Purgatory, and praying for the
dead. 1. What he says of particular Doctors, and their particular times, for
it. 2. What he says of the whole Church in some of those times. 3. To what
origin he confesses the Doctors to refer it, to wit, unto Scripture and
Tradition of the Apostles. 4. He contrariwise fears not nor basheth not to
say, they had it from the devil and his limbs.
vj. As touching the Popes primacie.

Chapter. 4. He charge the said Primitive true Church also with sundry
errors, wherewith he neither does, nor will, nor can, charge us. Chapter 5.
What reason he renders, why they in those ancient times had the true Church
notwithstanding these their errors. Chapter. 6. An answer first to all the
foresaid errors, wherewith he has charged the Church of the first. 600.
years, and afterward likewise to all errors that he lays to the Church of
these later times.

His zeal in answering for Calvin and others being in deed of his Church.

The first part of this Chapter. Concerning the errors that he lays (cap. 3.
part 2.) both to the Fathers and to us. 1. Of Cross and Images. 2. Of
Invocation of Saints, and worshipping of their Relikes. 3. Of Abstinence from
fleshmeate, and from Marriage. 4. Of Ceremonies. 5. Of Sacrifice. And for the
dead. Purgatory. And Purgatory fire. Prayer for the dead. And Oblations for
the dead. Beeres to carry home the corpses.

The Second Part. Concerning the errors that he laid (cap. 4.) to the Fathers
and not to us. 1. Touching the Heresies which were in their times. 2. Touching
the errors of S. Cyprian, S. Irenee, and S. Justinius. 3. Touching Second
Marriages, And S. Jerome. 4. Touching praying to the Son, and to the Holy
ghost. 5. Of ministering the B. Sacrament to Infantes.
The third part. Concerning the errors that he lays to the Church of later
time, and not of old. 1. Touching the bodies of Angels. 2. Touching the Popes
Superiority over the Council. 3. Touching the Constance Councels presumption.
4. Touching certain false interpretations of Scripture.

Chapter. 7. That he has no other shift against our manifold Euide^ces (so
clear they be) but the name of Only Scripture, as well about each
controversy, as also about the meaning of Scripture it self, and how timorous
he makes us, and how bold he bears himself thereupon. The first part. How he
excepteth by Only Scripture against all other Euidencies, in the Controversies
that are between us. 1. Against the Rule to know Heresy by finding the first
authors and their old Heresies. By Antiquity. By names.
2. Against the Apostles Traditions. 3 Against the true Churches Authority,
that is, against her practice, and her Judgment, Against her Councels, Against
her Chief Pastors Determinations, and their whole Succession. 4 Against the
Fathers both in general, and in particular.
The second part. Being told that the question between us is not (as he makes
it) of the Scriptures authority, but of the meaning: How there likewise
against al expositors he takes the same exception of only Scripture, requiring
also Scripture to be expounded by Scripture. The third part. What he means by
his Only Scripture: and that thereby he excepteth also against Scripture it
self. The fourth part. What great promises he makes to bring most evident
Scripture against us, and also by Scripture to prove his sense of Scripture:
Triumphing also before the victory, and saying, that we dare not be tried by
Scripture, but reject the Scriptures. Whereupon a fourefolde offer is made
unto him.
Chapter 8. To show his vanity in his forsaid rigorous exacting of plain
Scriptures, and great promises to bring plain Scripture, conferring place with
place so evidently: All the Scriptures that he alleges, are examined, and
answered. The first part. Concerning the question of Only Scripture. The
second part. Concerning the question of the Church. 1. Indefinitely. Whether
the whole Church may err. Whether she may be divorced. Whether she it is that
should prepare the way to Antichrist. Whether she be always a base company.
Whether it be always invisible, yea or so much as then when Antichrist comes.
2. Namely of their Church and of ours. Certain places co^ferred diligently
together, concerning the Defection and Antichrist.

The third part. Concerning the question of Purgatory. 1. Ab authoritate
Scripturae negative, that is, by the Scriptures authority negatiuely. 2. Ab
authoritate Scripturae affirmitiue. First, about certain foundations of
Purgatory and prayer for the dead. The distinction of venial and mortal
sin. Whether after sin remitted, pain may remain. Whether Purgatory
follow thereupon. Whether in Christ, the works of one may help another. His
common argument of the omnisufficiencie of Christ's passion. It is
omnisufficient, ergo it works always to the full. It is omnisufficient, ergo
nothing works with it. Secondly, directly of Purgatory it self, and prayer
for the dead. Whether all the elect go straight to Heaven. Before Christ's
coming. Or at the least, since Christ's coming. Whether the Judgment may
stand with Purgatory. Whether faith, hope, and Gods will.

The fourth part. Concerning all other questions that he mentions. About Good
works. 1. In general. Whether they do justify. Whether we have Freewill.
2. In special. Of prayer. Prayer to Saints. Of Fasting.
About the Sacraments. 1. In general. Whether they be but two. Whether they
do confer grace.
2. In special. Baptism, the necessity, and effect of it. Eucharist: Real
presence. Transubstantiation. Marriage of Votaries. Of Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons.


Chapter. 9. To defend, that the Doctors, as they be confessed to be ours in
very many points, so they be ours in all points, and the Protestants in no
point. All the Doctors sayings that he alleges, are examined and answered.
The first part. Of his Doctors generally. 1. His chalenging words. 2. A
general answer to his challenge, declaring that we need not to answer his
Doctors particularly. 3. I join with him nevertheless particularly.
The second part. Of his Doctors, particularly. First, whether they expound any
Scripture against us. 1. About Antichrist, and Babylon. 2. About Only faith.
3. About Purgatory. Touching Scripture expounded against it. Touching
Scriptures for it. Whether they say no Scripture to make for it. Of certain
particular textes.

Secondly, whether they give any other kind of testimony against us. 1. About
the Books of Machabees. Whether, somewhat also of other controuersed
Scriptures, specially.
2. About Only Scripture. Where, of S. Augustine threefoldly alleged.
3. About certain Traditions. 4. About the Marriage of Votaries. 5. About the
Real presence. And Transubstantiation. 6. About the Sacrament of penance.
Absolution. Temporal debt remaining after Absolution. Satisfaction. Pardons.
7. Of Purgatory. Of the Canonical Memento, of oblations, and of Sacrifice
for the dead practiced by the Church. Of particular Doctors. Whether S.
Augustine doubted of Purgatory. Or denied it. Other Doctors about praying for
the dead. Whether it be only for Venial sins.
8. Of Limbus patrum.



Chapter 10. That, notwithstanding al which he has said against D. Allens
Articles, in his first book being of that matter, or also in his other of
Purgatory: Every one of my 51. Demaundes (and therefore also every one of my
Motives, and likewise every one of those Articles) stands in his force (every
one I say) and much more all of the^, to make any man to be a Catholic, and
not a Protestant. 1 Collatio Carthaginensis touching the Church of the
Scriptures. 2 Building of the Church amid persecution. 3 Going out of the
Church. 4 Rising after the beginning of the Church. 5 Co^tradicted of the
Church. 6 This name Catholics. 7 This name Heretics. 8 This name
Protestants. 9 Conversion of heathen Nations. 11 Our Britannie. 10.12.
Miracles and Visions. 13.15. Honor of Crosses and Saints. 14.16 Virtue of
Crosses and Saints. 17 Exorcismes. 18 Destroying of Idolatry. 19 Kings and
Emperors. 20 In all persecutions. 21 Churches. 22 Service. 23 Apish imitation.
24 Priesthood and Sacrifice. 25 Monks. 26 Fathers. 27 Councels. 28 See
Apostolic. 29 Traditions. 30 Their own Doctors. 31 Universality. 32
Antiquity. 33 Consent. 34 Authority. 35 Unity. 36 Owners and kepers of the
Scriptures. 37 Stoare house of all truth. 38 Old Heresies. 39 In old Heretics
Only. 40 They never before now. 41 Studying al truth. 42 Unsent. 43 Succession.
44 Apostolic Church. 45 Changing. 46 Our Auncetors saved, and theirs damned.
47 Communion of Saints. 48 By their fruits. 49 All enemies. 50 Sure to
continue. 51 Apostasy.
Chapter 11. What gross contradictions Fulke is feign to utter against him
self, while he struggleth against Gods Church and the Doctrine thereof.
Chapter. 12. A Nosegay of certain strange flowers piked out of Fulke: that
they which delight in such a Gardener, may see his handyworke. The.13. Chapter,
or Conclusion. That in his two writings against D. Allen, there is yet stuff
enough to make another Book as big as this, to the further discredit of his
party.

