THE SPARAGVS Garden:

A COMEDY.

Acted in the year 1635. by the then Company of Revels, at Salisbury Court.

The Author Richard Brom.

Hic totus voloride at Libellus. Mart. LONDON:

Printed by I. Oaks, for Francis Constable, and are to be sold at his shops in
Kingsstreet at the sign of the Goat, and in Westminster Hall. 1640.

To the Right Honorable WILLIAM Earl of New Castle, etc. Governor to the
Prince his Highness.
My LORD!
YOur favorable Construction of my poor Labors commanded my Service to your
Honor, and, in that, betrayed your worth to this Dedication: I am not ignorant
how far unworthy my best endeavors are of your least allowacne; yet let your
Lordship be pleased to know you, in this, share but the inconveniences of the
most renowned Princes as you partake of their glories: And I doubt not, but it
will more divulge your noble Disposition to the World, when it is known you
can freely pardon an Officious trespass against your Goodness. Caesar had never
bin commended for his Clemency, had there not occasion been offered, wherein
he might show, how willingly he could forgive: I shall thank my Fortune, if
this weak presentation of mine shall any way increase the Glory of your Name
among Good Men, which is the chiefest aim and only study of

Your Honour^ devo^ed servant. Richard Brom.

To his deserving friend Mr. Richard Brom on his Sparagus Garden, a Comedy.
WHat ever walk I in your Garden use,
Breeds my delight, and makes me love thy Muse
For the designment; since I cannot sp^
A prospect, which does more ^nvite mine eye:
I Am in a maze, and know not how to find
A freedom that will more delight my mind,
Then this imprisonment within thy Bower,
Where hours seem minutes, and each day an hour,
Nor, were my stay perpetual, could I grieve,
Where such r^re fruits mine appeti^e relieve.
The en^ous Critic would recant to see
How much oppressed is every virgin tree
With her own bu^then: Leekes, and A^ornes here
Are food for Critickes; but the choycer cheer,
For those, can r^llish Delicates I might
In praising of thy worth, be in^nite:
But thou art modest and (...) to hear
A tedious, glorious, needless Character
Of thee* and of thy Muse: Yet I could say,
(Give me but leave) it is no common Play*
Within thy plot of ground, no We^d does spring,
To hurt the growth of any Vnder^ing:
Nor is thy Laborinth confused, but we
In that disorder, may proportion see:
Thy Hearb^ are ^hysicall, and do more good.
In purging Humors, then some's letting blood.
C. G.

To the Author on his Sparagus Garden.
Friend,
WHat do mean, that thus thou do entice
Thy Lovers, thus to walk in Paradise?
Most skillful Artist! that so well do know
To plant, for profit, as for out-ward show
For on thy Sparagus are thoroughly pleased
Our intellects; others scarce* hunger eased.
The wisest of the Age shall hither come,
And think their time well spent as was their sum.
The Sqint-ey'd Critic that such care does take,
To look for that he loatheth to partake:
Now crossing his warped Nature shall be kind,
And vexing grieve 'cause he no fault can find.
The ignorant of the times that do delight,
Not in a Play, but how to wast daylight,
Shall resort hither, 'till that you descry,
With pleasure, smiling April in each eye.
Alcinou's garden, which each day did spring,
And her loved fruit unto perfection bring,
Ought not compare with this: Here Men did grow:
Such care thy Art and Labor did bestow
For man's wel-being, and anew create,
And poyse them up above a needy Fate.
Is it not pity ought should hurt this Spring?
(A Serpent in a Garden's no new thing)
Yet wisely has thy goodness took a care,
He should sting none, but who censorious are.
R. W.

The Prologue to the Play.
HE, that his wonted modesty retaynes,
And never set a (...) upon his Brains
Above your Judgments; nor did ever strive
By Arrogance or Ambition to atchieve
More praise unto himself, or more applause
Unto his Scenes, then such, as know the Laws
Of Comedy do give; He only those (...)
Now prays may scan his Verse, and weigh his Prose:
Yet thus far he thinks meet to let you know
Before you see it, the Subject is so low,
That to expect high Language, or much Cost,
Were a sure way, now, to make all be lost.
Pray look for none: He Will promise such hereafter,
To take your graver judgments, now your laughter
Is all he aims to moove. I had more to say -- -
The Title, too, may prejudice the Play.
It says the Sparagus Garden; if you look
To feast on that, the Title spoils the Book.
We have yet a taste of it, which he does lay
In The midst o'th journey, like a Bait by the way:
Now see with Candor: As our Poet's free,
Pray let be so your Ingenuity.
The Epilogue.
AT first we made no boast, and still we fear,
We have not answered expectation here,
Yet give us leave to hope, as hope to live,
That you will grace, as well as Justice give.
We do not dare your Judgments now: for we
Know lookers on more then the Gamsters see;
And what ere Poets write, we Act, or say,
It Is only in your hands to Crown a Play.
(...)

Touch. With me gentlemen?


Gil. Only a few neighbourly and friendly words sir.


Touch. Oh you are most friendly welcome good Mr. Gilbert G^lawire, and Mr.
Walter Chamlet I take ye to be.


Ambo. The same sir at your service.


Touch. Your fathers both were my good neighbors indeed; worthy and well
reputed members of the City while they lived: but that may be read upon the
Hospital walls, and gates; it is enough for me to say they loved me: Sanson
Touchwood! and I were a wretch if I should not honor their memory in their
happy succession: Again gentlemen you are welcome.


Gil. Yet you may be pleased sir to remember, though our fathers were both
loving friends to you, yet they were sometimes at odds one with another.


Touch. True, true, ever at odds: They were the common talk of the town for a
pair of wranglers; still at strife for one trifle or other: they were at law
logger-heads together, in one match that held 'em tugging tone the the other by
the purse-strings a matter of nine years, and all for a matter of nothing.
They cours'd one another from Court to Court, and through every Court Temporal
and Spiritual; and held one an other play till they lost a thousand pound a
man to the Lawyers, and till it was very sufficiently ad judged that your
father was one fool, and your father was another fool. And so again
gentlemen you are welcome: now your business.


Walt. You may now be pleased sir to remember that our fathers grew friends at
last.


Touch. Heaven forbid else.


Gil. And note the cause, the ground of their reconciliation, which was upon
the love, betwixt me and this gentleman's sister. My fathers Son married his
fathers Daughter, and our two fathers grew friends, and wise men again.


Touch. To the point good gentlemen, yet you are welcome.


Gil. Troth sir the point is this: You know (and the town has taken sufficient
notice of it) that there has been a long contention betwixt you and old Mr.
Striker your neighbor --


Touch. Ha?


Gil. And the cause or ground of your quarrel (for ought any body knows but
your selves) may be as trivial, as that which was derided in our fathers.


Touch. Are you there with me?


Gil. And great hopes there are, and wagers laid by your friends on both sides,
that you two will be friends.


Touch. I Will hold you an hundred pounds of that.


Gil. Nay, more, that Mr. Striker will be willing to give his Grandchild to
your Son, so you will give your consent.


Touch. And your coming is to persuade that, is it not? if it be so, speak;
deal plainly with me gentlemen, whilst yet you are welcome.


Walt. Insooth it is so, we come to negotiate the match for your son, and
your friendship with old Mr. Striker.


Touch. You are not welcome.


Gil. But when you weigh the reasons, and consider the perfect love of the young
pair, and how the world will praise your reconciliation, and bless the
providence, that made their loves the means to work their parents charity.


Touch. Again you are not welcome.


Gil. Your self but now commended the atonement
Of our two fathers, wrought by the same means:
I mean my marriage with his sister here
Against as great an opposition.

Walt. But our fathers loved their children.


Touch. Your fathers were a couple of doting fools, and you a pair of saucy
knaves; now you are not welcome: and more then so, get you out of my doors.


Gil. Will you sir, by your wilfulness, cast away your son?


Touch. My son? no son of mine, I have cast him off already for casting an
eye upon the daughter of mine enemy: let him go, let him pack; let him
perish: he comes not within these doors, and you, that are his fine spoken
spokes-men, get you off of my ground I charge you.


Walt. We are gone sir: only but wishing you Mr. Touchwood to remember that
your sonne's your son.


Touch. Indeffinitely not sir, until he does not only renounce all interest
in the love of that baggage; but do some extraordinary mischief in that
family to right me for the trespass he has done; and so win my good opinion,
till which be done a daily curse of mine he shall not miss; and so you may
inform him.


Exit. Gil. What an uncharitable wretch is this?


Walt. The touchiest piece of Touchwood that e're I met withal.


Gil. I feared we should inflame him.


Walt. All the comfort is, his son may yet outlive him.


Act 1. Scene 2.
Walter, Gilbert, Samuel.
Gil. BUt the danger is, his father may dis-inherit him


Walt. He cannot be so devilish; here comes his son, a gentleman of so sweet
a disposition, and so contrary to his crabbed Sire, that a man who never heard
of his mothers virtue might wonder who got him for him.


Gil. Not at all I assure you, Sam is his fathers nowne son: for the old man
you see, is gentle enough, till he be incensed; and the son being moved, is
as fiery as the father.


Walt. But he is very s^dome and slowly moved; his father often and of the
sudden.


Gil. I prithee would thou have green wood take fire as soon as that which
is old and sere?


Walt. He is deep in thought.


Gil. Over head and ears in his Mrs. contemplation.


Sam. To dis-obey a father, is a crime
In any son unpardonable. Is this rule
So general that it can bear noe exception?
Or is a fathers power so illimitable,
As to command his sons affections?
And so control the Conqueror of all men
Even Love himself? no: he, that enterprises
So great a work, forgets he is a man;
And must in that forget he is a father,
And so if he forgo his nature, I
By the same Law may leave my Piety.
But stay, I would not lose my self in following
This wild conceit

Gil. How now Sam, whither away?


Sam. I was but casting how to find the way
Unto my self. Can you direct me gentlemen?

Walt. Yes, yes; your father has told us the way.


Sam. Ha you had conference with him? ha ye? speak.


Gil. Marry sir ha we, and I think to purpose.


Sam. Ha you won ought upon him to my advantage?


Walt. As much as may restore you to acquaintance
With him again, can you but make good use on it.

Sam. Pray do not trifle with me; tell me briefly.


Gil. Briefly he says you must not dare to see him;
Nor hope to receive blessing to the value
Of a new threepence, till you disclaim your love
In your fair Annabell; and not only so,
But you must do some villainous mischievous act
To vex his adversary, her Grandfather;
Or walk beneath his curse in banishment.

Sam. A most uncharitable and unnatural sentence.


Walt. But think withal it is your father, that
Makes this decree; obey him in the 'xecution:
He has a great Estate, you are his only son:
Do not lose him, your fortune, and your self
For a frail piece of beauty: shake her off;
And do some notable thing against her house,
To please your father

Sam. The Devil speaks it in thee,
And with this spell I must Conjure him out.

Draw. Gil. Oh friend you*are too violent.


Sam. He Is too desperate,
To urge me to an act of such injustice.
Can her fair love, to whom my faith is given,
Be answered with so loud an injury?
Or can my faith so broken yield a sound
Less terrible than thunder, to affright
All love and constancy out of the breast
Of every Virgin that shall hear the breach
Of my firm faith?

Gil. Be not so passionate.


Sam. I have no further power to do an outrage
Against that Family to whom my heart
Is linked, then to rip out this troubled heart
The only ominous cause, indeed, of all.
My over passionate fathers cruelty; and that
(If I must needs do an injurious Office)
Alone, shall be my act to calm his fury.

Gil. Prithee blow over this passion; thou were wont
To affect wit, and can not be a Lover
Truly without it. Love is wit it self,
And through a thousand lets will find a way
To his desired end.

Sam. The Ballet taught you that.


Gil. Well said, Love will find out the way:
I see thou art coming to thy self again,
Can there no shift, no witty slight be found
(That have been common in all times and ages)
To blind the eyes of a weake-sighted father,
And reconcile these dangerous differences
But by bloodshedding, or outrageous deeds,
To make the feud the greater? recollect
Thy self good Sam; my house, my purse, my counsel
Shall all be thine, and Wat shall be thy friend.

Walt. Let me entreat your friendship.


Sam. And me your pardon.


Gil. So, so, all friends; let us home and there consult
To lay the tempest of thy fathers fury;
Which cannot long be dangerous, it is but like
A storm in April, spent in swift extremes,
When straight the Sun shootes forth his cheerful beams.

Ex. Act 1. Scene 3.
Striker, Mony-lacks.
Stri. YOu will not assault me in mine own house? I hope you will not; nor
urge me beyond my patience with your borroughing attempts* good sir Hugh
Mony-lacks I hope you will not.


Mon. I hope I moved you not, but in fair language sir;
Nor spoke a syllable that might offend you.
I have not used the word of loan, or borrowing;
Only some private conference I requested.

Stri. Private conference! a new coined word for borrowing of money; I tell
you, your very face, your countenance (though it be gloss'd with Knighthood)
looks so borrowingly, that the best words you give me are as dreadful as
Stand and deliver, and there I think I was w'ye. I am plain w'ye sir, old
Will Striker I.


Mon. My father Striker, I am bold to call you.


Stri. Your father! no, I desire no such near acquaintaince with you, good sir
Hugh Mony-lacks: you are a Knight and a noble gentleman, I am but an Esquire
and out of debt; and there I think I was w'ye again*


Mon. I shall be with you anon, when you have tal'^d your self out of breath.


Stri. It Is true, I had the honor to be your Worships father in law when time
was, that your Knighthood married and Ladyfied a poor daughter of mine: but
yet she had five thousand pounds in her purse if you please to remember it; and
as I remember you had then fourteen hundred a year: But where is it now? and
where is my daughter now? poor abused Innocent; your riotousnesse abroad, and
her long night watches at home shortened her days, and cast her into her grave
-- And 'twas not long before all your estate was buried too; and there I was
w'ye again I take it: but that could not fetch her again.


Mon. No sir, I wish my life might have excused
Hers, far more precious: never had a man
A juster cause to mourn.

Stri. Nor mourned more justly, it is your only wearing; you have just none
other: nor have had means to purchase better any time these seven years as I
take it* By which means you have got the name of the mourning Knight; and
there I am sure I was w'ye.


Mon. Sir, if you will not be pleased to hear my desires to you, let me depart
without your derision.


Stri. Even when you please, and whither you please good sir Hugh Mony-lacks:
my house shall be no enchanted Castle to detain your Knight-errandship from
your adventures. I hope your errand hither was but for your dinner; and so
far forth (and especially at your going forth) you are welcome. Your daughter
I do keep, and will for her poor mothers sake; (that was my daughter) peace
be with her -- she shall be no more a trouble to you; nor be your child any
longer: I have made her mine; I will adopt ^er into mine own name, and make
her a Striker; she shall be no more a Mony-lack^, and if she please me well in
matching with a husband, I know what I will do for her.


Mon. I thank you sir.


Stri. Do you thank me sir, I assure you you need not; for I mean so to
order her estate, and bind it up in that trust that you shall never finger a
farthing on it: am I w'ye sir?


Mon. I cannot choose but thank you though in behalf of my child.


Stri. Call her your child again, or let me but hear that you suffer her to
ask you a bare blessing, i will send her after you upon adventures sir Knight*
and who shall give a portion with her then? or what can she hope from a father
that groans under the weight of a Knighthood for want of means to support it?


Mon. I* shall find means to live without your trouble hereafter.


Stri. You may, you may; you have a wit sir Hugh, and a projective one; what,
have you some new project a foot now, to out-^oe that of the Hand-barrowes?
what call you 'em the Sedams? oh cry you mercy, cry you mercy; I heard you had
put in for a share at the Asparagud Ga den: or that at least you have a P^sion
thence; to be their Gather guest and bring 'em custom, and that you play the
fly of the new Inne-there; and sip with all companies: am I w'ye there sir?


Mon. You may be when you please sir; I can command the best entertainment
there for your money.


Stri. In good time sir.


Mon. In the mean time sir, I had no mind to beg nor borrow of you, and
though you will not* give me leave to call you father, nor my daughter my
daughter, yet I thought it might become my care to advertise you (that have
taken the care of her from me) of a danger that will much afflict you, if it
be not carefully prevented.


Stri. How Is this?


Mon. You have an adversary --


Stri. But one that I know, the rascal my neighbor Touchwood.


Mon. There I am w'ye sir, I am informed that his only son is an earnest
Suitor to your Daughter: (I must not call her mine)


Stri. How Is that?


Mon. That there is a deep secret love betwixt 'em; and that they have had
many private meetings: and a stolen match very likely to be made if you prevent
it not.


Stri. Can this be true?


Mon. Give me but a piece from you, and if by due examination you find it not
so, i will never see your face again till you send for me.


Stri. To be rid of you take it.


Gives it. Mon. I am gone sir, and yet I think i am w'ye.


Exit. Stri. Is the Devil become a match-broker? what, who within there: what?

Annabell? what Friswood?


Act 1.Scene 4.
Friswood, Striker.
Fris. Here sir, I am here forsooth.


Stri. Are you so forsooth? but where is your Mistress forsooth?


Fris. Listening is good sometimes; I heard their talk, and am glad on it.


Stri. Where is your Mrs. I say?


Fris. My Mrs. Annabell, forsooth, my young Mrs?


Stri. What other Mrs. have thou but the Devils Dam her self, your old Mrs.?
and her I ask not for; good Mrs. Flibber de'Jibb with the French fly-flap of
your coxecombe.


Fris. Is the old man mad troe?


Stri. I ask for Annabell.


Fris. Bless me! how do you look?


Stri. Where Is Annabell I say? fetch her me quickly, least I bast her out of
your old Whit-leather hide.


Fris. How youthful you are grown? she is not far to fetch sir; you know
you commanded her to her chamber, and not to appear in sight, till her
debauched father was gone out of the house.


Stri. And is not he gone now forsooth? why call you her not?


Fris. I warrant he has told you some tale on her. That lewd Knight, now he
has undone himself by his unthrifty practices, begins to practice the undoing
of his daughter too! is it not so forsooth? has he not put some wickedness
into your head to set you against her?


Stri. I never knew thee a Witch till now.


Fris. Ha, ha, ha; I warrant he told you that your adversary Touchwoods son,
and my Mistress Annabell are in love league together.


Stri. Marry did he; and I will know the truth.


Fris. Ha, ha, ha.


Stri. Dare thou laugh at me?


Fris. No, no; but I laugh at the poor Knights officiousnes, in hope of some
great reward for the gullery that I put upon him: ha, ha, ha. Good sir a little
patience, and I will tell! you. Ha, ha, ha -- 'twas I that devised it for a
lie, and told it him in hope that his telling of it to you, would provoke you
to beat him out of the house; for reporting a thing that had no probability or
resemblance of a truth in it.


Stri. Is it but so?


Fris. Sir I have been your creature this thirty years, down lying and
uprising; (as you know) and you should believe me, you had me in my old
Mistresses days -- --


Stri. I, thou wast a handsome young wench then; now thou art old.


Fris. Yet not so wondrous old as to be sung in a Ballet for it, or to have
been able ere Ad^m wore beard to have crept into Eves bed, as I did into my
Mistresses. (Heaven pardon you, as I do with all my heart.)


Weep. Stri. What in thy fooleries now?


Fris. Nor so old neither but you are content to make a sorry shift with me
still; as your abilities will serve you --


Weep. Stri. Come, come; thou art not old.


Fris. Nay that is not it that troubles me: but that I, that served you before
your daughter was borne; I mean your daughter that was mother to this daughter
which now you have made your daughter; that I that saw the birth, the marriage,
and the death of your daughter; and have had the governance of this her
daughter ever since, till now she is marriageable; and have all this while
been as plyant as a twig about you, and as true as the sheath to your steel
as we say, that I should now be mist^usted to connive at an il match for her,
for whom my chiefest care has bin from the Cradle? there is the unkindnesse.


Weep. Stri. Enough, enough; Fid* I believe there is no such matter.


Fris. I thought you had known me --


Weep. Stri. I do, I do; I prithee good Fid be quiet, it was a witty trick
of thee to mock the poor Knight withal: but a pox on him, he cost me a
piece for his news; there is another for thee: but the best is he has tied
himself by it, never to trouble me more; I have that into my bargain.


Fris. And you would tie me so too; would you?


Stri. Not so Fid, not so: but look to my Girl, and thus far mark me. If
ever I find that young Touchwood, the son of that miscreant, whose hatred I
would not lose for all the good neighbor-hood in the Parish; if ever J say, he
and your charge do but look upon one another, i will turn her and you both out
of doors: there J will be w'ye, look to it.


Fris. Agreed sir; agreed.


Stri. Look to it J say, J must abroad, my anger is not over yet: I would I
could meet my adversary to scold it out; I shall be sick else.


Exit. Fris. 'Twas well I overheard 'em, my young lovers had bin spoiled else:
had not I crossed the old angry man's purpose before he had met with the young
timorous Virgin, she had confessed all; and and all had bin dashed now.


Act 1. Scene 5.
Annabell, Friswood, Sam.
An. HOw now Fris. is my Grandfather gone out of door?


Fris. Jf he were as safe out of the world, it were well for you.


An. Nay say not so good Fris.


Fris. Your unlucky father has destroyed all your hopes in Mr. Sam Touchwood;
in discovering your loves (what Devil soever gave him the intelligence) and
you must resolve never to see your sweet Sam again.


An. I must resolve to dye first: oh.


Sinkes. Fris. Ods pity! how now! why Mrs. why Annabell, why Mrs. Annabell;
look up, look up I say, and you shall have him spite of your Grandfather
and all his works: what do you think I am an Infidel, to take Mr. Samuels
forty pieces? and a Ronlet of old Muskadine for nothing? come be well, and
indeed you shall have him.


An. Oh Sam, sweet Sam --


Fris. These love-sicke maids seldom call upon other Saints then their
sweet-hearts; look up I say, your sweet Sam is coming.


An. Ha, where? where is he; why do you abuse me?


Scene. Enter Sam. Fris. I say he will come presently; look up I say, forgive
me! he comes indeed: my Mr. thought I was a witch, and I now suspect my self
for one. Oh Mr. Samuel, how came you hither? here he is Mrs. what mean you to
come now to undo her and your self too? yet she had dyed and you had not come
as you did. Why do you not look upon him and be well? get you gone, we are
all undone if my Mr. come back and find you: speak to her quickly, then kiss
her and part, you will be parted for ever else.


Sam. How fares my love?


An. Better then when I was in earthly being,
This bosom is a heaven to me; through death
I am arrived at bliss, most happily
To be so well revived thou made me dye.

Fris. I made you not dye, as you will dye, if you stand prattling till my Mr.
return and take you: for Mr. Samuel, I must tell you Mr. Samuel, he knows all
Mr. Samuel.


Sam My father knows as much, and that is the cause
Of my adventuring hither to instruct you
In a strange practice; here it is in writing, A paper.
It Is such a secret that I durst not trust
My tongue with the conveyance often; nor have I
The confidence to hear it read: take it,
And in my absence join your best advises,
To give it life and action; it is rule*
Which (though both hard and grievous to pursue)
Is all that can our hopes in love renew.

Fris. What horrible thing must we do troe? pray let me see the paper, I hope
there is no pistolling nor poisoning in it: though my old Striker come short of
the man he was to be with me, I would be loath to shorten his days with the
danger of my neck; or making a Bon-fire in Smithfield: pray let me see the
paper.


Sam. Not until my departure gentle Friswood.


Fris. Is there such horror in it, that you dare not stand the opening of the
paper?


Sam. Consider sweet our love is Fever sick,
Even desperately to death;
And nothing but a desperate remedy
Is left us: for our bodily health, what sour
Unsavory loathsome medicines we will take
But to remove an Ague?
What sharp incisions, ^earings, and cruel Corsives
Are daily suffered, and what limbs dissever'd
To keep a Gangreene from the vital parts,
That a dismembered body yet may live!
We in like ca^e must to preserve our love,
(If we dare say we love) adventure life,
Fame, Honor, which are all but Loves attendants
To maintain it.

An. I understand you, sweet,
And do before I read your strong injunction,
Resolve to give it faithful execution
What ere it be. I ha got courage now,
And (with a constant boldness let me tell you)
You dare not lay that on me I Will not bear:
And Love, predominant over all other passions,
Shall bear me out in it.

Sam. Oh you have made me happy.


Fris. As I live my Master --
Kiss and away; whip quickly through the Garden --
Run you up to your Chamber; i will see you out my self.

Sam. Thus let us breath that till we meet again.


Fris. Whoope what do you mean?


Sam. We leave for truce at raising of the siege,
Our interchanged hearts each others pledge.

Fris. Go fools, this sets you both but more on edge.


An. Farewell,


Sam. Farewell.


Ex. Act 2.
Scene 1.
Brittle ware, Rebecca.
Brit. SWeet wife content thy self.


Reb. Yes content my self! shall I so? with what, you John Bopeepe? you must
be my husband, and I must content my self, must I? no sir, it is you that must
content me, or it is your heart must smart for it.


Brit. If you could be content with all that I have, or all that I can do, and
expect no further, I then might hope to pacify you.


Reb. All has not done it yet you see, nor have you yet found out the way. Five
years practice one would think were sufficient, so long you have had me; and
too long it is unless I had got a better name by it, to be accounted barren --
-- oh me.


Brit. Now it is out; zonnes what would you have me do? where is the defect
think you? is it not probable that you may be defective as well as I?


Reb. That I may be defective! I defy thee, Lubber; I defy thee and all that
say so, thou fribling fumbler thou; I would some honest sufficient man might be
Judge betwixt us whether I be defective.


Act 2. Scene 2.
Mony-lacke, Rebecca, Brittle-ware.
Mon. How now, always wrangling?


Reb. Defective quoth a --


Mon. What Is the matter Landlord?


Reb. Do I look like a thing defective?


Mon. Land-Lady --


Reb. Oh fearful!


Mon. Mrs. Brittle-ware what is the matter?


Reb. You shall be Judge Sir Hugh, whether I be defective; you have lain here
Sir Hugh these three years, have been our constant lodger off and on as we
say; and can you think me defective?


Brit. You will not be impudent?


Mon. Good* Mr. Brittle-ware what is the matter?


Brit. The matter is sir she will be content with nothing.


Mon. The best wife in the world! and if you cannot afford her that to content
her, you are a most hard-harted husband.


Reb. What nothing? would you wish him to afford me nothing to content me? I
must have something to content me; and something he must find me, or I will
make him look out for it.


Mon. Come, come, I know the quarrel; and I know you will never get a child by
falling out.


Reb. Nor any way else so long as he is such a jealous beast as he is.


Mon. Oh you must leave your jealousy Mr. Brittleware; that is a maine hindrance


Brit. I am not jealous I.


Reb. Not, and stare like a mad Ox upon every man that looks upon me?


Mon. Fie upon him, is he such a beast, to be jealous of his own wife? if
every man were so, it would spoil the getting of some children in a year.


Reb. And denies me all things that I have a mind to.


Brit. The best is* the loss of your longings will not hurt you; unless you
were with child.


Reb. I must have my longings first; I am not every woman I,
I must have my longings before I can be with child I.

Brit. You must not long for every strange thing you see or hear of then.


Reb. As true as I live he fribles with me sir Hugh; I do but now long for
two or three idle things scarce worth the speaking of; and do you think he
will grant me one of 'em?


Mon. What may they be? he shall grant 'em.


Reb. One of my longings is to have a couple of lusty able bodied men, to take
me up, one before and another behind, as the new fashion is, and carry me in a
Man-litter into the great bed at Ware.


Mon. There Is one, and will you deny her this to hinder a child getting?


Reb. Then I do long to see the new ship, and to be on the top of Paul's
Steeple when it is new built, but that must not be yet; nor am I so
unreasonable but I can stay the time: in the mean time I long to see a play,
and above all plays, The Knight of the burning -- what dee' called.


Mon. The Knight of the burning Pestle.


Reb. Pestle is it? I thought of another thing, but I would feign see it. They
say there is a Grocers boy kills a Giant in it, and another little boy that does
a Citizens wife thy daintielist -- -- but I would feign see their best Actor
do me; I would so put him to it, they should find another thing in handling of
me I warrant 'em.


Brit. Heyday! so last frost she longed to ride on one of the Dromedaries over
the Thames, when great men were pleased to go over it a foot.


Mon. Well, shall I make a convenient motion for you both?


Reb. Quickly sweet sir Hugh, I long for that before you name it.


Mon. Have you this Spring eaten any Asparagus yet?


Reb. Why is that good for a woman that longs to be with Child?


Mon. Of all the Plants, herbs, roots, or fruits that grow, it is the most
provocative, operative and effective.


Reb. Indeed Sir Hugh?


Mon. All your best (especially your modern) Herballists conclude, that your
Asparagus is the only sweet stirrer that the earth sends forth, beyond your
wild Carrets, Corne-^lag, or Gladiall. Your roots of Standergrasse, or of
Satyrion boyld in Goats milk are held good; your Clary or Horminum in diverse
ways good, and Dill (especially boyld in Oil) is also good: but none of
these, nor Saffron boyld in wine, your Nuts of Artichoakes, Rocket, or seeds of
Ash-tree (which we call the Kite keys) nor thousand such, though all are
good, may stand up for perfection with Asparagus.


Reb. Do you say so sir Hugh?


Mon. I have it from the opinion of most learned Doctors, rare Physicians, and
one that dares call himself so.


Brit. What Doctor is he, a fool on horse-^acke?


Mon. Doctor Thou-Lord, you know him well enough.


Reb. Yes, we know Doctor Thou-Lord, though he knows none but Lords and
Ladies, or their companions. And a fine conceited Doctor he is, and as humorous
I warrant ye; and will Thou and Thee the best Lords that dares be acquainted
with him: calls Knights, Jack, Will, and Tom familiarly; and great Ladies,
Gills, and Sluts too, and they cross him. And for his opinion sake, and your
good report sir Hugh, I will have Sparagus every meal all the year long, or
i will make all fly for it; and do you look to it Fribble, for it will be for
your comodity as well as mine.


Brit. And sure it is a rare commodity when a Knight is become a Broker for to
cry it up so.


Reb. And let me have some presently for my next meal, or you cannot imagine
how sick I will be.


Mon. But mistake not me* nor the commodity we speak of Mrs. Brittle-ware;
where would you have it? here in our own house? fie! the virtue of it is
mortified, if it pass the threshold from the ground it grows on. No, you must
thither, to the Garden of delight, where you may have it dressed and eaten in the
due kind; and there it is so provocative, and so quick in the hot operation,
that none dare eat it, but those that carry their coolers with 'em, presently
to delay, or take off the delightful fury it fills 'em with.


Reb. Is there convenience for that too?


Mon. Yes, yes; the house affords you as convenient Couches to retire to, as
the garden has beds for the precious plants to grow in: that makes the place a
palace of pleasure, and daily resorted and filled with Lords and Knights, and
their Ladies; Gentlemen and gallants with their Mistresses --


Reb. But do not honest men go thither with their wives too?


Mon. None other; some to their own costs, and some at other men's.


Reb. Why do we not go then? or what stay we for, can you tell fumbler?


Mon. Nay Mrs. Brittle-ware, not so suddenly; toward the evening will be the
fittest season of the day: mean while go in and fit your self for the walk,
your husband and I are first for an other business.


Reb. Noble Knight I thank you, I hope my next longing shall be to bespeake
you for a Godfather.


Mon. You shall not long long for that.


Reb. I take your noble word.


Exit. Brit. She Is gone, and now sir Hugh let me tell you, you have not dealt
well with me, to put this fagary into her foolish fancy.


Mon. Will thou be an Ass now? do not I know how to fetch it out on her
again think thou? she shall not go, and yet be contented too.


Brit. I you tell me so


Mon. Why thou will not be jealous of me now, that has lain in thy house these
three years, will thou? nor think me so foolish to provoke thee with an
injury; that know me and my ways so well.


Brit. I know something by your worship worth the price of a new Pillory.


Mon. Why so then; and will I wrong thee Jack think thou, ha? no nor mistrust
thee neither: for though thou art a jealous coxcomb over thy wife, and she a
touchy thing under thee, yet thou and I Jack have bin always confident of
each other, and have wrought friendly and closely together, as ever Subtle and
his Lungs did; and shared the profit betwixt us, have not we Jack: ha?


Brit. I think we have; and that you have some new device, some stratagem in
hand now. Uds me, I now remember, is the party come to town?


Mon. Yes; and my Spring has seaz'd him upon the way: and here I expect him
instantly.


Brit. And will he be made a gentleman?


Mon. That Is his ambition Jack; and though you now keep a China-shop, and
deal in brittle commodities (pots, glasses, Purslane Dishes, and more trinkets
then an Antiquaries study is furnished withal) you must not forget your old
trade of Barber Surgeon, it is that must sted us now in our new project.


Brit. I warrant you, is he a trim youth?


Mon. We must make him one Jack, it is such a squab as thou never saw; such
a lump, we may make what we will of him.


Brit. Then sure we will make money of him.


Mon. Well said Jack, Spring has writ me here his full description.


Act 2. Scene 3.
Mony-lacks, Spring, Hoydon, Coulter, Brittle-ware.
Mon. SLid he is come already: now Mr. Spring?


Spri. I come to present a gentleman to you sir.


Mon. How a gentleman? will you abuse me?


Spri. He finds your defect already; but be bold sir, he desires to be a
Gentleman sir; and (though he be but course metal, yet) he has that about him
which with your help may quickly make him a clear Gentleman.


Hoy. I have four hundred pounds sir; and I brought it up to town on purpose
to make my self a clear gentleman of it.


Mon. It was well brought up; it appears also that you have had some breeding,
though but a Yeomans son.


Hoy. It Is true, I have a little learning sir, and a little wit, though last
night I met with some upon the way at Hammer-Smith that had more: yet I had
enough to perceive I was cheated of a matter of seven pound (almost all the
odd money I had about me) at my Card before thy Card; a pox take the whole pack
on 'em. Sdaggers if ever man that had but a mind to be a Gentleman was so noddy
poopt! oh how I could chafe to think on it.


Spr. Oh but you must not, it becomes not the temper of a Gentleman.


Hoy. So you told me; then I thank you friend.


Spr. Your small acquaintance sir.


Hoy. I have had more acquaintance where I have found less love, and I thank
you again good small acquaintance: you told me indeed it became not a gentleman
to cry for losing his money; and I told you then, that I should, or would be a
gentleman: Whereupon Small acquaintance (because I was resolved to play no
more) you advised me to give over; and you told me you would upon our coming
to the City, here bring me to a Knight, that was a Gentleman-maker, whom I
conceive this to be, and here am I, and here is my four hundred pound, which my
man has here drawn up to Town, and here I mean to quarter it.


Coul. But I will see what penniworths you bargain for first, by your
Masterships leave.


Mon. Drawn and quartered! you have a wit Sir, I find that already.


Hoy, Yes sir, I have a down right Country wit, and was counted a pretty
spark at home. Did you never hear of little Tim of Tanton? But I now mean to
have a finicall City wit, and a superfinicall Court wit too, before I see mine
Uncle.


Mon. You may sir.


Hoy. And be able to jest and jeere among men of judgment: I have a many small
jests, petty John's, as I call 'hem: But I will have a clubbing wit, and a
drinking wit; and be able to hold play with the great Poets I: and with dry
jests to maule the mallipart'st lesser ones (that hold themselves better than
the biggest) out of the pit of wit I, before I see mine uncle.


Mon. You may have all sir, if you quarter your four hundred pound discreetly:
but who is your uncle I pray?


Hoy. For that you shall pardon me, till I am a Gentleman: But I assure you he
is a great gentleman in the City here; and I neither must nor dare see him,
till I am one at least: and I will tell you presently how I mean to quarter my
money.


Coul. They Will quarter that and you too, if I zee not the better to the matter.


Mon. Do thou know the uncle he speaks of?


Spr. No, nor cannot learn who it is for my life.


Brit. Some great man sure that is ashamed of his kindred: perhaps some Suburb
Justice, that sits of the skirts of the City, and lives by it.


Mon. Well said Jack.


Hoy. Look you sir, thus had I cast it: Small acquaintance pray do you note it
too: I love your advice, that at first sight of me (which was but last night)
could relieve me from Cheaters.


Brit. From some of his own companions to cheat, you more himself.


Hoy. The first hundred pound to be for the making of me a gentleman: the
second hundred shall be for apparel.


Spr. He speaks half like a gentleman already.


Brit. Right, there is half disposed of.


Hoy. The third hundred ^le spend in pleasure: hark Small acquaintance, we'll
have wenches.


Whisper. Spr. What wants he of a gen^leman, and go no further, but save the
last hundred.


Hoy. Oh Small acquaintance, that must walk too: but all for profit to support
my gentility hereafter.


Spr. As how?


Hoy. I will be cheated of it.


Mon. How?


Hoy. Nor in gross, but by retaile, to try men's several wits, and so learn
to shift for my self in time and need be.


Brit. Do you hear this?


Coul. There Is a plot now!


Mon. I protest I admire him: J never found like Craft in a Yeomans son
before.


Hoy. No words on it J beseech you sir; nor name that foolish word Yeomans son
any more: J came to change my Copy, and write Gentleman: and to go the
nighest way to work, my Small acquaintance here tells me, to go by the
Heralds is the farthest way about.


Mon. Well sir, we will take the speediest course for you that may be possible.


Brit. The season of the year serves most aptly too,
Both for purging and bleeding:
Give your name into this book sir.

Hoy. Timothy Hoyden, sir.


Brit. Timothy Hoyden.


Write. Hoy. But must J bleed sir?


Mon. Yes, you must bleed: your fathers blood must out,
He was but a yeoman, was he?

Hoy. As rank a Clown, none disprais'd, as any in Sommerset shire.


Mon. His foul rank blood of Bacon and Pease-porridge must out of you to the
last dram.


Hoy. You will leave me none in my body then, I shall bleed to death, and you
go that way to work.


Spr. Fear nothing sir: your blood shall be taken out by degrees, and your
veins replenished with pure blood still, as you loose the puddle.


Hoy. How must that be done?


Coul. I that ich I would hear.


Mon. I commend you that you seek reason: it must be done by meats and
drinks of costly price; Muscadell caudels, jellies, and cock-broaths. You
shall eat nothing but Shrimpe porridge for a fortnight; and now and then a
Phesants egg soopt with a Peacocks feather. I that must be the diet.


Hoy. Delicate!


Coul. This stands to reason indeed.


Mon. Then at your going abroad, the first air you take shall be of the
Asparagus Garden, and you shall feed plentifully of that.


Hoy Of the air do you mean?


Mon. No of th'Asparagus. And that with a Concoction of Goats milk, shall set
you an end, and your blood as high as any Gentleman's lineally descended from
the loins of King Cadwalader.


Hoy. Excellent, I like all excellently well, but this bleeding. I could never
endure the sight of blood.


Mon. That shows the malignant baseness of your fathers blood within you*


Hoy. I was bewiteh'd I think before I was begot, to have a Clown to my
father: yet sit my mother said she was a Gentlewoman.


Spr. Said? What will not Women say?


Hoy. Nay, small acquaintance, she professed it upon her Deathbed to the Curate
and diverse others, that she was sister to a Gentleman here in this City; and
commanded me in her Will, and upp^n her blessing, first to make my self a
Gentleman of good fashion, and then to go to the gentleman my uncle.


Spr. What gentleman is that?


Hoy. I must not, nor I wo'not tell you that, till I am a gentleman my self:
would you have me wrong the will of the dead? Small acquaintance, I will rather
dye a Clown as I am first.


Mon. Be content sir; here is half a labor saved; you shall bleed but of one
side: the Fathers side only.


Hoy. Say you so?


Mon. The Mother vain shall not be pricked.


Hoy. I thank you sir:
I would 'twere done once.

Mon. But when this is done, and your new blood infused into you, you shall
most easily learn the manners and behavior.


Spr. The Look, the garb, the congee --


Brit. And all the Complements of an absolute gentleman.


Hoy. O brave!


Mon. For which you shall have best instructions;
You Will run a chargeable course in it, that I Will tell you:
And may yet if you please retain your money;
Cross your mothers will and dye a Clown.

Hoy. By no means sir.


Coult. I begin to believe honestly of the Knight.


Mon Do you note this skin of his here?


Brit. Skin, it is a hide sir.


Hoy. It Is somewhat thick and foul indeed sir.


Mon. He must have a bath, and that will be more charge.


Spr. It Is pity he should be flead.


Hoy. I thank you small acquaintance; pray let me have a bath, what ere it
cost me, rather than flea me.


Mon. Well sir, this house shall be your lodging, and this the Mr. of it, an
excellent Chyrurgeon, and expert in these affairs, shall be your attendant.


Hoy. My man may attend me too, may he not?


Spr. Yes, by all means, and see the laying out of your money.


Coul. I like that best: sure they are honest men.


Mon. Is that your man? what does he wear a Coulter by his side?


Coul. No sir, my name is Coulter; I my self am a Coulter. and this is but my
Hanger on, as I am my Masters.


Mon. Thou may make a Country gentleman in time, I see that by thy wit.


Coul. All my friends will be glad on it.


Mon. Come gentlemen, I Will lead you the way.


Ex. Act 2. Scene 4.
Touchwood, Walter, Gilbert, Samuel.
Touch. But how can you assure me gentlemen that this is true?


Gil. We saw't not acted sir, nor had reported it,
But on those terms of honor you have sworn to;
In which you are engaged first to forgive
Your son: then never to reveal to friend,
Or foe, the knowledge of the fact.

Wat. You cannot now but receive
Your son into your favor, that did urge him
To do some outrage, some villainous shame or mischief
Upon that Family as he would shun your curse.

Touch. This is a mischief with a witness to it:
He has done it home it seems.

Gil. Sir, can a son
Do his fathers will too fully?

Touch. You may be pleased to call him. Exit Wat.
I would now put on anger, but I fear
My inward joy's too great, to be dissembled:
Now for a rigid brow that might enable
A man to stand competitor for the seat
Of austere justice -- Are you come to boast Enter Sam, Wat.
The bravery of your fact, with a dissembled
Show of obedience; as if you had merited
Forgiveness and a blessing; when my shame
For thy lewd action makes me turn and hide
My face -- for fear my laughter be descried.

aside and laugh. Gil. Pray turn not from him sir.


Touch. I have heard sir of your workmanship; but may
A man receive it on your word for truth?

Sam. It is too true, unless you please in mercy
To pardon, and preserve me from the rigor
Of Justice, and the sharper censure
That I shall suffer in all good opinion.

Touch. I mean you shall out of the noise on it presently:
So -- there is a hundred pieces, get you gone;
Provide you for a journey into France,
Bear your self well, and look you come not home
A verier Coxecombe than you went abroad:
Pray wear no falling bands and cuffes above
The price of suits and cloaks, least you become
The better half undone in about at Buffets.

Sam. I hope you shall hear well of me.


Touch. Amen.


Sam. Pray bless me sir.


Touch. My blessing be upon thee,
Go get thee gone, my tenderness will show
It self too womanish else.

Gil. Goodness of nature.


Wat. We'll help to set you forward.


Ex. Touch. Thank ye gentlemen:
Be but my son, thou shall not want a father,
Though somebody must seek one: ha, ha, ha --
I Would give another hundred Pieces now
With all my heart, that I might be untongue-ty'd,
And triumph over my adversary now,
And dash this business in his angry teeth:
Strike Strikers teeth out with his own abuse:
Perhaps he knows't already, if he does;
I may take notice, and make bold to jeere him:
This is his usual walk.

Act 2. Scene 5.
S^riker, Touch-wood.
Stri. I was too blame
To give it so much credit at the first,
As to be troubled at it.

Touch. It Is the Rascal.


Stri. That he, the son of my despite and scorn,
Should gain of Fate a lot to see my Niece,
Much less a face to ask her for his wife.

Touch. Perhaps he is casting of his will.


Stri. Yet the vexation that I was but told so,
Lies gnawing in my stomach, that until
I vomit it upon that Dunghill wretch;
I cannot eat nor sleep to do me good.
And I thank Chance he is here.

Touch. He comes, and so have at him.


Stri. Hum, hum, hum, humh.


Touch. And ha, ha, ha to thee old puppy.


Stri. Sirrah, sirrah, how dare thou keep a son that dares but look upon
my Niece? there I am we'yee sir.


Touch. Sirrah, and sirrah to thy withered jaws, and down that wrinkled throat
of thine: how dare thou think a son of mine dares for displeasing me, look
but with foul contempt upon thy loathed issue?


Stri. Impudent villain, I have heard he has seen her.


Touch. Has he but seen her? ha, ha, ha, I fear I shall out with it: I would
not be forsworn: i will keep't in if I can.


Stri. Yes Malipert Jack, I have heard that he has seen her, but better had
thou pist him against the wall, then he presume to love her: and there I am
we'yee sir.


Touch. Have thou but heard he has seen her: I tell thee thou old booby thou;
if he had seen, felt, heard, and understood her: nay had he got her with child,
and then left her, he were my son, and I would cherish him.


Stri. Dare thou speak so, thou old Reprobate.


Touch. Thou do not hear me say it is so, though J could wish it were with
all my heart, because I think it would break thine.


Stri. Hugh, hugh, hugh.


Cough. Touch. I hope I shall keep it within the compass of mine oath; yet
there was a touch for him.


Stri. Oh thou hel-bred Rascal thou; hugh, hugh,


Cough and spit. Touch. So, so, up with it, Lungs, Lights, Liver, and all:
choke up in a churles name.


Stri. Hugh, hugh.


Touch. I have put him into these fits forty times at least, and not without
hope it will thratle him at last -- -- if you do break a gut, or a rib or two,
with straining, a rope will be your only remedy: and so I leave you: by the
way you have not heard me say that I know any thing by your Niece: But what I
know I Will keep to my self.


Stri. And hang thy self, I care not what thou know, yet thus far take me
we'yee sir.


Touch. Not a step, unless I were sure I were going to the devil, huh, huh:
no sir, you shall not trip me: you shall not fetch it out of me: tush, my
sonne's my son, and keep your niece to yourselfe, huh, and if she has any
thing of his you may keep that too huh; and so choke up again with all my
heart, and much good do it you.


Exit. Stri. Huh, huh -- him! so he is gone, the villain's gone in hope that he
has killed me, when my comfort is he has recovered me:

I was heart-sicke with a conceit which lay so mingled with my
Fleagme thar I had perished, if I had not broke it, and made me
spit it out; hemh, it is gone, and i will home merrily.
I would not that he should know the good he has done me
For half my estate; nor would I be at peace with him
To save it all: His malice works upon me,
Past all the drugs and all the Doctors Counsels,
That ere I cop'd with: he has been my vexation
These thirty years; nor have I had another
Ere since my wife died; if the Rascal knew't,
He would be friends, and I were instantly
But a dead man, I could not get another
To anger me so handsomely.

Act 2. Scene 6.
Friswood, Striker.
Fris. YOu are welcome home sir.


Stri. And merrily too Fid. Hemh light at heart,
I met with my Physician, Dog-leech, Touchwood;
And cleared my stomach, and now I am light at heart.
And thou shall hear on it Fid anon perhaps.

Fris. You are the better able then to hear
And bear what I must tell you.

Stri. Where Is my Niece?
How does she* ha?

Fris. As well as a young woman
In her case may do sir.

Stri. Ha! how is that?


Fris. Twill out, and I as fit to tell't you as another.


Stri. Out with it then.


Fris. It Is true, I faced you down there was no league
Between young Touch-wood, and your Niece, in hope
To turn her heart from him before the knowledge
Of any thing that past should be a grief to you:
But since I have discovered it is too late;
And she can be fit bride for no man else.

Stri. He has not lain with her, has he?


Fris. You speak as just as Gormans lips.


Stri. I hope he has not lipt her so:
Prithee what can thou mean?

Fris. Sir, if you think

The knowledge of a truth of this sad nature

May prejudice your health, by drawing a Choleric fit into you, you were best
to send for your Physician, your dog-leech Touchwood, as you called him, to
break your bed of Fleagme, by laughing at you.


Stri. What do thou mean now, I have asked thee twice.


Fris. I say young Touch-wood has touched, and clapped your niece;
And (which is worse) with scorn and foul disdain
Has left and quite forsaken; and is gone:
(They say) sent by his father to travail.

Stri. It Was this the villain hammered on to day,
When he spoke mystically, doubtful words,
Reflecting on this mischievous sense: Hell, hell, hell.

Fris. Twere good you would forsake the thought of hell sir,
And think upon some timely course to save
Her credit, and the honor of your house by marriage.

Stri. You counsel very well;
But were you privy in their loves affair?

Fris. Indeed I knew too much on it: think of a course good sir.


Stri. I know no course for her and you but one,
Young whore and bawd, and that is instantly
To pack you out of doors to seek your living,
And there I will be we'yee.

Fris. Sir that you must not.


Stri. Sprecious do thou must me in mine own house?


Fris. In your own house sir, kill us if you please,
And take the sin upon you; but out of it
You must not dare to thrust us with your shame:
Which I will so divulge, as you shall find
Your house to be no sanctuary for your self;
And there i will be with you*

Stri. This is lusty.


Fris. Consider wisely that I know you sir,
And can make foul relation of some passages
That you will shame to hear.

Stri. Hold your peace.


Fris. Remember sir, near thirty years ago,
You had a sister, whose great marriage portion
Was in your hands: good gentlewoman, she
Unfortunately loving a false Squire,
Just as your Niece has now, did get a clap:
You know sir what I mean.

Stri. You Will hold your peace?


Fris. I Will speak it though I dye for it; better here
Than in a worse place: So clapped I say she was,
I know not yet by whom you do, and bear
An inward grudge against some body to this hour for it.
But to my story, good gentlewoman she
Was by your most unbrotherly cruel usage
Thrust out a doors, as now you threaten us:
And miserably big-bellied as she was
Leaving her most unjustly detained her portion
In your false hands, forsook you and the town,
To fly the air, where ^er disgrace was spread:
Some jewels and some gold she had concealed:
But to what part of the world she took we know not,
Nor did you ever care, but wished her out on it,
By any desperate end, after her flight
From portion, blood and name; and so perhaps
Immediately she was: for which, this judgment
Is justly fallen upon you.

Stri. Yet hold thy peace.


Fris. Neither by threats, nor bribes, nor all persuasion,
Until you take your Niece into your care:
What will the world say when it hears this story
Of your own natural sister, and your cruelty,
When you shall second it with your Neeces shame?

Stri. I never was so mated, so astonished.


Fris. Nay, more than this, old Striker, i will impeach
You for foul incontinence; and shaking your
Old Bullion Tronkes over my Trucklebed.

Stri. Thou art not desperate! will thou shame thy self?


Fris. I value neither shame, nor name, nor fame;
And wealth I have none to lose; you have enough
To pay for all I take it.

Stri. Oh I am sick.


Fris. Be of good cheer, i will send for your Physician.


Stri. Sick, sick at heart; let me be had to bed.


Exit. Fris. I hope I have laid the heat of his severity,
So sometimes great offenses pass for none,
When severe Judges dare not hear their own.

Ex. Act 3.
Scene 1.
Enter Gardner, and Martha his wife. Gar. PRay lets agree upon it good wife, you
are my wife I take it, and I should have the command, yet I entreat, and am
content you see.


Mat. And so would any man I think that has such a help and commings in by his
wife as you have: it is not your durty Sparagus, your Artichoaks, your Carpes,
your Tulips, your Strawberries, can bring you in five hundred pound a year, if
my helping hand, and brain too were not in the business?


Gar. Let us agree upon it: and two or three years toil more, while our trade
is in request and fashion, will make us purchasers. I had once a hope to have
bought this Manor of Marshland for the resemblance it has to the Low Country
soil you came from, to have made you a Banke-side Lady. We may in time be
somewhat. But what did you take yesterday Mat in all, what had you, ha?


Mat. Poor pidling doings; some four and twenty pound.


Gar. What did the rich old Merchant spend upon the poor young gentleman's wife
in the yellow bedchamber?


Mat. But eight and twenty shillings, and kept the room almost two hours, I
had no more of him.


Gar. And what the Knight with the broken Citizens wife (that goes so Lady
like) in the blew bedchamber.


Mat. Almost four pound.


Gar. That was pretty well for two.


Mat. But her husband, and a couple of serving-men had a dish of Sparagus, and
three bottles of wine, besides the broken meat into one of the Arbors.


Gar. Every thing would live Mat: but here will be great Courtiers and Ladies
to day you say.


Mat. Yes they sent last night to bespeake a ten pound dinner, but I half
fear their coming will keep out some of our more constant, and more
profitable customers.


Gar. Twill make them the more eager to come another time then Mat. Have they
paid their reckoning in the Parlour?


Mat. Yes, but hutchingly, and are now going away.


Act 3. Scene 2.
Gentleman and Gentlewoman to them. Gar. O here they are going.


Gent. I protest Mr. Gardner your wife is too dear: Sixteen shillings for a
dish of Sparagus, two bottles of wine, and a little Sugar, I wonder how you can
reckon it.


Mat. That was your rec^oning in all sir; we make no account of particulars,
but all to Mall, as they do in the Netherlands.


Gent. Your Dutch account Mrs. is too high for us to trouble you any more.


Mat. That Is as you please sir, a fair day after you:

Ex. Genesis Who would be troubled with such pinching guests?


Gar. I, it is good to misreckon such to be rid of 'hem.


Mat. They are even as welcome as the Knight that comes hither alone always,
and walks about the garden here half a day together, to feed upon Ladies
looks, as they pass to and fro; the peeping Knight, what do you call him?


Gar. O Sir Arnold Cautiou^.


Mat. You may call him Cautious, I never saw five shillings of his money yet.


Gar. No, he comes but to feed his eye, as you say, with leering at good faces,
and peeping at pretty insteps.


Mat. Sir Hugh-Money-lacke, our gather-guest as we call him, sends us no such
dull customers: O that good Gentleman I never did any ^averne, Inn, or new
Ordinary give tribute to a more deserving gentleman -- oh here come gallants.


Act 3. Scene 3.
Enter Gilbert, Wa^, and Sam (disguis'^) to them. Three, and never a woman!
strange! these are not the Courtiers we look for.

Gil. This is his daily haunt: I warrant thee we find him.


Wat. And it shall take, never fear it Sam.


Gil. By your leave Mr. and Mrs. or rather Lord and Lady of the new plantation
here.


Wat Nay Prince and Princess of the Province of Asparagus.


Sam. The Island of two Acres here, more profitable than twice two thousand in
the Fens, till the drainers have done there.


Mat. You are pleasant gentlemen: what is your pleasure?


Gil. Saw you Sir Arnold Cautious here to day?


Mat. Not yet sir.


Gil. Have you a room in your house for us?


Mat. Have you any more company to come to you?


Wat. Yes, we expect some gentlemen.


Mat. Gentlemen did you say?


Gil. Yes indeed gentlemen, no gentlewomen I assure you.


Mat. Intruth sir all the rooms within are gone.


Gil. What they are not gone abroad, are they?


Mat. You are always pleasant sir: I mean they are all taken up.


Gil. There are some taken up in 'hem, is it not so?


Mat. Still you are pleasant sir: they are indeed bespoken for great Courtiers,
and Ladies that are to dine here.


Gar. If you will bestow your selves in the garden, and make choice of your
Arbor: you shall have the best cheer the house can afford ye, and you are
welcome.


Gil. Be it so then; lets walk about gentlemen. Pray send us some wine.


Wat. And a dish of your Sparagus.


Mat. You shall have it gentlemen.


Exit. Gil. Did you note the wit of the woman?


Wat. I, because we had no wenches we must have no chamberroome, for fear she
disappoynt some that may bring 'hem.


Sam. She spoke of great Courtiers and Ladies that are to come.


Wat. Some good stuff perhaps.


Gil. Why I assure you, right noble, and right virtuous persons, and of both
sexes do frequent the place.


Sam. And I assure you, as ignoble and vicious do pester it too much; and
these that respect profit merely have not the wit, and less the virtue to
distinguish betwixt the best and the worst, but by their purses.


Wat. It Is enough for them to weed their garden, not their guests: O here comes
our collation.


Act 3. Scene 4.
Enter two boys, they cover a Table, two bottles of wine, Dishes of Sugar, and
a dish of Sparagus. Gil. ANd what is the price of this feast boy?


Boy. Plaist ill Monsieur.


Gil. What a^t thou a Frenchman?


Boy. No, I took you for one sir, to bargain for your meat before you eat
it, that is not the generous English fashion, you shall know anon sir.


Gil. Go get you gone with your wit, and tell your prodigal fools so.


Wat. Go, we'll call when we want attendance.


Ex. Boy. Gil. Sam you are too sad; let not your disguise alter you with us:
Come here is a health to the Hans in Kelder, and the mother of the boy, if it
prove so.


Sam. I Will pledge it.


Wat. We want Sir Hugh Mony-laok^ here to discourse the virtues of this
precious plant Asparagus, and what wonders it has wrought in Burgundy,
Almaino, Italy, and Languedoc before the herborists had found the skill to
plant it here.


Sam. What Is he to whom weeseeke?


Wat. Who mine Uncle, Sir Arnold Cautious; he will come, never doubt him; he
seldom misses a day to pry and piere upon the beauties that come to walk here.


Gil. It Is such a Knightling, I Will but give ye his Character, and and he comes I
warrant thee* he is an infinite admirer of beauty, and dares not touch a woman:
he is aged about fifty, and a* batchelour: he defies wed lock, because he
thinks there is not a maiden*head in any marriagable beauty to be found among
Women.


Sam. Yet you say he is an admirer and hunter after the sight of beauty.


Gil. He gets a crick in his neck oft-times with squinting up at windows and
Belconies; and as he walks the streets, he peepes on both sides at fair
breasts and faces, as he were seeking Birdsnests; and follows pretty feet and
insteps like a hare tracker.


Wat. This is still mine Uncle.


Gil. And when he sees a Coach of Ladies about to alight, he makes a stand, in
hope to see a delicate leg slip through a laced smock, which if he chance to
discover he drivells.


Sam. Well, how your plot may hold to my purpose I cannot see: he is the
unlikeliest man to have a wench put upon that you can mention.


Gil. I grant the attempt is hard, but the higher will be the achievement:
trust my experience Sam: for as in every instrument are all tunes to him that
has the skill to find out the stops, so in every man there are all humors to
him that can find their faussets, and draw 'hem out to his purpose.


Wat. Fear not the plot, as we have cast it, nor the performance in the
Comedy, though against mine own Natural Uncle.


Gil. Thy unnatural Vuncle thou would say; he never did thee good in's
life: Act but thine own part, and be not out Sam, and fear nothing.


Wat. He Is somewhat too young to act a rorer: but what Iads have we seen pass
for soldiers?


Act 3. Scene 5.
Enter three Courtiers and Ladies: Cautious aloof. Sam. O here come the great
guests.


Gil. And these are noble ones indeed; these are Courtiers Clinquant, and no
counterfeit stuff upon 'hem: I know 'hem all, every Lady with her own husband
too: what a virtuous 'honest age is this: and see if thine Uncle be not at his
old game, bopeepe in the tail of 'hem. He shall follow 'hem no further: Sir
Arnold Cautious, Noble Knight you are well encountered.


Ex. Court. Caut. Good Master Gold wire, do you know these Ladies; or be they
Ladies, ha?


Gil. Yes, and noble ones, the three Graces of the Court, the Lady Stately, the
Lady Handsome, and the Lady peerless, do not you know 'hem?


Caut. No not I.


Gil. How the slave twitters; you look not up at greatness, you mind too much
the worldly things that are beneath you: if you had such a Lady under you, (of
your own I mean) you would mind her.


Caut. Oh fie, fie, fie.


Gil. Look no more aft^r 'hem, they are gone: besides they are virtuous, and
too too great for you: when will you get a convenient wife of your own, to
work out the dry itch of a stale Batchelour?


Caut. Go, go, you are a wag, I itch not that way.


Gil. Will you go this way with me then, and hear what I will say to you?


Caut. With all my heart, I am free from business.


Gil. You have a Nephew, whose sister I married, a virtuous wife she is, and I
love him the better for it; he is a younger brother, and borne to no great
fortune: now you are very rich, a Batchelour, and therefore I think child
less --


Caut. In Troth Mr. Gold-wyer you must pardon me, I may not stay with you: I
had almost forgot a most important business.


Sam. Even now he had none.


Gil. Nay good Sir Arnold Cautious, you know not what I Will say.


Caut. I say he is an unthrift, a Squanderer, and must not expect supplies from
me.


Gil. He does not, shall not, not to the value of a token: pray stay, and hear
me sir; it is no ill air to stay in.


Caut. I withal my heeart good Mr. Gold-wyer; I like the air well, and your
motion hitherto.


Gil. Will you be pleased to do your kinsman the favor to further him in a
match; I mean an honest lawful marriage match -- but with your countenance,
and a good word at most.


Caut. The most unthankful office in the world: pray use some other friend
in it: indeed I stay too long.


Gil. Hear but who it is that he loves, how likely he is to obtain, what
abundant profit the match may bring him, and the desperate undoing danger he
falls into if he be not matched, and then do your pleasure.


Caut. Why what new danger is he toward, more than the old ill company he was
wont to keep?


Gil. Oh sir, he is now in league with a companion more dreadful than 'hem
all, a fellow that is in part a Poet, and in part a Soldier.


Caut. Bounce, bounce.


Gil. You have hit upon his name: his name is Bounce, do you know him sir?


Caut. Not I, nor desire acquaintance with either of his qualities.


Gil. He is a gentleman sir, that has been upon some unfortunate late services,
that have not answered his merit.


Caut. And now he is come home to right himself, by writing his own
meritorious acts, is he?


Gil. Good in troth, I wish you would see 'hem, to come over 'hem with a jeere
or two; I know you are good at it: They are in an Arbor here close by,
drinking to their Muses, and glorifying one another for eithers excellency in
the art most Poetically.


Caut. Glorify do you say? I have heard Poets the most envious det ractors of
one another of all Creatures, next to the very Beggars.


Gil. Abroad perhaps and asunder, but together there is no such amity: You never
saw 'hem drink; pray see 'hem sir, it may take your Nephew off of his Ningle,
who has infected him with Poetry already: and twenty to one, if he fail in
the match, which I was about to mention; he will win him away to the wars
too, and then he may be lost for ever.


Caut. Good Mr. Gold-wyer go you to your company, I am not a man of reckoning
amongst such; besides, I seldom drink betwixt meals.


Wat. Athis own cost he means.


Gil. I commend your temper: you shall not be in the reckoning; but I beseech
you let me prevail with you: See, we are upon hem: save you Gentlemen: I have
brought you a noble friend, your uncle; I know he is welcome to you brother
Wat; and you I am sure will make him so Mr. Bounce: when you shall hear he is
an admirer of Poetry and war.


Caut. Even a far off I assure ye: I never durst approach near the fury of
either of the fiery qualities.


Sam. It is your modesty, not fear that keeps you at distance I imagine.


Caut. Poets may imagine any thing: imagination is their wealth, some of 'hem
would be but poor else: are you turned Poet Nephew?


Wat. For my private recreation sir.


Caut. What by writing Verses to win some Mistresses to your private
recreation: mean you so?


Sam. You dare not sir blaspheme the virtuous use
Of sacred Poetry, nor the fame traduce
Of Poets, who not alone immortal be,
But can give others immortality.
Poets that can men into stars translate,
And hurl men down under the feet of Fate:
It Was not Achilles sword, but Homers pen,
That made brave Hector dye the best of men:
And if that powerful Homer likewise would,
Hellen had been a hagge, and Troy had stood.

Gil. Well said Poet, thou tumblest out old ends as well as the best of 'hem.


Sam. Poets they are the life and death of things,
Queens give them honor, for the greatest Kings
Have bin their subjects.

Caut. Enough, enough; you are the first good Poet that e're I saw wear so
good a Countenance: leave it, I would not have a gentleman meddle with Poetry
for spoiling of his face: you seldom see a Poet look out at a good Visnomy.


Sam. Think you so sir?


Caut. Yes, and that it is a Poetical Policy, where the face is naturally good
without spot or blemish, to deface it by drinking, or wenching, to get a name
by it.


Sam. A death deserving scandal.


Gil. Hold, hold.


They scuffle, and Wat throws. Sam, and offers to stab him. Gil. holds his
Dagger. Sam. Thy malice, and thy ignorance
Have doomed thee.

Gil. Gentlemen what mean ye?


Wat. My blood must not endure it.


Gil. You have wronged us all, and me the most.


Wat. The wrong is chiefly mine; yet you add to it
By hindering my just vengeance.

Sam. I Will find a time to right you, or my self.


Exit. Wat. My next sight of thee is thy death:
I fear you are hurt sir; are you, pray sir tell me?

Caut. Let me first admire thy goodness and thy pity:
My own true natural Nephew.

Gil. Now it works.


Caut. I now consider, and will answer thee
In a full measure of true gratitude.

Wat. But good sir are you not hurt? if you bleed, I bleed with you.


Caut. Oh sincere Nephew, good boy I am not hurt,
Nor can I think of hurt, my thoughts are bent
Upon thy good; you were speaking of a choice sir,
My Nephew would be matched to, let me know the party.

Gil. Will you sir stand his friend?


Caut. Let me but know the party and her friend,
And instantly about it.

Gil. He is caught.


Wat. How am I bound to you!


Caut. Nephew I am yet bound to thee, and shall not rest till I am dis-ingag'd
by doing this office for thee: what is she, let me know?


Gil. Sir, as we walk you shall know all: i will pay the reckoning within as we
pass.


Caut. But by the way Nephew, I must bind you from Poetry.


Wat. For a Wife you shall sir.


Gil. Poetry, though it be of a quite contrary nature, is as pretty a jewel as
plain deal^ng, but they that use it forget the Proverb.


Ex. Act 3. Scene 6.
Enter Courtiers and Ladies. 1* Cour. COme Madams, now if you please after your
garden Feast,
To exercise your numerous feet, and tread
A curious knot upon this grassie square;
You shall fresh vigor add unto the spring,
And double the increase, sweetness and beauty
Of every plant and flower throughout the garden.

1 Lad. If I thought so my Lord, we would not do
Such precious work for nothing; we would be
Much better huswifes, and compound for shares
Of The gardners profit.

2 La. Or at least hedge in
Our Sparagus dinner reckoning.

2 Cour. I commend your worldly providence:
Madam, such good Ladies will never dance
Away their husbands Lands.

1 Cour. But Madams will ye dance?


1 La. Not to improve the garden good my Lord,
A little for digestion if you please.

1 Cour. Music, play.


The Dance. 1 Cour. You have done Nobly Ladies, and much honored
This piece of earth here, with your graceful footing.

1 La. By your fair imitation, good my Lords.


1 Cour. May the example of our harmless mirth
And Civil recreation purge the place
Of all foul purposes.

1 La. It Is an honest wish:
But wishes weed no gardens; hither come
Some wicked ones they say.

1 Cour. We seek not to abridge their privilege;
Nor can their ill hurt us; we are safe.

1 La. But let us walk, the time of day calls hence.


1 Cour. Agreed.


Exeunt. Act 3. Scene 7.
Money-lacke, Hoyden, Spring, Brittle-ware, Rebecca, Coulter.
Mon. YOu are now welcome to the Asparagus Garden Land-lady.


Reb. I have been long a coming for all my longings: but now I hope I shall
have my belly full on it.


Mon. That you shall, fear not.


Reb. Would I were at it once.


Mon. Well, because she desires to be private, go in with your wife Mr.
Brittleware, take a room, call for a feast, and satisfy your wife, and bid
the Mrs: of the house to provide for us.


Brit. I will sir.


Ex. Brit. Wife. Mon. And how do you feel your self Mr. Hoyden after your
bleeding, purging, and bathing, the killing of your gross humors by your spare
diet, and your new infusion of pure blood, by your queint feeding on delicate
meats and drinks? how do you feel your self?


Hoy. Marry I feel that I am hungry, and that my shrimped yet and sippings
have almost famished me, and my purse too; slid I dare be sworn, as I am
almost a gentleman, that every bit and every spoonful that I have swallowed
these ten days, has cost me ten shillings at least.


Spr. Is it possible that you can consider this, and be almost a gentleman?


Hoy. Small acquaintance I do not lie to you: truth's truth, as well in a
Gentleman as a beggar, for I am both almost, and perhaps not the first that can
write so.


Spr. Do you note how his wit rises?


Hoy. There Is one of my hundred pounds gone that way, all but these twelve
pieces.


Coul. You see now what a fine hand you have made of your money, since you got
it out of my clutches.


Hoy. Then there is my apparel, a hundred pound went all in three suits, of
which this is the best.


Spr. But what do you think of your wit hundred pound?


Hoy. Marry I think that was the best laid out: for by it I have got wit
enough to know that I was as clearly cosen'd of it as heart can wish: of my
soul and conscience, and as I am almost a gentleman, and a man had come to
London for nothing else but to be Cheated, he could not be more roundlier rid
of his money.


Mon. Well sir, if you repine at your expenses now, that you want no hing but
your Belly-full of Sparagus to finish my work of a gentleman in you; I will,
if you please, in lieu of that stuff up your paunch with Bacon and
Bagge-pudding and put you back again as absolute a Clown a^ ever you came
from plough.


Coult. I would he're come to that once.


Sprin. Take heed how you cross him.


Hoy. Nay pray sir be not angry, (though to the shame of a Gentleman I say it)
my teeth do ee'ne water at the name of the sweet Country dish you spoke of
(bacon and bag-pudding) yet I will forbear it: but you say I shall fill my
belly with this new Daintrill that you spoke of; these Sparowbills, what do
you call'hem.


Mon. You shall have your belly full.


Hoy. Top full I beseech you.


Coul Humh --


Mon. You shall: but I must tell you, I must ha you turn away this grumbling
Clown that follows you: he is as dangerous about you, as your fathers blood
was within you, to cross and hinder your gentility.


Hoy. True, you said you would help me to a boy no bigger than a Monkey.


Spr. And you shall have him, a pretty little knave, you may put him in your
pocket.


Coul. Yes wusse, to pick's money out if he had it; shortly 'twill come to that
bevore't be long.


Hoy. Coulter you must to the plough again; you are too heavy a clog at the
heels of a gentleman.


Coult. I with all my heart, and I con youthanks too.


Hoy. The Clown, my fathers heir, will be glad of you.


Mon. Have you an elder brother?


Hoy. You do not hear me say he is my brother; but the clown my father had a
former son, by a former wife, that was no gentlewoman as my mother was, and he
is a Clown all over, and incurable, even get you to him, like to like will
agree well: here is a Crown for you, 'twill carry you a foot to Tanton; and so
get you gone like a Clown as you are.


Coult. It Is well you allow me some mon ey yet: we shall have you beg all the
way home shortly, when your Cheaters have done we' ye.


Mon. How villain!


Spr. Why do you not correct him sir?


Coult. Nay why do not you, he dares not? though he could spare his Clown
blood, he dares not venture his Gentleman blood so, nor you yours, it is all too
fine I doubt; therefore keep it, and make much on it: I would be* loath a jaile
should stay my journey, or by my Cursen soul I would see, what color the best
on it were before I go. But if I don't your errand to your brother, and tell'n
how you do vlout'n behinde's back, then say Cut's a Curre: And so a vart vor a
varewell to the proudest o'yee; and if you be an angered, take it in your angry
teeth.


Exit. Spr. Mon. Ha, ha, ha.


Spr. What a rude Rascal it is? you are happy that he is gone.


Mon. And so am I, he hindered half my work; seven years time is too little
to make a gentleman of one that can suffer such a Clown within seven mile of
him.


Hoy. Would he were beyond Brainford on his way then by this time for me. But
you forget the way you were in; you said you would fill my belly; and then fall
to practice fine complements and congies to make me a perfect gentleman, and
fit to see mine unknown uncle.


Mon. All shall be done.


Act 3. Scene 8.
Enter Brittleware and Rebecca to them. Hoy. See if my Surgeon and his wife
have not filled themselves, and come wiping their lips already.


Mon. So shall you presently: now Landlady are you pleased with your Asparagus?


Reb. With the Asparagus I am; and yet but half pleased neither, as my husband
shall very well know.


Mon. Well, we will leave you to talk with him about it: come sir let us into
the house.


Ex. Brit. But half pleased sweetheart?


Reb. No indeed John Brittleware* the Asparagus has done its part; but you have
not done your part John; and if you were an honest man John, you would make sir
Hughes words good of the Asparagus, and be kinder to me: you are not kind to
your own wife John in the Asparagus way; you understand me: for ought I see
Pompeons are as good meat for such a hoggish thing as thou art.


Brit. Well, when we come at home Beck, I know what I know.


Reb. At home, is it come to that? and I know what I know: I know he cannot love
his wife enough at home, that will not be kind to her abroad: but the best is I
know what my next longing shall be.


Brit. More longings yet! now out of the unsearchable depth of woman's
imagination, what may it be?


Reb. It begins to possess me already, still more and more: now it is an
absolute longing, and I shall be sick till I have it.


Brit. May I know it forsooth, tell it that you may have it.


Reb. I dare tell it you, but you must never know that I have it.


Brit. If you dare tell it.


Reb. Dare* nay be as jealous as you will: thus it is, I do long to steal out
of mine own house, unknown to you as other women do, and their husbands nere
the wiser, hither to this some Sparagus Garden, and meet some friend that will
be kind to me.


Brit. How, how!


Reb. In private; unknown to you, as I told you; it is* unpossible I shall ever
have a child else, and you so jealous over me as you are?


Brit. Art thou a woman and speak this?


Reb. Art thou a man, five years married to me; and ask me now if I be a
woman?


Brit. Art thou so full of the Devil to fly out in this manner*


Reb. Why his horns fly not out of me to fright thee, do they?


Bri. Oh for a hell that has not a woman in it?


Act 3. Scene 9.
Enter a Gentleman and a City Wife. Reb. Look you there John jealousy* there is
an example before your eyes, if nothing hang in your sight; there you may see
the difference between a sower husband and a sweet natured gentleman! good
heart! how kindly he kisses her! and how feately she holds up the neb to him!
little heart! when will you be so kind to your own wife John.


Brit. Is that his wife think you?


Reb. No, no, I know her, it is Mris. Holy-hocke the precise Drapers wife* oh,
how my longing grows stronger in me: J see what shift soever a woman makes
with her husband at home, a friend does best abroad.


Act 3. Scene 10.
Enter Servant to them* Ser. Jndeed my Mris. will not take this money, there
wants two shillings.


Wom. Why is my piece too light*


Ser. Two light for the reckoning Mrs. it comes to two and twenty shillings,
and this is but twenty.


Gent. Unreasonable; how can she reckon it,


Ser. J know what you had sir, and we make no bills:


Gen* Well fare the Taverns yet, that though they cosen'd never so much, would
down with it one way or other^e and their Iacks, go again; now tel^ your Mris.
and that will hinder her somewhat.


Ser. Not a jo^ sir.


Gent. Then tell her the Countess of Copt* Hall is coming to be her neighbor
again, and she may decline her trade very dangerously.


Ser. My Mris. scorns your words sir.


Gent. You. Rogue*


Wom* Nay sweet Co^, make no upror^ for my reputation^ sake; here youth there is
two shillings more, commend me to your Mistress.


Ex. Ambo. Brit. She pays the reckoning it seems.


Reb. It seems then he has been as kind to her another way.


Ex. Act 3. Scene 11*
Enter Money-lucke, Hayden, Spring, Martha. Mon. How is it? J hope you are not
wrangling now, but better pleased than so.


Reb. No, no, sir Hugh, it is not the Spa^gus can do it, unless the man were
better:


Hoy. But may J now be confident that J am almost a gentleman.


Spr. Without that confidence you are nothing.


Mon. There wants nothing now, but that you learn the rules and rudiments, the
principles and instructions for the carriages, congies, and complements, which
we'll quicly put into you by practice.


Hoy. And then the spending the little rest of my money, and J am a clear
gentleman, and may see my uncle.


Mon. Right, right.


Hoy. And I will write it, and crowd it into as many Bonds as I can a purpose
to write gentleman; Timothy Hoyden of Tanton -- no, of London, Gentleman:
London is a common place for all gentlemen of my rank, is it not?


Spr. Excellent, do you not mark howfinely he comes on?


Hoy. But as I hope to live and dye a gentleman Mrs. what shi* call, your
reckoning was devilish dear* s'daggers three pound for a few Cuckoe pintles,
they were no better I think.


Spr. Now you fall back again, and derogate from the condition of a gentleman
most grossly, to think any thing too dear you cate or drink.


Hoy. Pox on it, I had forgot.


Mon. When he has his rules and principles, which must be his next study, he
will remember.


Hoy. Pray let us about it (...).


Mon. Now we'll go; but you forget me Mistress.


Mat. No indeed sir Hugh* here is two Piece for last week and this.


Mon. It Is well* Landlord and Landlady will you go?


Brit. Would you would long to be at home once.


Wif* (...) I do perhaps and to be here again, and there again; and here, and
there* and here again ^ and all at once.


Brit. Hey kicksie winsie.


Wif. And I do long to go to Windsor too, to know if the prophecy (...)
there, (...) reported here.


Mat. How did you hear it goes forsooth?


Wif. That all old women shall die, and many young wives shall have Cuckol^s to
their husbands*


Mat. I heard forsooth that all young wives should dye that were pu^e maids
when they were married.


Wif. And none other?


Mat (...) report goes forsooth*


Wif. You speak very comfortably: It may be a long journey to the worlds end
yet.


Brit. It seems you are not proscribed by the prophecy then?


Wife. I thank my destiny.


Hoy. My first work when I am complete gentleman shall be to get them a
Child, and make 'hem friends.


Mon. A most gentlemanly resolution.


Wif. And truly the City is much bound to such well affected gentlemen.


Exeunt. Act 4.
Scene 1.
Tom Hoyden, Coulter.
Tom. IS it possible that half this can be true, that a half brother of mine
can be made such an ass all over?


Coul. It Is all true, as I am a Cursen fellow Mr. Thomas, every word on it: ^
scorn to lie in a sillibub I; what luck had I to meet you? I never thought
to zee you at London.


Tom S'daggers death, it has as good as veez'd me out of my wits to think on it:
was my vathers blood zo quaisome to him, (with a mischief to' t) that he must
let it out to be a gentleman, because his mother was one (by her own report:)
for our own parts we another know nor care where hence she coame, nor whither
she is gone, but dead she is) she brought my vather a good purse of money, and
kept another in store it seems, till she could keep't no longer, and then
bestowed it well and wisely upon Chitty vace her zonne, to make him a
geantleman, and told him what great house he coame on by her side; for she was
a Striker forzooth, and ga'n directions to vinde an old Uncle of his here in
Cuckold-shire, one Mr. Striker: but virst she bade him put his zelfe into
vashion, and be sure to beare's zelfe like a Gentleman; and he has ta^ne a
wise course to compass it, i^ zeems: I warrant he ha made a voole of his voure
hundred pound by this time.


Coult. Ay, and o'his zelfe too, as his Cony catchers ha handled him: And you
had zeen't, you would have be pist your zelfe vor woe, how they blooded him.


Tom. Ah.


Coult. And then how they spurg'd his guts out.


Tom. Ah.


Colt. A Bots light on 'hem, 'twould ha made a dog zick to zeet how like a
scalded pig he looked.


Tom. Ha, ha, ha.


Coult. And then how they did veed'ne with a zort of zlip zlaps not all worth
a' mess of milk porredge to make him vine vorsooth.


Tom. Ah.


Coult. You Will zee zuch an altrication in him as never was zeen in a brother.


Tom. But I wo'not zee'n yet as voule a Clown, as I am, and as vine a
gentleman, as he is, I have a trick i'my skonce to make a younger brother o'ne.


Coul. I that would be zeene now.


Tom. I have it, and it is a vine one, I came to London to zeeke the voole my
brother, and ha the same directions from our Curate, (to whom my mother told
all) that Tim had to vinde his uncle Strikers house, and I ha quir'd it out;
and this is it, and thou zhalt zee what I chill do now: wh'are within.


Act 4. Scene 2.
Enter Friswood to them. Fris. Who would you speak with.


Tom. By your leave vorsooth, I would speak with the Mr. of the house: I
understand his worships name is Mr. Striker.


Fris. He is so sir, but he is not in case to buy any cattle at this time.


Tom. Nor do I come to zell'n any; my coming is of a dead bodies errand
vorsooth.


Fris. What strange fellow is this troe?


Tom. I* pray vorsooth, and you be old enough (as it zeems you be) to remember
when my mother was a maid, did you know a zuster of Mr. Strikers that was
married into Zummerzet shire?


Fris. What was her name I pray?


Tom. Her Cursen name was Audry, she zed, and a Striker she as bevore she was
married; but my vather made a Hoyden.


Fris. Hoyden.


Tom. Yes Hoyden, zo I zay; there be very good vokes of th name, as you shall
well know; I cham one my zelfe, and she need not be ashamed I wusse of the kin
she coame on, to hugger mugger it as she did to her dying day.


Fris. Most wonderful, but is she dead?


Tom. Yes vaith she is dead, and as sumptiously buried, though I zay't, as any
yeomans wife within ten mile of Tanton, any time these ten and twenty year.


Fris. Pray what were you to her?


Tom. I tell you, my va^her married her; and I should be her zonne I think.


Fris. Good heaven, how things will come about!


Tom. Coulter keep thy countenance Coulter, *i will make^' hem believe I am her
very natural zonne, and zee what will come on it.


Coult. I Will keep my countenance, and zet a vace on it too and ne^d be.


Fris. Your Uncle Striker at this time is very sick sir, but I will acquaint
him with your desire: pray walk into the next* room the while sir.


Tom. If he should dye now Coulter, and make me his heir?


Coult. I marry Mr. so you might make a better journey on it then the gentleman
your brother.


Ex. Fris* This to me is the greatest wonder of all, that I am presently
possessed of my Mrs. sullen sickness, which has even drawn him to deaths door,
and my Mistresses unfortunable condition are nothing to this Country Hoydens
relation:


Act 4. Scene 3.
Enter Touchwood. O Mr. Touchwood, you are the welcom'st Gentleman that ever
could come into so heavy a house.

Touch. A stinking one it is I am sure: that nasty carrion thy Mr. is i'my nose
already, I think I were best go no further.


Fris. Let not the sadness of this place dismay you.


Touch. But is he dead already, ha?


Fris. Not altogether dead sir


Touch. The worse luck; and how does your Mistress? ha, ha, ha, well well I say
nothing.


Fris. She is in bodily health sir, but very sad and much disconsolate, poor
Damsel.


Touch. Not for her Grandsire, is she: if the worst dog he keeps howl for
him, I Will worry sheep with mine own* teeth, and trusse for him; but why is she
sad, prithee tell me^ ha* ha, ha.


Fris. I marvel at your mirth sir.


Touch. I would now give her a new Gown, to tell me the true cause that I
might save mine oath, and rore out my rejoycings: it was a devilish trick of
the Rascals to bind me by oath never to speak of it, but to those that should
tell me of it first. I have such a coil to keep it in now: Prithee tell me,
what has the old Traveller* that is now bound for the Low Countries, gi'n thy
Mrs. in his will, can tell?


Fris. Alas he is offended with her, she has displeased him in somewhat, that
is the maine cause of his mortal sickness.


Touch. That Is my boy, there boy, there, that was a home blow.


Fris. She comes not at him sir, nor dares not see him: do you know any thing
by her sir?


Touch. No, no, no, not I, not I; s'bores I bit my tongue too hard.


Fris. If you do sir, would you would speak a good word for her, that he may
dye in charity with her.


Touch. The jade jeeres me, I Will stay no longer ^'the house.


Fris. Nay good sir say not so, after so many messages and entreaties, by all
the best of the parish, and an exhortation made to you by the Minister himself:
did you vouchsafe to come, and will you now come short to see my Master, now the
Doctors have given him over, and he is dying?


Touch. I confess 'twas my desire to see that dying that brought me hither:
where is he? I Will hold my nose, and have at him.


Fris. I hope you will be friends with him now sir; for he is even a going.


Touch. Friends? I Will rather go with him, and fight it out by the way.


Act 4.Scene* 4.
Enter Striker brought in a Chair, Curate. Fris. Look you sir here he is.


Touch, What up and in a Chair?


Fris. Yes sir; he will not yield by any persuasion to dye in his bed.


Touch. Then he may live to be hanged yet* for ought I see.


Cur. See sir, your neighbor Touchwood comes to be reconciled to you.


Touch. You are quite besides the book sir Domine, I have no friends in hell to
send to by him: no sir, I come to see him dye, as he lived a hateful miscreant.


Cur. Let me pray and beseech you to speak more charitably, or else not to
offend the dying man with your presence.


Touch. Do I come to humor him, or you, or my self, think you: you that
take upon you, and do rather go about to sooth him up in his sickness, then
to fright him out of his pain, rather encourage him to live then rid the world
of him, and his abominations.


Cur. Best look into your self Sir: The worlds a stage, on which you both are
Actors, and neither to be his own Judge.


Touch. But he has played many vilde and beastly parts in it, let him go, I
would see his last Exit, and hiss him out of it; hark, the Ravens cry porke
for him, and yet he dies not.


Fris. O you are a hard-hearted man.


Touch. My heart's not hard enough to break his, I would it were: where is your
kind hearted Mistress, fetch her, and try what she can do.


Stri. Huh, huh, huh,


Cough. Cur. What have you done sir?


Touch. So, so, so, so it works, it works.


Stri. Out snarling Hell-hound my curse upon thee, and thy cursed son that
has undone my Niece and me: curse upon curse light on ye.


Cur Oh fearful.


Touch. How heartily he prays; sure he is near his end.


Cur. Pray sir depart, you are too uncharitable.


Touch. My son undone thy Niece: has he not done her think thou? ha, ha,
ha.


Stri. Huh, huh, huh: Villain thou know what he has done; huh, huh.


Touch. I know not whether I know or no; tell me, and I Will tell thee.


Fris. I Will tell you then that which you know already,
Although you keep it for a joy within you:
Your wicked son has by her own confession
Done that unto her, that unless he play
The honest man's part and marry her, he will
Full dearly answer it in Hell.

Stri: Huh, huh, huh.


Touch. Speak English, has he lain with her?


Fris. It Is so:
She has confessed it to her grandfather,
To me, and Mr. Pancridge here is made
Acquainted with it.

Touch. Ha, ha, ha*


Cur. The Virgin says
She is depusilated by your son.

Touch. Depusilated, ha, ha, ha.


Cur. It is no laughing matter: therefore send
Speedily for your son, before the rumor
Make it ridiculous; as yet none knows it,
But we a slender few.

Touch. Will you direct
Your Divine Rhetoric there to him; and win him
But to entreat me in this case, and try
What I will say to it.

Cur. Be persuaded sir.


Stri. In this extremity I do entreat you that they may marry*


Touch. I have my ends upon thee; quickly dye,
And take thine own, thy base submission
Has rendered thee more odious, more loathsome
To me than all thy former villainies.

Stri. Huh, huh huh.


Touch. And hark thee ere thou dyest, for now thou art going*
Before my son shall wed that whore thy Niece,
She shall bring all the hands of all the whore-masters
In City, Court, and Kingdom, (black Coats, and all)
I will spare none) unto a fair Certificate
That she is clear of all men but my son,

Stri. Huh, huh, huh.


Touch. Nay more:
That she is clear of him too; and that he
Has never top'd her in the way we treat of,
Before he wed her: for my son shall not ride
In his old boots upon his wedding night:
So, now dye and sink
Into thy grave, to rid us of thy stink.

Cure. I have not known such want of charity.


Fris. Unconscionable wretch, thou have killed my Mr.


Stri. Vgh, ugh, no Fid ugh hem! he has cured me:
I am light at heart again: he has cured me;
He has played the good Physician against his will;
And a halter be his fee for it.

Touch. The Devil I have, and his Dam it shall.


Stri. Ah hem! I am light at heart again.


Touch. O damned old counterfeit.


Fris. Well fare your heart old Master.


Stri. Though she prove bastard-bellyed, I will own her,
Cherish, maintain, and keep her from thy son.

Touch. Oh I could tear that tongue out.


Stri. Keep her child too.


Touch. Do, and her next, and fill thy house with bastards.


Stri. I Will hold 'hem more legitimate than thy brood.


Cur. What mean you gentlemen?


Stri. For thou, thy son, thy house is all a Bastard.


Touch. Bear witness, he calls my house a Bastard.


Fris. Ha, ha, ha.


Touch I Will make thy house to smoke for it.


Stri. Bear witness there, he says he will fire my house.


Cur. For neighborhood and Charity speak lower.


Stri. Tis'petty treason; i will be wi'yee there sir.


Touch. And hang thy self old scare Crow.


Fris. Will you eat a piece of Ginger-bread for your Wind Sir.


Touch. Out Witch.


Kicks her. Fris. O murder, murder.


Stri. I Will lay as many actions on thee as thou have bones in that Swines foot
of thine.


Fris. My Nails shall right me: I Will teach him to kick a woman.


Cur. Hold mistress Friswood*


Fris. O Villain kick a woman!


Touch. Thou laidst this plot to murder me, thou man-killer.


Stri. Blood-sucker thou lie.


Cur. Help from above, within, or any whence, in the name of sanctity I
conjure you. Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebo.


Act 4. Scene 5*
Enter Tom and Coulter. Tom. What Is the matter? by your leave which is my zick
Uncle? are you scuffling for's money before he be dead.


Coul. We Will part you with a vengeance.


Touch. Ha you your Tennants, your Clownes here brought in to butcher me?


Stri. Slave they are thine, brought in to spoil and rob me; I know 'he^n not.


Cur. I fear I have conjured up fiends indeed, how infernally they look?


Tom. No sir, we come with no zick intendment on neither another zide; but an
you be Mr. Striker, we are o'your zide, an't be to cut all the rest into
Pot-hearbs.


To Touch. Fris. No, this is my Mr.


Tom. Zay but the word then, and have at 'hem.


Touch. Had you your ambuscado for me?


Cur. They are a pair of the Sedan Mules I take it.


Coul. Moyles sir, we be no Moyles would you should well know.


Tom. We be Cursen folk as good as your zelfe, and get you out of the house by
mine Uncles leave here.


Touch. Your Uncle, oh brave.


Tom. Orif I baste you not well a fine, and Lamb-skinne your jackets till your
bones rattle in your hides, then zay cha bewrai'd the house I coame on.


Touch. Well sir, I Will go and leave you to your Uncle: rejoice sir with your
kind red: I hope you will have more shortly, if your Niece prove fruitful: Come
Master Paneridge, will you go?


Cur. With joy for your recovery, and manners to your privacy, Right
Worshipful I leave you to talk with' Clown your Nephew.


Touch. Tarry, tarry; as sure as a Club, this Clown is sent for out of the
Country, to soder up his cracked Niece in Matrimony, and therefore calls him
Uncle; I could spoil the Match, but by my oath I dare not; and therefore
Clown take thy course: come let us go Mr. Pancridge


Ex. Stri. And why you my Nephew sir?


Tom. And why not I your Nephew; has not she told you, and have not I told you as
much as the matter's worth, and do ye mean to vlee from the bargain?


Stri. What new afflictions hourly find me out?


Fris. And for your health, I hope sir.


Stri. Sir, I Will have better testimony then your own;
It Is true I lost a sister; but till you
Bring stronger proof she was your mother sir,
Your Clowneship must not Uncle me; am I we'you sir?
Kings Crowns have been pretended to by'impostures;
And knavery is as rife in Russet Wool,
As in the prowdest purple; get you gone,
There I am we'you directly.

Tom. Is It come to this now?


Coult. Your project will not hold Mr. Thomas, best zeek your brother Tim, he
has a zertification from the parish, and the Priest too, of all your mothers
mind, and you could cosen him on it, and come again, and uncle this weese
gentleman, whether he wool or no; 'twould be vine i'vaith


Tom. Agreed: well sir, vor this time I ha no more to zay t'yee, since you be
so budge: but he that made you zave you


Exeunt Amb. Stri. Farewell sir, I do begin to think there is something in it.


Fris. He made me think he was your sisters son Ia m sure.


Stri. I will not think so, no he was set on
By some of my maligners to abuse me;
It had been good to ha laid him by the heels:
But let him go; call down my Niece out of
The melancholy mist she is chambred in, Ex. Fris.
All makes for her; their vexing me, restores
Her to my love again; and reason good;
She Is mine own natural Niece: and though
She has lost the husband, and the name she sought,
Yet she appears a Striker; and I will cherish her.
Come you shall grieve no longer, I am friends wi'yee:
Stand up, stand up I say, and look up too,
Off with this mourning veil, and dry those tears:
I have considered that right Noble Parents
Have pardoned in their Children as great faults;
But let it be your warning, not your license.

Scene 6.
Ent. Anna^. and kneels. An. For your security I am content,
And would entreat to live in that retirement,
Which your fair Justice, and my foul offense
Of late confined me to, to weep and sigh
My loathed life away.

Stri. No more: you shall
No longer live reclus'd in wilful darkness;
Enjoy your former liberty; see, and be seen:
And (as you weigh my pardon and my love)
Let not your blemish dwell upon your face;
Nor any argument of grief, or shame
Be legible there, to the most curious eye:
But let your cheek be cheerful, and your brow
Crowned with as great a confidence, as may
Comply with Virgin Modesty: and that
Add to your beauty with full strength of Art,
Beyond the eye to take a lovers heart.

An. In all I will obey you,


Stri. If I make
Choice of a husband for you then, you will take him.

An. Twill but become my duty.


Stri. A good girl.


Fris. Sir here is the Knight come again, that has been here in the time of
your sickness to have seen you, and my Mistress, but could not: and left a
letter for you once: he that looks women through so.


Stri. Oh* Sir Arnold Cautious: did you tell him I was of the mending hand.


Fris. Yes I told him you were so, so.


Stri. Give me my Gown and Cap though, and set me charily in my sickly
chair; his letter is a treaty of a match betwixt his Nephew and my Niece: go
fetch him up.

Ex. Fris. In Niece, and be not seen until I call you: until you hear me
call you, do you hear?

Ex. Ann. Could I but catch this Cautious coxecombe Knight now -- I Will put fair
for it.


Act 4. Scene 7.
Enter Cautious and Friswood. Fris. Here is the Knight sir.


Stri. Why reach you not a Chair? I hope sir Arnold
You Will pardon the necessity of my rudeness:
I cannot rise, nor stoop, to you, uh, uh, uh.

Caut. Rather excuse me sir, that press upon you
Thus in your weakness: but you understand
My business by my letter if you have read it.

Stri. Yes sir, go forth; but be not far I pray you. Ex. Fris.
I have heard your Nephew is a wild young man*

Caut. A very bashful boy I assure you; that is the reason
That I am won to be a spokes-man for him.

Stri Oh no dissembling sir; you know he is wild,
And suffers under your displeasure for it: uh, uh, uh.

Caut. A witch could not guess righter: but they say
That dying men are Prophets oftentimes.
Suppose he has been wild, let me assure you
He Is now reclaimed, and has my good opinion:
And is as like in person and behavior
To gain the maids affection.

Stri, Speak to the purpose; pray what is his estate?


Caut. I there is the point indeed: why sir, he has
A hundred pound a year; and is withal
A hopeful, and a handsome gentleman.

Stri. Hopeful, and handsome! uh, uh, uh.


Caut. You sir have wealth enough.


Stri. And she has choice enough
Of greater matches: could I get her
Into a marriage vain, but she will not look
Upon a man not she; but lives retired
Here in my house, and is a careful Nurse:
She Is fitter sir to be an old man's Nurse,
Then any young man's bride: uh, uh, uh, uh.

Caut. Is she so grave in youth? I have often sought
A sight of her, but never could obtain it.

Stri. Not without my consent I warrant you;
She Is nearer to a mother than a maid.
I tell you truth sir, and you know deceit
Becomes not dying men: uh, uh, uh. For virtue and obedience
She Is fitter for your self then for your Nephew:
But to the point, a hundred pound a year
You say he has, and hopes and handsomnesse,
Which may acquire, with your assurance of
So much for jointure -- Yes, a thousand pound
In portion with her: but sir let me tell you,
I Would rather give six thousand unto one
Of mine own choice; which she will not refuse,
If I but say this is the man, and take him.

Caut. Will not your Niece be seen: I feign would see her.


Stri. At hand: she will not out of my presence sir,
Nor ever was by man, not since the clock
Of her Virginity struck eleven, not she,
Except at door or window, as men pass:
And so perhaps your Nephew may have seen her.

Caut. In Troth no otherwise; and so he told me*
May not I see her sir?

Stri. I tell you true;
Deceit you know becomes not dying men: uh, uh, uh.
And therefore hark you sir, I have a purpose,
(That if she take the man whom I will choose)
To make her my sole heir; provided that
She match before I dye: uh, uh, I cannot last*

Caut. Pray let me see your Niece.


Stri. Friswood -- why Friswood.


Caut. Is that her name?


Stri. No sir, I call my maid.


Caut. A maid; I took her for an old woman.


Stri. A maid upon my virtue: and I fear
That her frigidity has mortified my Niece:
Deceit becomes not dying men you know
Friswood I say, I bad her not be far:
I dare not strain my self to call her louder.

Caut. I Will call her for you sir: Fris --


Stri. Hold sir, hold, pray use this whistle for me,
I dare not strain my self to wind it I,
The Doctors tell me it will spend my spirits, Caut* whistles.
So, so, enough sir -- Fie, f^e upon you:
Go call my Niece, uh, uh.

Ex. Fris. Caut. Be of good cheer sir, and take courage man:
What you have been a Striker in your days:
And may be again, I would not have him dye.

Stri. Uh -- alas I cannot last -- why comes she not?


Fris. I cannot get her from her work; nor to
Believe me that you sent for her, because
I told her that a gentleman was with you

Stri. There was your fault, then I must call my self.
Why Anna-bell, ah, ah, ah, An-na-bell.

Ex. Fris. Caut. Take heed, strain not your self too hard, but send again:
The rarest beauty that I e're beheld, Act 4. Scene 2.
Which with a maidenhead of that growth, Enter Annabell.
Would be an absolute wonder, her sweet modesty,
And meek obedience* justifies that too, She kneeles at Strikers feet.
And makes her up a miracle of nature;
My former misbeliefe I do renounce,
And at first sight, (which is the birth of love)
A faith grows in me, strengthened by the word
Of this expiring man, that chastity
Has not forsaken beauty.

Stri. You shall hear him.


Ann. What to propound a husband? honored sir,
Although I rather wish to dye a Virgin;
Yet my obedience to your grave behests
Shall sway my will: your choice shall be my liking:
But let me thus much favor beg, before
You make that choice, that you will not destroy
The building you have rear*d; your care and cost
Has built me up by virtuous education,
Unto that height that I consider heaven;
And wax so old in that high contemplation,
That to look down on youthful vanities,
Were to be at a stand; and to delight in 'hem,
Were to fall back again; and to be linked
In marriage, to a man whose wild affections
Are bent to worldly pleasures a maine perdition.

Caut. I dare not speak to her for my Nephew now:
Nor (though I love her strangely) for my self.

Ann. Do you tell me of his Nephew sir? even he
The Knight himself, I hold to be too young
For a well governed man as the world goes.

Caut. I have not the heart to wrong her; she is too good.


Fris. Sir, here is a gentleman presses at my heels
To speak with you.

Act. 4. Scene 8
Enter Gilbert with his arm in a Scarffe. Caut. Mr. Goldwire, what is your
haste?


Gil I come to cry you mercy, and this good gentleman;
And this sweet Gentlewoman, who I take it
Is his fair Niece, of whom you are in treaty;
If it be not already gone too far;
Let me entreat you not to put your finger
Further in the business in behalf of your Nephew.

Caut. You first moved me to it.


Gil. It Is that repents me:
Your base unworthy Nephew has abused me;
I do not speak it for a slight hurt he has gi'n me,
But for his breach of Faith to another Virgin.

Ann. Oh me; and would you speak for such a man?


Gil. And the false way, the plot he had upon you,
To put you on this enterprise, the Quarrel*
In which he rescued you, to indeere himself to you,
Was a mere counterfeit squable, a very trick
Contrived betwixt him* and his brother Poet
To Abuse your goodness:
J leave it to your consideration sir:
I am in haste; and so I wish you health sir;
And you much happiness in a husband Lady.

Gives her a letter. Ex. An. Has given me here a letter; I want but
Place fit to peruse it.

Caut. Had he a plot upon me, I Will have my plot too;
And now woe for my self sir if you please.

Stri. Sir, let me tell you, I think well of you, uh, uh,
Deceit becomes not dying men you know,
She would make ee'ne too good a wife for you:
(...) I have heard sir of your disposition,
Never to marry without best assurance,
First, of Virginity, and then of Chastity,
In her that you would choose; and let me tell you, uh, uh,
I know not where you can so well be fitted:
She Is right, uh, uh, if you dare take a weak man's word,
Deceit would ill become me, uh, uh.

Caut. I take you at your word, and thank you sir.


Stri. Vh, uh, uh, uh -- O lay me in my bed:
You need not leave me yet sir.

Caut. No sir, no,
It shall be a match, or no match ere I go.

Exeunt omnes. They lead Striker forth. Act 4. Scene 9.
Money-lacks, Spring* Britleware, Hoyden.
Mon. NOw sir have you your rules by heart?


Hoy. Both Rules and Rudiments I have al ad unguem.


Mon. Repeat your Principles.


Hoy. Principles to be imprinted in the heart of every new made gentleman: To
commend none but himself: to like no man's wit but his own: to slight that
which he understands not: to send money, and never look for it again: to take up
upon obligation, and lend out upon affection: to owe much, but pay little* to
sell land, but buy none: to pawn, but never to redeem again: to fight for a
whore: to cherish a Bawd, and defy a tradesman.


Mon. And can you observe and keep these rules think you?


Hoy. I hope I can sir, and have begun pretty well already* you see I have
spent and lent all my money; and pawned all my Clothes but these a* my back,
as I am a clear gentleman; and for the rest of the rudiments, and the several
carriages and deportments by garb, by congy, complement, etc. which are to be
attained by practice when I come abroad and amongst 'hem, you shall gain
credit by me.


Mon. I commend your confidence: now Mr. Spring, and Mr. Brittleware, play you
the Complementasters before him a little, for his further instruction: Imagine
them a couple of Courtiers scarcely acquainted fall to; and look that you
congy in the new French Bum-trick; here Landlord, take his Cloak and hat to
appear more generous.


Hoy. Bum trick!


Mon. Come meet and begin; play but two or three bouts at most at single Rapier
complement, and one or two at Back-sword and you ha done: now observe sir.


Hoy. Single Rapier, and Back-sword Complement foil.


Spr. Noble Master Fine-wit, the single example of Court-Ceremony, if my
apprehension deal fairly with me.


Brit. Sir, how auspiciously have I fallen upon the knowledge of you by virtue
of the same apprehension.


Mon. So, there is one.


Scene 10.
Enter Gil* Sam* Wat* aside. Gil. What Is here?


Sam Peace, let us see a little more.


Hoy. As I am a Gentleman, a neat bout and fairly come off of both sides.


Spr. Sir* I shall ever bless the promptness of my memory, in being so
fortunate to collect the fallacious acquaintance of so complete a goodness.


Hoy. Sweet sir I shall ever bless, etc.


Writes in his tables. Brit. Oh you are pleased out of that noble worth which
can convert all things to the form and image of its own perfection to make
your self glorious, with that which is miserably impoverished in it self.


Mon. Good, there is two.


Hoy, Miserably impoverisht in it self -- oh sweet.


Spr. Sir, you have such a conquering way in humility, that he shall be sure
to come off vanquished that offers to contend with you.


Brit. This is the noblest of all humanity to piece up the defect of your
friend with a glory of your own.


Mon. A plain hit that: here were three bouts well played.


Hoy. Piece up the defect of your friend with a glory of your own: most
stately fine, as I am a gentleman.


Mon. So much for single Rapier: now for your secret wipe at Back-sword.


Hoy. I that I would see, like the hackling of the Millers legs: now for a
delicate back-blow.


Spr. See you yon fellow I held complement with?


Hoy. Yes sir, a well-spoken gentleman and a lovely.


Spr. The arrantst trifle in a Kingdom.


Hoy. What he is not, is he?


Spr. Made only to make physic work: a very lump of laughter.


Hoy. Ha, ha, ha.


Mon. You have done well: now you sir.


Brit. Do you note him yonder that past from you?


Hoy. That gallant sir?


Brit. The very scorn at Court;
So empty, not one passable part about him.

Mon. Good.


Brit. A very tilting stock for young practisers to break their jests on.


Mon. Enough.


Hoy. Good and enough; do you call this good enough, to abuse one another thus?


Mon. Yes, this is qacksword Complement: this wipes off the false praise which
the first thrust on: you must be seen in both, or you are no true garbist
else.


Hoy. J shall soonest hit of this; for from a whelpe I could give scurvey
language.


Gil. Now break in upon 'hem; save you sir Hugh.


Hoy. O course salutation: save you sir Hugh.


Mon. How got you hither gentlemen?


Wat. Here we are sir, and have seen part of your practice, your Courtly
exercise.


Mon. Peace: but how got you in, and a stranger with ye?


Gil. He shall betray nothing.


Sam. We found fair entrance into the house.


Gil. and Wat whisp. with Mon. Brit. 'Sfoot where is my wife then?


Sam. If your wife be the gentlewoman of the house sir, she is now gone forth
in one of the new Hand-litters: what call ye it, a Sedan.


Brit. O Sedana.


Ex. Spr. He Is run mad with his horns.


Hoy. He Is run with my Hat and Cloak by your leave.


Spr. He Will come again, near doubt him.


Hoy. You say so small acquaintance* but I could never see any thing of mine
again, since I came amongst you, if it once got out of my sight: what money
have I left troe?


Tells. Brit. I pray gentlemen which way took she:


Sam. Down toward the Strand I tell you, in a new Litter, with the number one
and twenty in the breech on it.


Brit. A Litter of one and twenty in her breech: High time to run.


Exit. Gil. You see we have our plot in action too, sir Hugh, and it runs
fairly on.


Mon. But what a rogue art thou to put such a slur upon thine own Uncle* first
to put him on for thy self, then you with a Counterfeit trick to put him off
of that course, to run desperately headlong to break his own neck in a
match: what a Rogue art thou to use thine uncle thus?


Wat. Nay what a wretch were you, if you should cross your daughter in such a
fortune?


Mon. Which if I do, cut my windpipe: what the young rascal Touchwood is gone
into France they say?


Wat. I he is safe enough.


Mon. Sir Cautious to be caught! if I do not love my daughter the better for
her lucky leg stretching* I am a villain, I am taken with such kind of roguery.


Gil. Take heed you have not a cross plot in that itching pate of yours to
spoil all now.


Mon. Then cut my weasond I say.


Gil. And I swear I will, or cut these hands off; I thought good to tell you
so, because I know what tricks you have done, and what discoveries you have
made for small parcells of ready money.


Mon. Hoo pox, I want no money; now look there comes Mr. Hoyden, salute these
gallants.


Hoy. What without a hat or cloak?


Mon. The better for a young beginner.


Hoy. Sweet sir, I shall ever bless my auspicious stars, that shined me into
the falicious acquaintance of so singular goodness.


Gil. Sir you forget your self.


Hoy. Most singular sweet sir, most miserably impoverish't in it self.


Gil. Good sir forbear, make not an Idol of me.


Hoy. You piece up the defect of your friend with a glory of your own.


Sam. Can you say this gentleman was a Clown within this fortnight?


Hoy. Within this fortnight I assure you sir, as rank a Clown of one side, as
ever held Cow to Bull.


Sam. Had it been of both sides, it had been miraculous.


Hoy. Now note me sir: do you see that fellow I left?


Sam. Yes, it is my friend.


Hoy. The arrantest coxcomb in a Country


Sam. How sir?


Hoy. Made only to make Physic work.


Sam. You do not know him sure.


Hoy. A tilting stock for young practisers to break jests on: there is a wipe
for you at back sword Complement.


Sam. There Is another for you sir.


Kicks him. Hoy. You knock at the wrong door sir, and I pity your ignorance:
go to school as I have done, and learn more wit: kick a gentleman.


Act 4. Scene 11.
Enter Tom Hoyden and Coulter. Coult. Here he is and here be all the crew on
'hem, and more.


Tom Here? thou mockst he is not here: sure these be all Lords I think.


Wat. How now; what is he?


Spr. Slid it is his Clown brother he spoke of?


Tom. Is It possible? icha made a sweet jaunt after you and have I vound a vine
voole o'thee: where is thy voure hundred pound? is that made a voole on too
troe: where is the zartificate my mother ga' thee to vinde thine uncle? gi' me
that, chill ^ee what I can do wi'it.


Hoy. Away Clown I know thee not can thou complement?


Tom. Complement lies, I can complement dagger out o'sheath, an I zet on it.


Coult. I hope he will veeze you, and make your zilken jacket hum: well zed Mr.
Thomas to 'hem, and to 'hem all I Will zi^e ye.


Gil. Wat. Sam. Mr. Thomas does he call him?


Tom. Yes, Mr. Thomas, and what zay you to that; and as good a Mr. as the best
o'yee, and you go to that; for by uds shall jidge me, I think you are all but
a company of Cheaterlings; and if you do not give the voole my brother
sartifaction for the wrongs you ha'd one him, and me in him, I Will canvas it out
of the carcasses o'zome o'yee, by uds daggers death will I. Draw Coul^er, and
amongst 'hem.


Mon. Hold sir, hold, you shall have satisfaction.


Tom. O shall I zoe, put up again Coulter.


Gil. This is a stout roaring Clown.


Mon. Where Is the Mr. of the house?


Spr. He Is run mad, after his wife, now he should look to his house.


Tom. Cha mich a do to vorbeare beating o'thee yet, my vingers do zo itch at
thee.


Hoy. I understand thee not, as I am a gentleman.


Tom. But now I think on it Coulter, we'll have all ag^ine, and by a quieter
way; and teach 'hem to lick honey, catch birds with Chafe, or go to plow with
dogs.


All. Ha, ha, ha.


Hoy. Ha, ha, ha; who understands the Barbarian tro?


Coul. Uds vish Master they do nothing but jeer to you all this while now.


Tom. Do they jeere, let 'hem jeer and gibe too; i will vetch ones Warrant shall
out jeere 'hem all, and he be above ground.


Mon. You shall not need sir; go but in till the Mr. of the house comes home,
you shall have your desire.


Tom. You zay very well sir; zay well is good, but do well is better. Lets zee
what you will do now.


Gil. Remember we have warned you sir Hugh, we must leave you.


Tom. Nay I'chill look to you: sirrah come in my hand.


Mon. Now for a trick to rid us of this Clown,
Or our trade sinks, and up our house is blown.

Ex. omne^. Act 5.
Scene 1.
Enter Trampler and Touchwood. Tram. T^s as I tell you Mr. Touchwood; your
son has lost a fair fortune in the young gentlewoman, and as I conceive by
your wilfulnes Sir Arnold Cautions licks his lips at her. I assure you; and a
sweet lick it is, six thousand pound in present portion.


Touch. A sweet li^k he has indeed if he knew all.


Tram. He does know all sir.


Touch. If he did, I know what I know; good oath let me not lose thy virtue.


Tram. He knows moreover, that Mr. Strike^, her grandfather has covenanted to
give her two thousand pound more at the birth of his first Child, lawfully
begotten on her body.


Touch. Ha, ha, ha; but what if her first child prove illegitimate?


Tram. That is not to be thought sir.


Touch. Yes, and spoken too, if I durst; but good oath let me not lose thy
virtue.


Tram. And then he had entered into ten thousand pound bond, to leave her his
heir if she survive him.


Touch. But he is well recovered you say.


Tram. Very lusty, very lively sir.


Touch. Then hang him, he will never dye; I am a feared I must be feign to give
him over, I shall never vex him to death: no, no, I shall never do it.


Tram. No sir, I heard himself say, that your vexing him has bin his physic,
and the best means to keep him alive.


Touch. Did he say so? I Will tear this match in pieces presently: and see how
that will work on him; i will do it, what is an oath to me, in respect of sending
him to the Devil, I Will do it.


Tram. I would you could sir, and recover her for your son yet.


Touch. Vmh.


Tram. Because I love the young gentleman well


Touch. Vmh.


Tram. Though I assure you the writings are all past, signed, sealed, and
delivered; but I have 'hem in my hands yet, and can do you a pleasure.


Touch. Humh.


Tram. And came purpos^ly to advise you, because I love your son.


Touch. Vmh -- what a world of villainy lies in the jobber noule of a Lawyer.


Tram. Think of it sir, and be speedy.


Touch. Right learned in the Law, and my sons friend Mr. Trampler, Mr.
Ambodexter Trampler, you are a most notorious knave, and and you shall hear
on it o'both sides, as you take fees.


Tram. Nay, and you be so hot Mr Touchwood I am gone.


Ex. Touch. I know my course; either I will crack the heart strings of Striker,
in crossing this match, with the cracked credit of his Niece, or else I will be
friends with him, and that will kill him out right: But my oath still troubles
me -- Oh gentlemen you are welcome.


Act 5. Scene 2.
Enter Gilbert and Wat. Wat. Ha you heard sir of your son yet?


Touch. Not I, he lacks no money yet it seems:
Young Travelers make no other use of their fathers.

Gil. But ha you heard the news of his young Mistress?


Touch. What of sir Cautious being caught, the wise and wary gentleman, your
Uncle, that would not believe there could be a marriagable maid, though she were
justified by a jury of Midwifes, and therefore purposed to have died a
Batchelour: that he should now be caught with a pipt Nut-shell, and a Maggot
in it.


Wat. Sure he was strangely wrought to it.


Gil. I you must think
There have been knavish heads used in the business.

Touch. But I will cross it and their knaveries, what ere they are.


Wat. I hope you will not cross mine uncle in such a fortune tho.


Touch. What to marry a wench?


Wat. No, so much wealth sir.


Touch. Pray let me use my Christian Liberty, my Conscience pricks me to it, it
must be done.

Enter Servant. Now what say you sir?


Whisper. Gil. We might ha spared this labor: he was resolved before we came
it seems to spoil the marriage.


Wat. We could not be too sure though: we are now sure enough, that our
disswasions will spur him on the faster.


Gil. And we are no less sure, that sir Hugh Mony-lacks will set his strength
to life Sir Cautious off of the hooks, in hope of a matter of 5. Pound, though
^e forfeit the obligation of his throat by it.


Wat. All the danger is, that Sir Hugh will be with mine Uncle too soon, and
prevent the match before he be too deep engaged in it.


Gil. For that my letter of instructions, which I have given Annabell shall
prevent him; and Striker keeps Sir Cautious in his house so warily, that until
the intended wedding hour, Sr. Hugh shall not obtain admittance.


Ex. Ser. Touch. Go fetch 'hem in, and make the warrant: ha, ha, ha: Gentlemen
will you hear a complaint my man tells me of certain Clownes that desire my
warrant to apprehend for notorious Cheaters, whom do you think?


Gil. I cannot guess.


Wat. I know none I hope.


Touch. Even Sir Hugh Money-lacks, the mourning Knight, and some of his
associats.


Gil. Of My life it is the roaring Clown, about the new made Gentleman his
brother.


Act 5. Scene 3.
Enter Tom and Coulter. Touch. What is it you sir, Mr. Strikers Nephew, as I
take it, you called his great worships Uncle lately as I take it, and did your
best to tore me out of his house.


Tom. Zheart Coulter we be vallen into the Bakers ditch.


Touch. And do you bring your complaints to me sir, ha?


Coul. Zet a good vace on it; and veare no colors though.


Tom. I am an honest man, and a true man for all that, and I thought you the
vittest to make my complaint to because you were the next Justice, to as
pestilence a piece of villainy as ever you were Master of in all your life: I
come but v^r justice, and to pay vor what I take, and't be avore hand, here it
is, whether it be vor your Clarke or your zelfe, who makes or meddles with it,
your man has my complaint in writing, pray let me have your warrant.


Tou. You shall, but first tell me, how came it that you called that Strike^ uncle.


Tom. Vor cause that he is uncle to a voole that I have to my brother, and I
thought I might be so bold wee'n, and he was not against it at virst, till you
were gone, and then he bad me go zeek better testimony, and so I went and
vound my brother Tim, his own zusters zonne I assure ye.


Touch. His Sisters son?


Tom. Where he was made such a Tim, as never was heard on in To^ton, amongst a
many Cheaters: by mass here are a couple o'^.


Coul. These were of the crew.


Touch. How now my Masters: sure fellow thou art mistaken.


Tom. No sir, I am not mistaken I but I take 'hem I, where I vinde 'hem I: And
I charge your justiceship with 'hem I, til they bring out my brother I.


Touch. Bring out your brother: why what has your brother done?


Tom. Done: nay they have done and undone him amongst 'hem. And I think
devoured him quick too vor he is lost, and no where to be vound.


Touch. Do you know the meaning of any of this gentlemen?


Gil. If he were your brother sir, that you found at Sir Hugh Money-lacks
lodging, you know we left him in your hands.


Wat. We stepped in but by chance, and such a youth we found there, and there we
left him in your and their hands, that had the managing of him.


Tom. Zo you did, but what then did me the rest, but pli'd me, and my man
Coulter here with wine, and zack, and something in it, I dare be zwore that laid
us a zleep, when we mistrusted nothing but vaire play: oh speak Coulter, oh.


Coul. And then when were vast azleep, they all gave us the zlip, the Knight
was gone, and the Squire was gone, and Mr. Tim was gone, but he was made away,
without all peraventure; for all the parrell that he wore was left behind: and
then -- speak Master.


Tom. And then the Mr of the house came home, and made a monstrous wonderment
for the loss of his wife; he could not vinde her he zed. and zo he vaire and
vlatly thrust us out o'doores, and is gone a hunting after his wife again: speak
Coulter.


Gil. Alas poor Britlew^re.


C^uli. And then we came for your warrant, to vind all these men again.


Tom. And to take 'hem where we vinde 'hem, and these were zome on 'hem, when
time was, and pray look to 'hem.


Touch. I know not what to make of this but sure there is something in it: And for
these gentlemen i will see them forth-comming.


Wat. We thank you sir.


Gil. And I will undertake Sir Hugh Mony-lacks will be at the Bride-house.


Touch. And thither will I instantly.


Gil. Wat. We'll wait upon you sir.


Tom. And I chill make bold to wait upon you till I be better zartified.


Touch. You shall, come on your way, come gentlemen.


Gil. Well, here is such a knot now to untie,
As would turn O^dipus his brain ^wry.

Ex. om^. Act 5. Scene 4
Enter ^urate and Britle ware: Cur. Be appeased and comforted, good Mr.
Br^tleware, trouble not your head in running after your fate, nor break your
weighty brains in seeking ways after your wives heels, which are so light by
your own report, they cannot crack an egg.


Brit. Her credit yet they may and mine.


Cur. Besides your wife is your wife where e're she is abroad as we as at home,
yea, lost perhaps as well as found: I am now going to yoke a heifer to a
husband, that perhaps will say so shortly: whither away Mr. Trampler?


Scene 5.
Enter Trampler. Tram. To the wedding house: where I think I saw your wife
last night Mr. Britleware.


Brit. Did you sir, did you^


Tram. I cannot say directly; but I think 'twas she: does she not call the
gentlewoman Aunt that keeps Mr. Strikers house?


Brit. Yes Mistress Friswood, she is her Aunt sir.


Scene 6.
Cur. Come go with us and find her.


Enter the Sedan, Hoy. in it, in woman's clothes. Brit. Pray gentleman stay, for
I suppose She Is here here is number one and twenty; and this is sure the litter.


Litter-man. What peep y^u for; you ought not to do so sir.


Brit. By what Commission ought you to carry my wife in a Close stool under my
nose


Litter-man. It Is a close Chair by your leave: And I pray forbear, you know
not who we carry.


Brit. I know the clothes she wears, and I will see the party.


H^y. I know that voice, and let me see the man; it is my surgeon.


Tram. A Surgeon! I took you for a China shopkeeper Master Britleware; these
by trades are for some by purposes, and I smell knavery.


Cur. And Lawyers commonly are the best upon that sent.


Brit. Gentlemen this is a man that lay in my house.


Ho. A gentleman you would say, or my cost was ill besto'd there.


Brit. These are my goods he wears; that was my mothers Gown, and
felloniously he wears it.


H^y. It Is all I have to show for four hundred pound I laid out in your house;
and Sir Hugh put it upon me, and hired these men to carry me -- Whither was it?


Lit^-man. Up to a lodging in St. Gileses sir.


Hoy. Where he promised to finish his work of a gentleman in me, and send me
to my Uncle.


Cur. O monstrum horendum; a man in women's clothes.


Tram. It Is felony by the Law.


Brit. Has sir Hugh gin me the slip to finish his work in private? it shall all
out, I am resolved, though I bewray my self in it: pray gentlemen assist me
with this party to Mr. Justice Strikers, you say my wife is there.


Tram. Yes you shall thither.


Brit. And there I Will take a course you shall smell knavery enough.


Hoy. I find Jam abused enough of conscience: and shall be carried to mine
Uncle now before my time and not as a gentleman, but as a gentlewoman, which
grieves me worst of all.


Cur. Hinc illae lachrimae, the youth is sure abused indeed.


Hoy Oh.


Tram. Come leave your crying: And you beasts up with your luggage, and along
with us; i will fetch such drivers as shall set you on else.


Litter-man. Let us be paid for our labor, and we'll carry him to Bride-well,
if you please.


Hoy. Oh, oh, that ever I was born in this groa^g chair.


Ex. Act 5. Scene 7.
Friswood and Rebecca. Fris. It was well I sent for thee Niece, to help me
deck the Bride here; and that the jealous fool thy husband thinks thou art
gone astray the while; it will be a means for thee to take thy liberty another
night, and pay him home indeed, when he shall not have the power to mistrust
thee: it is the common condition of Cuckolds to mistrust so much before hand,
that when they are Du^'d indeed, they have not a glympse of suspicion left.


Reb. Their horns hang i^ their light then; but truly Aunt, for mine own
part, I had rather my husband should be jealous still then be cured in that
right kind; though I confess the ends of all my longings, and the vexations I
have put him to

Were but to run his jealousy out of breath,
And make him pant under the frivolous weight
He bears; that is, a Cuckold in conceit;
Which without doubt he labors with by this time:
And when he finds me clear, twill be as well:
( I hope) and better then if it were done
By the broad way of foul pollution.

Fris. Nay I do not persuade you, take the downright way,
Nothing against your Conscience Niece; I sent
For him to ha come and found you here by chance;
But he has shut up house, and is run mad
About the Town I hear to all your haunts.

Reb. He shall come hither and renounce his jealousy,
And then entreat me too before I go.

Scene 8.
Fris. Yes, that is a wise wives part.


Ent. Strik. and Ca^t. Stri. What Is the Bride ready?


Fris. Yes sir, she is dressed.


Reb. And dressed, and dressed indeed;
Never was maid so dressed: oh sir you are happy;
The happiest Knight, and are now in election
Of the most sweet encounter in a bride,
That e're your chivalry could couch a Lance at.

Caut. I thank you Mrs. and I Will bring her shortly to bestow money w'yee in
China wares.


Reb. She is her self the purest piece of Pur^lane -- that e're had liquid
sweet meats licked out of it.


Caut. And purer too I hope.


Stri. Go call her down.


Fris. She Is at her private prayers yet sir, she.


Stri. When she has done, then hasten her away.


Ex. Fris. Reb. Reb. Such Brides do seldom make their grooms their prey.


Stri. Do you now conclude Sir Arnold you are happy?


Scene 9.
Caut. As man can be being so near a wife.


Ent. Monylacks. Mon. By your leave gentlemen.


Stri. He come? I fear a mischief.


Mon. How comes it Father Striker, and son Cautious in election
That you huddle up a match here for my child,
And I not made acquainted, as unworthy,
Until the very intended marriage hour?

Stri. Who sent you hither, I sent not for you now sir:
And there I am wi' ye sir.

Mon. It Is true, I covenanted not to come at you,
Until you sent for me, unless you found
Young Touchwood had the love of Annabell,
You have heard he has touched her has he not?

Stri. Hold your peace.


Mon. Has he not made her Touchwood too?


Stri. Can you say so?


Mon. Yes, and struck fire too in her tinderbox.


Stri. You will not speak thus.


Mon. To you I need not; for you know it already;
But to my friend Sir Cautious, whom I honor,
And would not see so shipwrack'd, I may speak it.

Stri. Will you undo your daughter?


Mon. My daughter; no you shall not put her upon me now.
She is your daughter sir: if I bu^ call her mine,
Or suffer her to ask me a bare blessing,
You Will thrust her out: no, you adopted her
In your own name, and made a Striker of her,
No more a Monylacks.

Stri. The beggarly Knight is desperate,
And should he out with it, my shame were endless:
This is the way or none to stop his mouth:
It Is but a money matter; stay a little

Mon Go not away sir Arnold, I must speak wi' ye.


Caut. I am not going sir.


Stri. Be not a Madman here, here is forty pieces,
I know you use to strike for smaller sums:
But take it for your silence, and withal
My constant love, and my continual friendship.

Mon. Give me your hand of that; enough. Sir Arnold.


Caut. What say you to me sir Hugh?


Stri. What does he mean tro?


Mon. You must not have my daughter.


Cau. No sir Hugh.


Mon. Unless you mean to take another leavings.


Stri. Oh devilish reprobate.


Caut. How mean you that?


Mon. Till she has buried first another husband,
And he leave her a widow: I am her father,
And claim a fathers interest in her choice;
And I have promised her to one already,
This very day, because I was not privy
To your proceedings; and have taken here
This fair assumpsit forty pieces sir;
You might admire how I should have 'hem otherwise.

Stri. Here Is an impudent villain.


Mon. For these I give a hundred, if you wed her.


Caut. To show my love unto your daughter sir I Will pay't.


Mon. Security in hand were good.


Caut. Pray lend me sir a hundred Pieces.


Stri. I dare not cross this devil, I must fetch 'hem.


Ex. Mon. Twill never the less be my disparagement.


Caut. What, when they know her grandfather disposed her,
That has the care of her, and gives her portion?
And then he can ^a' but his money, can he?

Mon. Oh but the wench, the wench, is such a wench,
Scarce ^wo such married in a Diocese,
In twice two twelve months, for right and straight ones.

Caut. There said you well; the straight ones I like well:
But those that men call right, or good ones, suffer
A by Construction.

Scene 10.
Mon. Amongst the Iewd.


Enter Striker with a purse. Stri. Here sir.


Mon. But is here weight and number sir?


Stri. Now the fiend stretch thee -- you may take my word.


Mon. Here I am wi' ye sir.


Scene 11.
Enter Gilbert, Wat, Touchwood, Tom, Sam. Gil. Though you are fully bent to
cross the marriage,
Yet lets entreat you not to be too sudden.

Tou. Till they come to the word, for better, for worse
I will not touch at it.

Stri. How now, what mates break in upon us here?


Touch. I come not as a guest sir, or spectator
To your great wedding, but of the Kings affairs;
In which I must crave your assistance sir;
Deny't me, or my entrance, if you dare.

Stri. It is some weighty matter sure then.
But not to trouble your sconce with too much business
At once, pursue your own, we will attend a while.

Touch. So it is sir,


Caut. In that he has said well: I would the Bride
And Priest were come once; I am content they stand
For witnesses: what my kind Nephew are you here?
I thank you for your plot, you see what it is come to.

Wat. It Is not all finished yet sir.
All in good time: the Bride is coming now.
You and your brother Poet are grown friends I see.

Cau. But it may be


Touch. What Is he?


Gil. A friend of Wats he brought for company.


Tom He was amongst 'hem too at the cheating exercise, and yonds the Knight
himself; I know 'hem all I troe.


Touch. And you will stand to this, that your lost brother
Was Strikers Sister Audreyes son.

Tom. I ha told you twonty times, and yet because you zay you will stand my
vrend, i will tell you more, she was with child with Tim bevore my vather married
her (she brought him in her belly vrom this town here (where they get Children
without veare or wit) but vor her money, and's own credits zake, my vather was
well apaid to keep it vor his own; and no body knew to the Contrary, not Tim
himzelfe to this hour.


Touch. Then how camst thou to know it?


T^m. My vather told it me upon his deathbed, and charged me on his blessing,
never to open my mouth to man, woman, nor child, zo I told no body but vokes
on it.


Touch. Well, hold thy peace, it is an absolute wonder! ^ow to the wedding


Scene 12
Enter Curate, Tramp. Ann. Fris. Reb. Cau. Hows this? my bride in mourning
habit, and her head inwillow?


Stri. What Is the meaning of it?


Reb. I said she was dressed as never Bride was dressed.


Touch. A solemn show, and suiting well the Scene!
She seems round bellied, and you mark it too.

Ann. My habit and my dressing suits my fortune.


Stri Pray sir do your office, her conceit
We will know afterward.

Cur. Hem, hem.


Ann. Oh, oh.


sinkes. Fris. Oh me; why Mistress look up, look up I say.


Reb. Clap her cheek, rub her nose.


Fris Sprinkle cold water on her face.


Reb. Cut her lace, cut her lace, and bow her forward, so, so, so.


Touch. I Will lay my life she quickens now with child.


An. Oh.


Mon. What think you is the matter?


Caut. Women how is it with her?


Fris. Sir, as with other women in her case.


Caut. How Is that I pray you. you have bin doing something aforehand sir.


Reb. Twill out, 'twill out,


Caut. Have I?


Reb. It seems so by the story.


Caut. Is she so dressed?


Tou. Ha, ha, ha.


Fris. You may leave laughing, it was your son that did it.


Stri. I am undone, my house disgraced for ever.


Touch. He knew't before hand, now I may declar't,
Speak of thy Conscience, did^t not?

Stri. Oh my heart.


Touch. Oh the hangman.


Caut. Deceit becomes not dying men you know,
Into a whirlepoole of confusion
Sink thou and all thy family, accursed miser.

Touch. This was a sure way now Sir Cautious,
To marry a maid, there is one in the mothers belly.

Stri. Vh, uh, uh, uh.


Caut. You knew not where I could be so well fitted.


Stri. Vh, uh, uh.


Caut. A rot o'your dissembling intrailes, spit 'hem out, you durst not strain
your self to wind your whistle, your Doctor told you it would spend your
spirits, so made me whistle for her


Stri. Vh, uh, uh.


Touch. Cheer up, cheer up, I may be friends wi'yee now:
Here Is one has cause, and knows the way to vex ye,
To preserve life in you as well as I.

Stri. A hem, a hem, I will outlive you both:
This days vexation is enough for a life time.

Caut. And may it last thee to thy lives last hour.


Touch. Now let me talk wi'yee, and come you hither sir.


Tram. I tell you true, your writings are so past, that if you go
Not off by composition, you will shake your whole estate.

Caut. Come hither Nephew,
I Will give thee a thousand pound, and take her off me.

Wat. I cannot with my reputation now:
But I will do my best to work a friend to 't.

Caut. Prithee do, try thy Poetical soldier.


Mon. That Clown come hither too: I fear I am trapt.


Touch. It Is all as I have told you, and without question,
The man in question is your sisters son.

Stri. Would it might prove so, that I had yet a Nephew,
For now my Niece is lost.

Touch. Here Is one shall find him out: or stretch a neck for it.
Sir Hugh you are charged for making of a gentleman.

Mon. Now I am in.


Tou. And more then so, for making him away.


Mon. What gentleman?


Tom. Marry my brother Tim.


Touch. Your patience yet a while: now gentlemen all,
Sir Cautious, and the rest, pray hear a story:
I have bin often urged to yield the cause
Of the long quarrel twixt this man and me:
Thirty years growth it has, he never durst
Reveal the reason; I being sullen would not.

Stri. You will not tell it now?


Touch. Indeed I will:
He had a sister (peace to her memory)
That in my youth I loved, she me so much,
That we concluded, we were man and wife;
And dread less of all marriage lets, we did
Anticipate the pleasures of the bed.
Nay it shall out; briefly, she proved with child:
This covetous man then greedy of her portion,
(Of which for the most part he was possessed)
Forces her with her shame to leave his house.
She makes her moan to me, I then (which since
I have with tears a thousand times repented)
Against my heart stood off, in hope to win
Her Dowry from him: when she gentle soul
(Whom I must now bewail) when she I say,
Not knowing my reserved intent, from him and me,
From friends, and all the world, for ought we knew,
Suddenly slipped away: after five years
I took another wife, by whom I had
The son, that has done that the woman says:
But where I left, if this man's tale be true,
She had a son, whom I demand of you.

Tom. I shall have a kind of an uncle of you anon,
And you prove Tims vather.

Tram. The young Gentleman that sir Hugh had in handling, is in the house, and
Master Brittleware with him.


Cur. Only we kept em back, till our more serious office were ended.


Touch. Pray em in, lets see him.


Exit Tram. Gil. Sir, will it please you first to see a match quickly clapped
up? This Gentleman whom I know every way deserving, were your Niece now in her
prime of Fortune and of Virtue, desires to have her, and she him as much.


Touch. He shall not have her.


Stri. How can you say so?


Wat. He knows his son I fear.


Touch. My son shall make his fault good, and restore her honor to her if he
lives, in meed for your f^ire sisters wrong and my misdeede, my son shall marry
her; provided that he take her in his Conscience unstained by any other man.


Stri. On that condition I Will give her all the worldly good I have.


Sam. Ann. We take you at your word.


Touch. My son!


Sam. I take her not with all faults, but without any least blemish.


Ann. My supposed slain: Thus I cast from me.


Tom. Znailes a Cushion, how warm her belly has made it.


Ann. And that all was but a plot 'twixt him and me, and these gentlemen: This
paper may resolve you.


Sam. It Is mine own hand by which I instructed her by a dissembled way, to
wound her honor.


Ann. Which, to preserve my love, again i would do,
Hoping that you forgive it in me too.

Caut. Now am I cheated both ways.


Wat. The plot is finished: now thanks for your thousand pound sir.


Touch. You are mine own; welcome into my bosom.


Act. 5 Scene 13.
Enter Hoyden, Trampler, Brittleware. Tom. Whoope, who oomes here, my brother
Tim dressed like Master Majors wife of Taunton-Deane.


Hoy. It Is all I could get to escape with out of the cozning house; and all I
have to show of four hundred pound; but this certificate and this small jewel
which my dying mother ga'me; and I had much ado to hide it from the Cheaters,
to bring unto mine Uncle; which is he?


Stri. Lets see your token Sir.


Touch. This is a jewel that I gave my Awdrey.


Hoy. That was my mother.


Tom. And that is your vather he zaies.


Hoy. And a gentleman? what a divellish deal of money might I ha saved! for
gentlemen let me tell you, I have been cozened black and blew; backe-guld and
belly-guld; and have nothing left me but a little bare Complement to live upon,
as I am a clear gentleman.


Stri. Will you bestow some of it upon me.


Hoy. Uncle you shall: First i will give you a hit at single Rapier complement:
and then a wipe or two with the Back-sword Complement and I ha done.


Stri. Pray begin.


Hoy. Noble Mr. Striker the grave Magistrate (if my apprehension deal fairly
with me) whose praises reach to Heaven, for the fair distribution of equal
justice: the poor man's Sanctuary, the righter of Widows, and the Orphans
wrongs.


Stri. Enough, enough, you have said very well.


Hoy. Note you yond justice sits upon the Bench?


Touch. Yes, I do note him.


Hoy. The Stocks were fitter for him: the most corrupted fellow about the
Suburbs, his conscience is stewd in Bribes, all his poor neigbours curse him;
it is though the keeps a whoor now at three score.


Touch. A very Western Southsayer, thou art mine own.


Hoy. His Niece is much suspected.


Touch. Nay there you went too far, this is his Niece, and my daughter now.


Hoy. I know no Niece he has, I speak but backsword complement.


Stri. You put me well in mind though, here is one, that ere the Parson and we
part, i will make an honest woman.


takes Fris. Touch. And for your part sir Hugh, you shall make satisfaction,
and bring in your Confederates.


Hoy. Here Is one that came to complain of me for my Robes here, but I ha lost
my small acquaintance.


Mon. I Will answer for him too, and give you all the satisfaction that I can


Touch. What you cannot shall be remitted, we have all our faults.


Brit. And have I found thee Beck in so good company?


Reb. I Jack, be you jealous no more, and I will long no more to vex rhee.


Fris. Live lovingly and honestly I charge you, or come not at me when I am
married.


Touch. This yonker i will take care for,
And make him a new gentleman by new breeding,
Without the Diet, bathing, purge, or bleeding.

Hoy. Sweet Sir I thank you.


Tom. I Will home again then and make Tanton ring on it.


Stri. Our quarrel in this piece of folly ends.


Touch. He parted us, and he has made us friends.


Caut. Nephew, and Gentlemen, I am friends with all,
You had your plot upon me, I had mine.

Stri. Lets in, and end all differences in wine.


The Epilogue.
AT first we made no boast, and still we fear,
We have not answered expectation here,
Yet give us leave to hope, as hope to live,
That you will grace, as well as Justice give.
We do not dare your Judgments now: for we
Know lookers on more then the Gamsters see;
And what ere Poets write, we Act, or say,
It Is only in your hands to Crown a Play.
FINIS.

