AN ADVERTISEMENT OF CORRVPTION IN OUR HANDLING OF RELIGION. To the Kings
Majesty.

By HVGH BROVGHTON.

1604.

To the Kings Majesty.
GREAT and deadly errors (most Gracious Sovereign) run current in England:
as good Divinity: for which God, from whom ever trespass receyveth just
recompense, does and will plague the deceavers and deceaved. They which know
the errors may not be silent: though the errers have showed teeth of Iron and
hard faces against their warner for better counsel. And only your Majesty
can, and you must force the deceavers to confess before all the world, how
they have been led amiss.

Of accusing the holy text, most pure, and expressing Gods wisdom.
MOses tells that Abraham bought a burial place in Hebron, for price of
money, and that Jacob bought a field in Sychem for lambs: and Jacob was buried
in Hebro^, and the Patriarchs in Sychem. Now if a man should say that Jacob was
buried in Sychem, he rejects Moses, and all the authority of God. Or if he
say that Abraham bought the field which Jacob bought, and say that Abraham
bought Sychems plot for money, The untruth is augmented: yet all this do our
right reverend Fathers. In these words from Act. 7.16. and 17. as they would
make the simple to believe: And Jacob descended into Egypt, and dyed, both he,
and our Fathers, and were carried over into Sychem, and laid in the sepulcher
that Abraham bought for money of the sons of Emor, the son of Sichem. By
this Jacob should be carried to Sychem, and be buried there: and Abraham should
be the purchaser, and for money, and Jacob and the Patriarchs should be buried
together. So the Jews would say that Machmad makes no greater madness in his
Al-koran: seeing Abraham's purchase was in Hebron, and for 400. sickles: and
that of Sychem was Jacobs, and for an hundredth lambs. And Jacob was buried in
Hebron, as was told, and the twelve sons in Sychem. The Bishops saw that
this was most false: and run from evil to worse. And thus their margent note
speaks, upon verse. 16. For (B) money. Here appears an error. For Abraham
seems to be put in the text in the steed of Jacob. For Jacob bought the
sepulcher of Emor, and not Abraham, who bought before a field of Ephron. Thus
we accuse the holy Ghost for giving us a corrupted New Testament. And our
countries heard not that any Greek copy from the first to the last differed
here. So the first should be corrupt: and so Machmad should say truly, that we
had not a pure N. Testament. Also the Jews rule should condemn us: a common
rule and general: in Thalm. Ierus. San. fo. 20. Diathece se batelah Mikzathah
batelah cullah. A Testament which fails in part, fails in the whole. This
our error is not first ours, but old, and known to Jews: whereby their
millions despise the Gospel, and hold S. Stephen no martyr: as missing in
Moses plain story. Whereas in truth S. Stephen meant thus: Jacob died in
Egypt, the Patriarchs died in Egypt: Only the Patriarchs were carried to Sichem:
Jacob and the Patriarchs were buried: Jacob in Hebron: in ground which Abraham
bought, and bought for money, and not for Lambs: The Patriarchs were buried in
Sichem, in ground which Jacob, not Abraham, bought, and not for money, but for
an hundredth lambs. Saint Stephen meant all this: which all, we pervert to
cause millions of millions to reject the New Testament, and to run to
eternal flames. The rare elegancie of S. Stephens words would have made a
Jew know that he spoke in the Prophets style, and shortness: but his speech
would be harshe, to one not long acquainted with the Prophets manner. To
understand this, three rules must be delivered. One, that Vau the Ebrew, is
sometimes, which: as in Malach. 3. and Mark cha. 1.1. which shall prepare thy
way: And often in two members joined, in other tongues by, AND, it is omitted
in the Prophets, as that in Ps. 133. Like the dew of Hermon, which falls
upon mount Sion. For, like the dew of Hermon, AND that which falls upon mount
Sion. A third Hebrew matter comes, hard even for Ebrewes, and often noted by
the holy Ghost among the 848. margent notes, upon most exact text words, but
worthy of notes: As Hand, for the hands: bar, for the bars: Son, for
the sons. So, grave, Act. 7. for, The graves: The singular being put gerally
for the plural. These things being considered, Saint Stephen will clear him
self to all learned Jews admiration. For, thus the Greek, Hebraizing, meant:
Jacob descended into Egypt, he, and our Fathers which were carried to Sichem.
And they were put in Grave: that which Abraham bought for price of money: AND
that from Emor the Sichemite. Any acquainted with the Ebrew style would thus
understand Saint Lukes Greek. And so the New Testament should be far from
blame, and in high admiration, and Jacob should not be left unburied in Saint
Stephen, nor buried with the Patriarchs: nor Abraham a purchaser in Sychem, nor
Sychem purchase made by money, and not by lambs. This our ignorance must be
noted, for the thousands or rather millions of copies disgracing our selves:
though in the pains expected it may be amended. For copies vnrevocable sold
now 46. years, our darkness must be hightened: and the scripture must be
defended, as pure all, and most sincere. None that have any spark of grace
will envy that, but wish it withal might maintained.

Of perverting the holy text of the old Test. in 848. places.
THe old Test. in Ebrew has in the margent words of warning for others in the
text 848. times, yet always the text word is exact, and the margent warns of
some matter profitable for the depth of Ebrew skill, or helps in a doubtful
phrase: or tells of the like elsewhere used with some little difference: or in
propre names which me^ gave unfit, layth a fitter to be read: or for brood
speeches reads ciuiller. And both the text is exact, and the margent
profitable. But the margent readings are omitted in many copies: And none
without great blame alter the text. Amongst Ebrewes David Kimchi was found
rash herein in his preface to the book of Iosuah. But he was sharply taken up
by others: yea and he calls back himself in particulars. Kimchi said: that
the Bible was corrupted in Babylon, and the margent was a correction. That his
opinion is showed to be most foolish and deadly against Gods word, by Elias
Levita praef ad Massorita. Biblia: and it might dash all authority of
scripture. Also Barbinel the most curious that ever, I trow, handled the
tongue, though not the soundest: yet herein he soundly confuteth Kimchi in his
praeface to Ezekiel. Yet a learned man of Cambridge, M. Edw. Lively, makes the
margent the right reading, for Dan. 9. penned after Babell fell: and by Daniel
full of wealth, and able to keep his own books. That his dealing is
extreemely dangerous to the authority of Scripture. For if in fifty two
years in Babel after the Temples fall, Moses and the Prophets had so many
corruptions in longer time more would grow. The learned man dealt here not
learnedly. A prosessour of Ebrew 30. years might have showed that the text was
still most exact: and in many places far the more curious Ebrew: and he should
not weaken the glory of Gods providence, whose watchfulnes has preserved every
letter of all the holy Hebrew that his Prophets wrote for the use of all ages.
Many booke-prophetes wrote for the use of Israel, while their tongue, families
and towns stood: which afterward would not profit, when Israel perished:
and heathen should be vexed in searching stories not plain.

Those books the last Prophets extinguished, and made up an absolute pithie
story fit for all ages. And so much we must defend to every letter.
Ecclesiastical authority in a certain libell commends M. Livelies book.
Bishops that know Ebrew will not assent, nor any who use advisement. Authority
should make Lively recant. This blamer knows that he has read thrice mo
Ebrew auctours then he, and will defend each of the 848. words blamed by M.
Lively. And a work titled Tiphereth Israel, would have told M. Lively more
the^ he knows for this matter, and much more, to speak better of the holy
text. And the right reverend fathers should write of the Bibles pureness
first, how the text is sound, before they dispute of further matter. All
things must be done in order in the Church of God. And if men regard money not
learning, Gods face will be upon them.

Of Tzau, an Ebrew word in Hosee, rashly blamed.
Jeroboam the first, bade Israel worship calves at Dan and Bethel: upon his
word they did so. That Hosee touched in one syllable, Tzau, a charge. M. Lively
writes that the text is corrupt: Shau by him it should be. No Ebrew told him
so. Only he told him self so. By equal authority he might make a new Bible
of his own head. He brings the Lxx. for his warrant. They translate: Vain
things, as Shau: The answer is easy. They translate commonly for Heathen
capacity: where Jews stories would be hard for them So they entitle the
books of Samuel, The Kings. Because Heathen would not soon perceive how Core
his son should have such a title. So Heathen would not soon see how Osee
spoke of Ieroboams charge: and therefore the Lxx. take for Tzau, Shau; for
Charge, Vain things, dealing most wittily. This work of M. Lively is sold in
Paul's. But the auctor should amend that: We may not cross our own ground:
that the Scripture is all pure and clear, in one copy or other: and here in
all that have been spoken off. And M. Lively alone fights against all the
world: But that our Ecclesiastical authority fights in his allowance, for
him against our good.

Of Daniels seauens: the right meaning and corruption commended by our
Ecclesiastical, and Stationers.
SInce Adamfell, on the day of his creation, and brought death before he walked
in any obedience, to kindle Gods anger to the full, yet God in mercy used many
means to breed faith in the redeemer: beside the warnings of his word. The
flood destroyed all but eight, and of all the men nothing remains but
spirits in prison, except eight saved in the Arc. That severity might have
made them all wise. Yet Cham was not bettered: but his race called out Idolatry
and Babels Tower for that. whereupon God bereft these builders of the tongue
that spoke of hope in the redeemer, that they should no more hear of him, till
Babel should fall by Sem in Cyrus and by Iapheth in Darius, when Persians and
Medes took Babell. And amongst his own people he reckoned the worlds age to
that time, most exactly and plainly, years 3470. And then his Angel tells
Daniel for Darius and Cyrus, and all nations, of the kingdom of Salvation: and
names the redemer the most holy: Messiah the Governer: Messiah that shall
confirm the covenant with many: and tells of his kingdom, how it shall be in
sufferings. Judah saw the fall of Salomons kingdom, their hope: and the fall
of Babel the glory of nations* and now first experience might teach that the
kingdoms of this world under the sun, had nothing but vexation of spirit. At
that time it was fit to tell all the world of the kingdom of heaven: when
Jews and Gentiles saw all the earth cursed. The Jews kingdom had fallen: and
they were told they should never have an earthly kingdom more: and Hethen
kingdoms were showed to be as savage beasts coaming out of the great sea
tossed with many winds. So in that opportunity an Angel, called Gabriel, the
mighty man of God, whom Daniel had seen before, comes in the Evening to
Daniel praying for a return home, for his people to restore their religion: and
tells him that his prayer was heard, that Jerusalem shall be restored, as Esaie
foretold Cyrus should do it, that mount Sion should have sacrifices seven
times the space of seaventy years captivity, that is, 490. years. But exactly
then the Son of God would consecrate him self to end Moses and to bring in an
Eternal redemption: and as he had Oxen and sheep in sacrifices for his body,
and their blood for the blood of his covenant: he would confirm a covenant
for all nations. As the Gospel records what he has done, leaving bread for
his body in seal of covenant, and wine for the new testament by his covenant:
So at his death he should end Moses Laws, and all Leviticall function: that no
Mosaicall sacrifice should afterward be lefull. And the time of all this
matter is clearly and strictly set down: that Cyrus and Darius knew when the
son of God would work redemption: in which hope 49000. Jews leave Babel for
Jerusalem, and so many of Israel as had hope of Salvation, thought of Jerusalem
in all countries where they were scattered. Also the Son of God is called by
Gabriel, as was said, Messiah: in such Ebrew as it must needs be a propre
name: which it is not again in all the old testament: and Saint John for
Messiah cha. 1. and 4. forces us to look unto the Angels speech: and still
the name of CHRIST through the new Testament: in so much that to deny MESSIAH
here to mean Our Lord and Savior, that is nothing else but to deny all the New
Testa. Besides, for certainty of all: God tells that by the tenth part of
this time exactly, from the leave to return, Jerusalem shall be walled, but not
without much ado: so forty nine years are set alone, with the stories of 4900.
thousand Jews interlaced, least Heathen lies should break the truth of the
Chronicle. When God had given Cyrus all the kingdoms of the earth, then he
makes a decree to build the Temple: and to give a subsidy throw 120. nations,
to help the Jews home. Long wars had Cyrus before he became so great. Esaias
did name him by his name, and foretold of his victories. And Heathen do record
them: and Lucian records, that Cyrus lived 100. years: and Xenophon, that he
very young began war: so his glory might well by Greeks begin where scripture
places the Chaldean: to whom Heathen Greeks give no superiority over the
Persians. After Cyrus took Babel, he reigned three years: when Daniel fasted
because the building of the Temple was hindered by letters written to Artaxata
named in Ezra 4. and called Prince of Persia, Dan. 10. And soon Cyrus might
dye. Otherwise Daniel would stir him to further his own decree: and Herodot
brings his death near Babels fall, by Scythian Thamar. Artaxata or Cambyses
had reigned so long with his father, that he had put to death all the chief
Nobility: By Lucian citing Persique writers: and after his hinderance of the
Temple, Christ with his eyes, like a flame of fire, Dan. 10. would reward him
according to his works: being Can-byshes, a Prince of shame: and Herodot
shows his badnes and quick death after his sole government. And as
counselors prevayled al his days to hinder the Temple, which counsels hardly
could be long uniform, that record in Ezra 4. argues, that he reigned not
long sole Emperor: though Heathen in Clemens give him 19. years, which might
be almost all under his Father. Next comes the King which married Atossa Hester
famous in Hellanicus for inventing Epistles, as he thought. Mardochai tells
of her Letters through 127. Provinces for the Jews safety: And of them
Hellanicus might speak. Hester was married to him in his seventh year. So her
son Darius Artaxasta mentioned Ezra 6: ver. 14. might be six years old in
his fathers twelfth, mentioned by Mardochai then active, though he were carried
to Babel with King Iechonias. This King Esters husband is called Darius in
Herodot, and Ctesias: and he lived by Ctesias 43 years, and by Herodotus he was
20. when Cyrus went to Scythia, upon the taking of Babel: and dreamed of his
Empire. So if Cambyses called Artaxata by his Imperial name, reigned after
Babels fall 7. years. Darius had 16. who by his Imperial name is Oxyares,
Assuerus or Xerx. Two sons he left, who gently strove for the Empire, while
neither sought to defeat the other, as Iustine records: and Herodot
records that Athossaes son borne after the father was Emperor, prevailed.
The wisdom of Mardochai and Nehemias and Ester, might cause that quietness:
Seeing Mardochai was a chief in the kingdom. And somewhat the young years of
Atossaes son: ten at his fathers death. So the other brother has his fathers
Imperial name Xerx, Est. 10. by the Jerusalem copy in the Massoreth. This Xers
six years prepared war for Grecia, in his brothers minority. When he was in
Grecia, then was Atossaes son 16. and might well license the building of the
Temple: and take the other Imperial name Artaxasta, being king of Assure, or
Babel: before he was sole Emperor, and mention prayer for the Kings sons:
and acknowledge Gods wrath in the overthrow of Xerx, for hindering the Temple.
And the style of Aggei shows that he exhorted the returned whereof some had
seen Salomons Temple, to build before the King gave leave: otherwise
exhortation were cold. And seeing Hester was of Benjamin, in whose tribe the
Temple was built, Sems son by Elam and Arphaxad was fit to be the builder.
And God prospered him and his son, and his grand child. No other would so
favor Judah: In his second he authoriseth the Temple, with great charges for
sacrifice, and with menacies upon the hinderers: in his sixth it is built: In
his seventh he sends Ezra to set forward laws, with great gifts from the
Persian worthies: being taught with the King the religion of God. In his
twentieth Nehemias the third in the Cataloge of the returned, walleth the City:
by seven seavens from the seaventieth of Babel. And Jerusalem is not more
walled by stones, then truth of story: to check Heathen, by the Chronicle.
When 49000. Jews teach us to make from Cyrus decree to build Jerusalem unto
the building but 49. years, where Persians have since their own challenge of
Empire 149. So that 100. must be cut off: when we examine their time as they
touch the 490. years, told unto the Kings of Sem and Iaphet, for persuading
Iapheth to dwell in the tents of Sem: And there the Heathen deceive, where
prophets most clearly correct their deceit: that Daniels chapter 10. and 11. and
Ezra 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. And Nehem: and Ester, and Aggei, Zachary, and
Malachi, chase their error, who can not stick to Heathen, but will wrest Gods
word more grossly then any thing is spoken in all the Alkoran. Yet our
Ecclesiastical bragg what Master Lively has done against all these holy
books. Particular texts and stories of Kings shall be compared with his
learning: and our right reverend fathers shall see who be the liars against all
duty, and raylers against all honesty, foming out their own shame as the
raging waves of the Sea, they shall resume their own phrases: and by their
ears hear their tongue.

Of 2. Chro. 36. or Ezra 1.
THus says Cyrus King of Paras: The Eternal the God of heaven has given me
all the kingdoms of the earth: and has commanded me to build him a Temple in
Jerusalem which is in Judah, Who is amongst you of all his people, The Eternal
his God be with him: and let him go up, etc.

Of Cyrus first year, what it means.
SEeing Cyrus came up as a warrier unto all the kingdoms of the earth, reason
would tell that in his first year of reign in Persia, he overcame not 120.
countries: but his first year of Empire above all mighty is meant: yet our
Ecclesiastical make the FIRST, here the first of Cyrus thirty: in M. Liuelies
thirty years skill for Ebrew writers* when he brings one Ebrew of his mind,
the Earth shall bear stars, and the sky shall be plowed.

Of Ezra Chap. 3. ver. 8.
IN the second year after return unto the house of God in Jerusalem the second
month, Zorobabel son of Salathiel, and Jesus son of Iosadak, and the rest
of their brethren the Sacrificers and the Levites, and all they which came from
the captivity, to Jerusalem, began to lay the foundation of the Temple, etc.
then this Epistle was written to hinder the building to Artax. King of Paras,
Ezr. 4.12. Be it known to the King, that the Jews which are come from him to
us, are come to Jerusalem, and build the rebelleous and mischevous City: etc.
And ver. 24. Then the work of the house of God was stayed. For this staying
Daniel fasted, as he writes, Cha. 10. v. 1. and 2. And the Ebrewes that write
upon Daniel, would tell M. Lively so. And reason tells that this Artax. was
ruler when the Jews under Cyrus came home.

M. Liuelies corruption.
Cyrus reigned 30. years.

Cambyses 7.

Darius 36.

Xerxes 21.

Artaxerxes 40. And by him the Temple was hindered by M. Lively: So he would
make about 100. years of a few months, and Zorobabel and Jesus alive all the
while: and the Temple without going forward, so long where none hindered. Never
any author was made so senseles as M Lively would make Ezra. And in deed the
Artax. whom he makes the hinderer, was the builder, Ezra 6. Such thanks M.
Lively gives him, where God did most highly renown him: and calls his
nobles WORTHIES.

In the second of Darius Nothus the Temple goes forward: by M. Lively, so,
Zorobabel and Jesus were 137. years together in office: and further absurdities
follow: as against Ezra. Chapter 6. The Elders of the Jews builded by the
commandment of Darius Artaxerxes. In his second year, they began to build,
and prospered by the prophecy of Aggai and Zachary: in the sixth of King Darius
the returned from the captivity celebrate the dedication of the house of God,
and the returned from captivity, celebrate the Passover: So 49000. of the
returned ( Ezra 2) should be alive and active the troops of them 138. in middle
age. And this is more strange: In the seventh of Artax. Ezra (son to Saraias
killed with Sedekias children 52. before Babel fell, 2. King. 25.) comes from
Babel 26. after Aggei prophecieth, by M. Lively, aged at the least by him 216.
years. Since ages were halfed upon the building of Babel not many lived so
long: yet Ezra sees many descentes of high Priests after all this. So by M.
Lively and our Ecclesiastical authority, Ezra should live longer then any
borne since Babell fell: so ready he is in Ezra, by 30. years profession. Such
a cunning professor should not halt before creples.

Of Nehemias. Chap 1.
In truth but 14. but 25. by M. Lively.
NEhemias walleth Jerusalem after Ezraes return 25. years, and in Persia
before his return, he asked his brethren: how his brethren did, the remnant of
captivity by M. Lively twenty years after the end of the Peloponnesian wars,
that is in propre Greek truth ten years before the reign of Alexand.
Macedon. And the returned from Babylon should be then at home 175. year. and
187. when he walleth Jerusalem: which space the holy Ghost has made but
seven seavens: that men might soon see a tenth of 490. in their present age
performed in most noble stories, if they had any mind to mark the word of God.

Of Aggei disgraced.
AGgei says, chapter 2.3. who is that remains among you, which saw the former
Temple. If the demanded were ten years old when they saw the former Temple,
they should be by M. Lively when Aggei spoke 200. years old. And who can
believe that; Ninety they were: and so well might be: and the truth hangs
without absurdities: but untruths will sone jar from scripture.

Of Zachary disgraced by our Divinity.
ZAchary speaks to Zorobabel in the second of Darius, and in his fourth: and
in all his speeches as to the returned from Babel. And he should be thought of
us, as of all the Thalmudiques, a Prophet at the return when the altar was
built: and yet he is called a young man, Chap. 2.4. An Ebrew professor should
not go against all Ebrewes, that ever professed, and the common judgment of all
men.

Of Malachie.
MAlachie prophecieth after the Temple was built, and not with Aggei and
Zachary. For Ezra would not have omitted him when he names the other two,
furtherers of the Temples work, if he had prophesied amongst them. But as the
Temple licenced by Darius alias Artaxasta, in his second year, was finished in
the sixth of Darius: and in the seventh of Artaxasta, Ezra comes from Babel to
reform matters: as marriages with infideles: and such, fit for beginning a new
common weal: So Malachy speaks nothing of the Temple, but of maintenance for
the Levites, and of strange faithed wives, and all, for matters fit for a new
beginning common weal: and not to later ages as many as Nestor had seen in
Homer; which thing M. Liuelies Persique skill would import But Hebrews
universally agree, that he was presently in action upon the building of the
Temple: so that many held him to be Mardochai, captiued of old time with
Iechonias, or Ezra, son to Saraias killed when Nebuchadnezar brent the holy
Temple. Now M. Liuelies Persique Chronique skill would make all Jews amazed,
how an Hebrew professor should ever dream against all Hebrews, all, every
mothers son that Malachies speech should be applied to times so far from the
return from Babel: and that, to dash the set time for the redemption of the
world.

Of all the Persian Kings: How the Scripture speaks of them: or leaves them.
DARIUS the Mede, who made a proclamation of worship to Daniels God, is
celebrated, Dan. 6.

CYRUS, who decrees to build Babel upon his own charges: and passes a Decree
to build Jerusalem, is mentioned, Dan. 10.2. Chapter 36. Ezra 1. and 4.

As in Isachar for Isachear San, or S^^ is omitted: for San, or S. in Artaxata
for Artaxasta in Greeks and Latins.
ARTAXATA, under whom the Jews are said to return, Ezra 4. who yet returned in
the first of Cyrus. All these three must needs be holden to reign together,
and but a very short time.

OXYARES, as Greeks would name him, or Asuerus, or Xerx, by the copy which the
Jews keep in golden letters at Jerusalem. Mardochai being 63. years in
Babel: and active in his twelfth: argues that time to be near the return.
And Esther Atossa his wife, famous in Heathen, tells that he is DARIUS
HYSTASPIS in Grecians. Also Hathac the Eunuch attendant upon Esther, and in
Ctesias miraculously affected toward Darius, he tells who that Assuerus
was. See Photius Ctesias. In the copy of Henry Stephen Nathac is put for
Hathac: But the Anspurge copy agrees better with Esther: And gives greath
light to know what King was Atossaes husband. And Aaechylus in his tragaedie
for Xerx his flight: makes Darius plainly husband to Atossa. She is Esther.

XERS, that bare his fathers Imperial name, he is noted in Dan. chapter 11. to
stir all against the kingdom of Iavan. But he meddled not with the Jews.

DARIUS called in Ebrew by Imperial name Artaxasta: by Cambyses Imperial name,
with differe^cie of one letter: as to keep the court Records distinguished:
and then in Greek by both Artax-Erxes is made from the imperial name of
Cambyses in Ezr. 4. And that of Darius Hystaspis son: Xers: Ester thenth: in ye
Golden copy kept at Jerusalem: which the west Jews follow. That made some Greeks
hold Artaxers S. to Xerx: and Josephus to hold him to be great Xerxes.
Artaxerxes: he is set forth in Ezra, Chapter 6. by two names Darius and Artax: by
the universal consent of Ebrewes, and most strong reasons, and so to be Esters
son: and so of Benjamin: and fit to build Gods Temple. And none Heathen but he
ever favored the Jews entierly, and Nehemias was his cup bearer, as likest to
be most faithful to him: and obtained authority to wall Jerusalem: and after
twelve years returned to the King: and his Nobles are called Valiant Worthies,
Ez. 7. And he tamed the Grecians most of any Persian: and he knew al his
Predecessors were plagued for hindering the building of the Temple: as he
clossely confesses, Ez. 6. of him being one man, and continuing favor
toward the Jews, the Ebrew professor against Ebrewes all, I trow, does make
two men, and puts others betwixt him and him self. Ochus and Longimanus
Nehemias passes over, and comes to DARIUS the last, Neh. 12. And for all
these the holy last Prophets have such arguments, that no Jew commenting
upon scripture, could think that Judah was in Babylon above 130. And their
millions will rather come short, then come so far as 130. years. And M.
Livelies It is hard to persuade Jews yt Persia ruled 130. years: and that
Nehemias saw all their times, M. Livelies 230. will be as the Alkoran: and
justly.
230. mar the strongest prophecy for the salvation of the world, and light
of the New Testament. So the holy story does receive extreme disgrace.

What kind of testimonies M. Lively brings, to rent all the last holy
Prophets: the stretch the lives in them 100. years more then their lives will
suffer.
Master Lively cites Julius Africanus, for Cyrus first year, to be in
Olympiad 55. And ill set by Beroldus in Olympiad. 80.

Answer to Olympiades.
Master Lively has seen or might, three treatises justly checking them which
hold Olympiades in any account: or account by Rome: or the Archontes of
Apollodorus, or the distances which Exatosthenes makes betwixt Cyrus and Xerx,
and thence to The Peloponnesian wars: and how Thucidides and Demosthenes make
fifty years for 35. And how from Lysanders vnwalling of Athens, he makes 34
years, where Isocrates and Strabo with Lysias would make but ten: and twelve
thence to Phil. Macedon for never an one. And the true accomptes of Greeks
living in Persicq times, were brought forth against one that had better skill
then M. Lively in Greek: and did all that Greek could do for defense: that
he might well say as Hector in Vergil: Si Pergama dextra
Defendi possent, etiam hac defensa fuissent.
And as careless VC-alegon had soon his house on fire for resistance past all
hope: so M. Lively might have seen what would become of his Library.

For Olympiades this was part.
EZekiel prophesied in Olympiad 48. by Clemens, and by him, Aggei ninety years
after in Olympiad 48 So our Ecclesiastical skill makes Ezekiel and Aggei of
one age. This will be small commendation for right reverend Fathers that have
taken so many hundredth thousand pounds sterling for teaching Divinity: To
make Ezekiel prophesying in the fifth of King Sedekias killed by Nabucodonosor and
Aggei that built the Temple by his tongue, to be of one and the same Olympiad
in sad truth, and truth to examine an Angels prophecy. Reverend Fathers
should have dealt more reuerendlie then to check Gods word for the very hour
of our redemption, set in Daniels time sure for all the world: more reuerendly
they should have dealt then to alter the borders which Prophets and Angels had
settled. More of this stuff shall be showed. Xexes in of Esthers time and
Oebotas a Greek, and Gelo King of Syracusa were of one time: and dealers in
the same wars. Pausa nias in Eliac.
Yet Oebotas warred then in Olympiad the sixth: and so Gelo built Camarina in
Olympiad the third by the comme^tarie upon Pindarus. So by our Ecclesiastical
men King Cyrus should be in Antiochus Epiphanes days: Or Xerxes in King
Ezekias time. Thus we corrupt religion by ignorance of all grounds of study.
This ground is sure and worthy of all interteynment: which Thalmud Ierusalemy
cites: but confirmed before in the Gospel Ein dibre Thorah zaricin chizuk:
Thaaniut fol. 66. col. 1. The words of the Law need no fortification. So our
Lord says: I receive no testimony from men. When Abraham saw Ismael persecute
Isaak, he knew that that time four hundredth years Israel should come from
Egypt, as well as Moses, in the end. So Ezekias knew fiftine years before he
died, when he should die, so well as they that saw his death: So Jeremy knew
seauenty years before Babel fell, when it should fall: as well as Daniel that
saw it fall: so Daniel knew that 490. years from his prayer, Christ our Lord
should confirm the covenant for Heathen: as well as the Disciples knew that it
was done. And all Jews, of any religion in the Gospel, looked at the same
time for the kingdom of heaven to appear by the plain propriety of Gods word.
Further dotage in Olympiades may be wayed.

Chilon the wise, the Old Lacedemonian of Solons age, was Ephorus in Sparte in
the fifty sixth Olympiad: of Solons age: and much ancienter then Cyrus.
Sosigenes in Laertius is the author. By Pamphyla, a learned Roman woman,
which wrote of Olympiades, whose work Photius honoreth in his Library: it was
the sixth Olympiade when this Chilon was Ephorus. So by Olympiades there is a
doubt of 200. years (that is 50 Olympiades) when Chilon one of the seven
sages, flourished. Whose time without Olympiades help, is known well enough. So
for the deceaved: these Olympiades, if they be not far enough out of the way
by them selves, these Olympiades would prick them forward. And it must needs
be counted a most grievous injury against the Majesty of God, to torment all
the Bible by them, and to deny the gracious light of Salvation: which the holy
Angel Gabriel left as mount Sion that can not be moved. And as the mountains
are about Jerusalem, so are holy Scriptures about that oration of the holy
Gabriel: who taught all at Babels fall, that 490. years after that year, the
King of Glory should be killed: but death should not hold him, but his justice
should appear by his Resurrection: that he was killed not for him self, but to
make reconciliation for our sins, and to seal Vision and Prophet: and to
make Heathen syssoma one body with Israel. The Lord knew, that as plain a
prefixed time as time could be prefixed was needful for all the world. And
the holy Angel might not speak deceit as Iuppiter in Homer, by a dream,
deceaved Agamemnon, by the word NOW: saying: Now thou shall take Troy.
Agamemnon took it for, THAT DAY: but Iuppiter meant that year: and so caused
for amends to Achilles, infinite slaughter of Greeks. By M. Lively the Angel
deceived all that ever read his words: till M. Lively came to teach their
right meaning, and he should no more be an holy Angel then Iuppiters dream was
a God. Our reverend fathers might have spared the Princes authority from
co^firming such Agamemnonean dreams. They that adventure their eternal state
on this: that they will with all heart, might, and strength, that Gods grace
will graciously afford, further the truth and light of the Gospel, will not
rejoice to have their authority usurped to the Eternal destruction of their
People and them selves. This cosinage to check the holy Angel by Olympiades, to
turn the prophecy from light to darkness: from truth to falsehood: from Christ
his name to profane Atheistes: from his covenant in the Lords supper: unto a
covenant of Roman dogs with as dogged Jews: from the times beginning certain
and clear to all hearts of sage, unto one never known before M. Lively told:
and to end not at our Lords death: to end Moses there, but to end at
Ierusalems fall: and sacrifice to be lefull so far: this matcheth Eves fall
by the Serpent: and passes the building of Babel. And Esaias thought and taught,
that by Cyrus Decree Jerusalem should be built. And seeing he gave them under
letters Patentes leave, to return to Jerusalem to build the Temple, the
Decree for City and Temple must needs be at that time: and so Daniel would
understand him: that from that year all the world might date their writings
thus: Dated 490. years before the kingdom of Messiah Cyri primo: Dated 460.
Darij Artax. 20 when Aggei prophecieth: Dated 442. vicesimo Artax. before
Messiah kingdom: when Jerusalem was walled. And as Men on a journey known,
know still how fewer miles they have to their Inn or rest: so all the world
year by year, since the Angel taught Daniel, might know, how near they were
to the opening of the kingdom of heaven by our Lord his most holy soul going
through the veil of his flesh into heaven, by Saint Paul, into Paradise by
the Gospel, into Hades by the Greek, (but in Hades to the Gardens of the
godly, and not Tartarus) to make reconciliation for us, having found Eternal
redemption. Such limits are fit marks for a Chronicle: The first year of
Cyrus Empire, who had revenged Babel that oppressed Gods children 70. years:
that year which saw an Angel tell Daniel of an Eternal kingdom, in hope of
which 49697. leave Babel for Jerusalem sure to be still in affliction: and a
Proclamation of the God that made the heavens over six score nations: and a
willing subsidy from so many for them that go to Jerusalem in this hope: Such
noble stories should be the mark of a Chronicle for Christ: chayned from Adam
3470. years thither: and thence seven times the captivities length, that is
490. years, until the King of glory does open freedom for all: when the sun
darkened three hours: when the earth trembles: when the stones burst: when
the curtine of the Temple rent: as a Draper would part a piece of cloth: when
the dead arose: when our Lord forty days was seen of the faithful, to send
his spirit and a fiery law to teach all nations. Such noble marks should the
Angel Gabriels Chronicle have: and not obscure dens of Cacus to bring errors
in number as the leaves of a forest.

And yet let us more consider the vanity taken by the Games of Olympia: renewed
every fifth year: having full four years to an Olympiade: That by a fuller
discourse such wicked toys might be banished for ever: and made a lothsomenes
to all men of judgment.

Olympiades miracles for Thales the wise man.
THales Milesius was well known that he lived in Solons times, and Croesus
King of Lydia, whom Cyrus conquered: and yet Croesus was of King Josias times,
as Greeks co^ferred, will convict. This Thales is said by some to be borne in
the thirty fifth Olympiade, and to flourish in the seventh: that is about 120.
years before he was born. And this stuff is goodly to obscure the time of
Salvation, shining in Daniel more then does the sun in his greatest
brightness. Mast. Lively has drawn Olympiades into our Ecclesiastical
authority: to make us a skoff to all Jews of the world: that we look by
them how to understand an Angel of light, sent by the grace of God to teach all
the simple world: into whose lips if grace were not powered, to be understood
as soon as he spoke: heathen would say Daniel saw no Angel. And M. Lively
never heard of any Jew that more regarded Olympiades, the^ we regard Lucianes
true stories. And if he had read such Grecians as mark them, how they jar,
he would have held them as weak as Cobwebbes which a fly would break.

Of Cyrus and Cambyses to what Olympiad M. Lively might apply them.
Suidas in the name Anacreon, the Poet, says: he lived in the days of
Polycrates the tyrant of Samos in the fifty two Olympiade: But others place
him in the twenty fifth Olympiade under Cyrus and Cambyses. So by Suidas Cyrus
and Cambyses reign together. And by Olympiades an hundredth years sooner then
M. Lively would: and almost an hundredth years before Nebuchadnezar: if
Ezechiel prophecieth in Olympiad 48. as Clemens of Alexandria writes he did.
And so the Ebrew professor may see to what pass his Musae Olympiades bring
Ebrew writers, if his pen were regarded.

The records of his Eclipses are less regarded: of Jews and Greeks: and of
Arabians cited by Christmannus upon Alfragan: which even from great Alexander
(whence Greeks better agree) make less years by much then Ptolemies
recorders of Eclipses. And they from Nabonassar, Mardocempad, Nabopollasar,
Cambyses, Darius the first, compared with King Ezekias calling back of the sun,
and Esthers time, can have no possibility of agreement, or likelihood. Galen
upon Hippocrates says well: that the most part of the books in Alexandria
Library were forged: And Laertius tells of forging many thousand years with
pretense of marking eclipses, and odd months and days. Chrysostom the
learned regarded them not: Maximus Monachus brings other reckonings,
Epiphanius other, and Clemens of Alexandria infinite varieties, and yet no care
of those calculations: and expressly tells there was no Chronique
observation in record before Eratosthenes, under the Ptolemeis times, co^piled
one. ROME also is brought in Chronicle, who before great Alexander had no
writers. And Onuphrius Panvinius wondereth at varieties, when and by whom Rome
should be built. Also ARCHONTES or Majors of Athenes are brought to fight with
an Angel. Three writers wrote of the^: Demetrius, Stesichorus, and Apollodorus:
the third auctour was late: and of Chroniclers that would seem exact, followed.
But their names many together running upon a letter, show that from some
Alphabet table, they we fetched: and very unlearnedly. For many extant in
Demosthenes, Aeschines, and Lysias, orators speaking of their own times, are
not in Apollodorus. And beyond the times of Xerx, there is no table of them
extant. As Athenes saw not to what purpose they should keep any record of
times. And Apollodorus has about 40. where the life of Euripides the Tragique
will confute him. That shall be showed in few words. Of Euripides thus writes
Suidas in Euripides. Euripides, etc. was borne the very same day that Greeks
turned the Persians unto flight, etc. he lived seaventie five years. This
writes Suidas in the term, EVRIPIDES. And in the term Timotheus thus:
Timotheus the Lyrique, was in the days of Euripides the Tragique, when Philip
Macedon reigned. So it is a sure demonstration that Xerxes flight, and Philip
Macedones reign are not sundred above 75. years. So M. Lively is convicted to
bring about 40. Mayors of Athenes for Euripides life time, more then his days
saw there. It is great pity that our Archepiscopall authority should check the
Date for salvation to all the world, with such Acherontean bables: where even
Greeks fight for scripture.

Of the distance from Xerxes flight, to the taking of Athens by Lysander, to be
65. years: and thence but ten to Philip Macedon.
WHen the Athenians dealt most manfully against the Persianes, they had the
superiority of Grecia commended unto them. That, they held till Lacedemon
unwalled their town: after 27. years war. That space of rule is in Lysias
in Epitaph. and in Isocrates Panygyrico 65. years. And both they being
Athenians, should know their own state: being alive in that very time. Then
began the Lacedaemonians superiority over Grecia. Leuctra field ended Laced
mons superiority. Strabo notes that plainly. Then Epaminondas the famous
Theban, brought up with Philip Macedon, and equal in years, wan the field,
young and unmarried about 27. years old. And at the same time did Philip
Macedone reign. For he reigned at 27 years. So the Lacedaemonians loss of
government being known how long it continued, tells how to settle the time
of Leustra field. Now Isocrates in his epistle to K. Philip, says: The
Lacedaemonians ruled but ten years over Grecia: that is, after Lysander
unwalled Athens. Therefore ten years thence reaches to Philip Macedones
reign. So Suidas for Euripides life, is strengthened by men of that age: in
plain words. Many profes herein I showed of old: which I need not now to
repeat. Philip Macedon reigned 20. years by Atheneus: and Alexander his son,
six before his Monarchy. So by Greeks years from Alexan. the great unto
Xerxes war: and his brothers reign at home, are not mo the^ 100. And the
time thence to Cyrus, by most strong proofs of scripture, and by all the
millions of the Jews over the earth, which all follow the Thalmud, years are
not above 30. And even by the perpetual consent of Grecians skilfully read,
the same is proved. So the Persians overrule Judah, but 130 years: and M.
Lively should better have marked first the authority, next the meaning of
Greek authors for antiquities. The Medes in Agathias have after the fall of
Assure, 300. year dominion. That is by Scripture truth, not one day. For
Nabucodresor overthrew Assure: not the Medes. And King Manasses was carried to
Babel, by the commandment of the King of Assure: not long before the
captivity of Babel. And the Persians extinguish all Babels empire. Only
Nabycadnezar was a^ Hercules to go as far as Spain, in Stra. 15. but in the
East the Persians ruled: and chalendge all that time to themselves which Judah
spent in Babel: and reckon with the largest to augment their years: all years
from young Princehood: as years of Empire. So Cyrus has 30. where after
Babels fall our men, as M. Scaliger give him but 3. Cambyses has nyneteene in
Clem. Alexan. 1. strom. For 7. by M. Lively: from Herodot, for bare four of
soul government, by true examination. Darius Histaspis has in Herod 36. for
bare sixtene in truth* and in Ctesias 31 from twelve years of age: so from
eight he might have about 36. For under the mighty Persianes many Kings and
their sons Princes lived at once. And the Greeks could find no certenty of
them: not so much as for their names. Aeschylus in his Persis, where he uttered
all that Graecia knew, shows that: speaking of times late: and differing much
from later writers. So Mast. Lively might have spared vexing of all the Bible:
citing auncientes rejected most strongly by both testamentes, true old Greeks,
and all Churches now. And Learned Christians should bend to find a concent,
not a dissent in holy scriptures: to show light, not lightness: order, and not
disorder: ioyance, not anoyance: right passing rumors, not might of conceited
humors, about matters of salvation.

How the first chapter of Saint Matthew is disgraced by Master Lively.
WHen Daniel was taught how many years should be from the time of his prayer
unto our Lord his confirming of the covenant for many: and how long he should
teach: even half a seven: and knew from Moses Law, Number. 4. for the Levites to
begin their office at thirty, that our Lord was to do so to: and by Ezekiel
39. that the legs of the Image in Egypt and Babel, must be broken by the
year of our Lord his coming into the world, and by his own seventh chapter,
where the fourth beast is cast into the fire before the son of man comes in
the clouds: and so could and did teach Darius and Cyrus all his book, and
sum of both Testaments, he persuades kings to grant authority for all
Israel to return and restore Jerusalem: and moved his nation thereunto. then
was Zorababel of Salathiel of Nathan of King David the Patriark and Father to
the son of God after the flesh, governor of the People. His family will
teach us to measure the time, specially marking the time from David's death to
that year 480. If 23. generatio^s draw but 480. ye. eleven Mat. 1. should not
have above 490. wont warrant from God. Nor yet so many 590. would make a Jew
reject the N. Testament.
just so many they were. Now from Nathan son to David, to Salathiel be 23.
generations. This being considered, we must flee to a miracle of Gods power, to
make up from Zorobabels government unto our Lord his 32.6. months 490. Or to
his birth 437. without consideration of Gods counsel none would believe the
number were so great in the years. For, the Generations betwixt our L. and
Zorobabel, are but ten: to draw mo years then 20. above did. So we have much
ado to persuade that 490. years were betwixt the fall of Balthazar the
Tyrant, for Satan over the Church: and the fall of Satan by the obedience of
our Lord upon the Cross: in anguish of his soul more then ever all souls
felt in this world. And M. Lively should have spent his time to fortify Saint
Matthew against all the millions of the Jews: who make the time ninety years
shorter then the Angel meant. And the excess is by M. Lively in Ezra his life
time almost all. Where Jews make him die at 100. yet he lived 150. at the
least: and about 250. as M. Lively rules the sun in Phaetons place. So Saint
Matthew vexed for lengthning lives 80. above ordinary, is vexed by M. Lively for
100. in an other extremity: as not able to make them up. And if that sum of
490. be unlikely but for Gods authority: and shorter by the Thalmud by 90. who
would bring without Gods auctority, 100. more: and differ from Jews 180. and
almost all in the life of one man? Jews that catch an Ebrew professor so
simple, would little esteem of Christian skill.

The whole speech of the Angel: with expositions ancient upon it.
THe matter will be clearer by laying down the Angels oration: Thus the holy
Gabriel speaks to gracious Daniel, chap. 9. ver. 22. I am now come forth to
teach thee knowledge. At the beginning of thy prayers came forth the word,
and I am come to show it unto thee. For thou art greatly beloved. Perceive
therefore the word and conceive the Vision.

SEAVENTIE SEAVENS (of years) are cut out, for thy people, and for thy holy
City: to consume wickedness, and to I follow ye margent Ebrew. The text is: to
Seal, and the 70. follow that and our Bishopps. And safely* The text is true:
And ye margent* An exposition, for playnnes.
abolish sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring
righteousness everlasting, and to seal Vision and Prophet, and to show CHRIST
the HOLY of HOLY. Know then and mark: from the outgoing of the Word, to
restore and to build Jerusalem, unto CHRIST the governor, shall be seven
seavens (of years) and sixty and two seavens: In t'hother it shall be restored
and builded, Sreete and Wall: and troublous shall these times be. In that after
the sixty and two seauens CHRIST shall be killed: and not for him self:
thereupon the City and holy place shall he destroy, the GOVERNOVRS own people
to come: and their end shall be with a Flood: and at the end of war, it shall
have a final judgment to desolation. But he shall confirm the Testament for
many the last Seven: when in HALF THAT SEVEN he shall end the Sacrifice and
Oblation. Afterward by an Army abominable, he shall make a desolation: even
till utter destruction and final judgment or come: by the 7^. and the Gospel.
flow upon the desolate.

The heads of the Angel Gabriel his speech.
DAniel is taught how long Sion shall be holy for sacrificing: how long
Circumcision, Sabbates, the Pascha of Lamb or kid, and all sacrifices shall
continue at Jerusalem: how many years, even to the hour of the day from his
prayer, are unto the death of our Lord for our eternal life: to confirm the
Testament for many: and to end all Moses laws, that Jews and Gentiles may be
one body. All this the book called, A true Chronicle, commended by I.C.
dedestroyeth: whose words with the folio shall be showed.

A denial of the main use of the prophecy, fol 170.
M. Lively pitieth us for beleving that our L. his death is prefixed to an
exact year, by an Angel.
It is a great pity that the message of the holy Angel, containing a most
excellent Prophecy from Gods own mouth, should be so perverted and depraved
as it has been by those which pick out this sense, as though he said, there
should be from the outgoing of the commandment to Messiah, 69. weeks (483.
years) in all^ A strange interpretation, and such (I dare boldly say it) as by
the Ebrew text can never be vpheld.

Reply, for Messiah,
HEre M. Lively shows as little learning as ever did any that professed Ebrew:
and as little Christianity as ever any of faith, and as little modesty, as any
can show: that one man should check all Churches. Messiah denied to be
Christ. By I. C his vsu^ded auctority against ye oath of Q.E. to the Gospel.
The Hebrician denies Messiah to be CHRIST our redeemeer: and would make it an
adjective. Therein first his Hebrew comes into question. Either Messiah is
never a propre name, of here it is a propre name, and here twice. In all other
places a pronowne is affixed, or a substantive in the genetive case. As mine
anointed, thy anointed, his anointed, the anointed of God, the Priest which
is anointed. Here Dan. 9. twice there is no pronown, and here it must be a
propre name Messiah or Christ: And it is never used for an adjective, being set
before the substantive: as here Messiah Nagid Messiah the King. And hence Saint
John took the name. A very Jew takes Messiah Da^. 9. yet by I. C. England
denies all their own faith: and sold in Paul's their denial.
And hence all the Talmudikes in all their commentaries: though co^menting upon
this place they directly do it not. Yet Rabbi Judah commenting upon Daniel, here
says: Messiah Nagid is Messiah the hope of Israel Nagid, forgoer and co^mander
of the nations, Es. 55. The very Jew confesses this much. And the Zohar upon
Genesis talking of the serpent, says, By the serpent Messiah shall be killed, and
many of Israel with him. And all the churches in Christendom hold Messiah here
to be the son of God our Redeemer: and our England held that the last seven
of 70. had our Lords preaching. Our Church, Scotland, France, Spain,
Heydelberg, Geneva so does. M. Lively should live in more modesty then so to
pity us for holding the rock of salvation as the Angel taught this. saying, In
the end of Seaventie seavens from Daniels prayer, CHRIST, or MESSIAH shall be
slain, and not for him self: but consecrating him self for the redeemed: or
anointing, or showing him self the son of God. For that does the term
anointing show in that place. M. Lively dares despise all Christendom where
he is most unlearned and senseles, and borrowed the oath of Q. E. by I.C. to his
iudaisme

Of a bad translation, and foolisher sense, fol. 156.
Ver. 25. from the going forth of the word, to build again Jerusalem unto
Messiah the governor shall be seven weeks: M. L. dreameth that 13^. years
after the return Jerusalem was ^^built and it continued but (...) years (...)
he dreameth. He (...).
(he means seven seavens of years, but loves darkness) and three score and
two weeks it shall be builded again street and wall. Thus he translateth. And
having differed extreemely from all Christendom, and all reason, thus he would
overcome by boldness.

Master Livelies boldness. fol. 171.
THat interpretation which I have made, leaving (...)
a stay or rest at seven weeks: as the half sentence being past, and
continuing the 62. weeks with the other part of the sentence following to the
end of the verse, and not referred to the former, as part of one whole number
with them, by the Hebrew text is most sure and undoubted and justifiable
against all the world: containing that which God himself in his own words has
uttered, neither more nor less, but the verse same which Gods Angel delivered
to Daniel by word, and Daniel to the Church by writing in the holy tongue, and
this once again it is; From the going forth of the word, to b^^ld again
Jerusalem unto (...)
Messiah the governor shallbe seven weeks, (...) that Ieru^alem was in
trouble ever since it was builded by the returned
and threescore and two weeks it shallbe builded again street and wall, and
in troublesome times. Mark the words, consider their order, and weigh well the
rests. As I find in the Hebrew so I have Englished, that is, the truth of
interpretation, A bold assertion of a 30. years professor: against all
learned Ebrewe speech and Christianity. Yet by boldness he has deceaved,
where lerning was 30. years to seek.
be it understood as it may.

Reply.
Master Lively sets such a face upon error, as never was heard in
Christendom, to disturb the granted rule of salvation. And it is great pity
that some took him not in hand, that know bitterness of style, and are eloquent
in that kind. His outfacing of the truth and Christianity drew John Cant: to
subscribe unto him. He might with as good learning have subscribed to the
Alkoram. Machmad bragged that Gabriel taught him: And challenged Daniels name
Chamudoth: which the Angel Gabriel gave him. Machmad and Chamudoth in Ebrew
be all one. The false prophet had some other name. Or by some close judgment
of God his parents gave a name helping to deceit: As for my poor skill in
reprehending the deceived extreemly, I heartily confess that I want due
vehemence, and will borow Ovid as Non mihi si linguae certu^ sint oraque centum.
Vergil, translating Homer to confess how I come short of ability to blame
the subscribing to M. Liuelies Ebrew, Divinity, History. Non mihi si centum
Deus ora sonantia linguis,
Ingeniumque capax, totumque Helicona dedisset,
Omnia prosequerer.
Si vox infragilis, pectus si firmius esset:
(Both poets, both the best translate Homer iliad 2.) Could I tell how to show
how much I. C. his subscription to M. Lively has iniuried Christianity: and
particularly the Church of England. Positions of old granted: and new doctrine
from Master Lively subscribed by I. C. shall be laid down.

First, The Church of England believed that the Angel Gabriel told Daniel of a
Decree past in Gods word and to ensue by Cyrus presently to restore and build
Jerusalem. And that, from this Decree and from Daniels prayer, should be 70.
seavens of years unto our L. his death. Whether he should die in the midst
of the last seven: or last year: that does not show much difference. This
much 46. years England held: that in the last seven our Lord should die.

M. Livelies difference.
BY M. Lively years 137. pass before the decree of building Jerusalem does
come forth: so that Gabriel could not be understood of Daniel, nor of any Angel
in Heaven, when the account began. The present age, and M Lively breaks of ye
holy Chronicle* and so disturbeth all the old Testam. all, every whit, and
the joining of it to the N. T. and I. C. by public auctority confirms this.
Nestors two, the later begotten in his fathers last had been dead before the
time should begin. And the thirty years professor never heard of a company of
men to live so long: since Israel believed the 10. spies to misbeleeue Gods
promise for the land of Chanaan: when 600000. at once cast of God. Then man's
ordinary old age was brought to 70. by Moses Psalm. 90. So M. Lively contemns
our Church: befooleth the Angel as speaking past all capacity: and befooleth
Daniel, as seeming to know that which his words carry otherwise.

Secondly, Nestor lived thre^ ages 30* ^0.30. active* double more do the
returned live active by M. Lively.
Christendom holds Messiah to be the Redeemer of the world, and Nagid or
Governor his attribute from Esaias 55. which Aben Ezra the very Jew cites upon
the same text.

But thus M. Lively writes. IN The times before the destruction of Jerusalem
by the Romans there were two rulers of the city, one of their own people a
Jew by profession or birth after their manner anointed to the governemnt of the
common wealth amongst them here named in the verse going before Messiah Nagid,
the anointed Prince, the other a stranger appointed Deputy by the Roman
Emperor called Nagid Habba, a ruler not borne in the country, or one of the
same nation, but a stranger come from an other place.

Thus writes M. Lively: TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD his very honorable
good Lord my Lord the Archbishop of CANTERBVRIE his grace.

And Dux gregis ipse capex de errauerat, to lend Q. Christianity denied in
England, by publyque auctority.
Elizabeth's oath to the Gospel, and authority, to extinguish the name Messiah
where only it stands propre in Ebrew, and to refer it to a common Jew
officer. And his G. could not see, that so the realm denies their own
christianity. Besides the Jews had not always since the return, one their
own, an other, a stranger to govern them. Again M. Lively feigneth from his
own head, new matter against all Ebrews. He says the civil officer was
anointed in Judah. None of Ebrews ever heard that Zorobabel was anointed or
Nehemias. And of David's house we read of none that bare stroke, besides them.
For heathen ruled till the Machabees of Levi usurped an vnl^full and ill
government. And thus by M. Lively the Angel should talk of idle matter: in
steed of Messiah, Christ our Lord. And Maymoni, the best of al about the
Talmud, notes that, Halacoth Melachim Perek 1. That no King but the first of
the family was anointed: as Saul, as David: or upon strife: As Solomon, for
Adonias: Ioas for Athalia: Ioachaz, for his elder brother Ioakim: But Joshua,
the first King next Moses, was not anointed. So M. Lively will be far to seek
in Rabbines.

Of the word Ba: To come: ill meant, A STRANGER.
THe Ebrew word BA used by the Angel, Dan. 9. is, To come: and never used for a
stranger: but in men: the age or coming in company, Genesis 4^.
following. And so the Angel meant: that Christ in the age following would
destroy the Jews, his own kindred, the unbelieving. Tremelius might have
wised M. Lively.

Of accentes whereby M. Lively brings a bad translation, and far a worse
sense.
THe holy Ebrew has kingly acce^tent 19. and servants eleven. The kings stay
upon the chief word in argument: the servantes hasten, being on lesser in
force of argument. Any king for the most, will make a full sense: as we
express them in other tongues: and some times not so much as a comma. Athnah
is in Genesis 1. ver. 1. and has not the force of a comma: And Rebiang, Ezr. 4.8.
has a pause. Upon new supposed force of these two accentes, M. Lively would
one accent turned to mar all the Bible.
pervert all the Angels oration. to make by the later abolished from stay: this
sense. Dan. 9. ver. 25. unto Messiah the governor there shall be seven seavens:
and 62. seavens the city shall be builded again. That is, (by him) it shall
continue builded. And he sets 137. years before the seven seavens: as
though 137. and 49. that is 186. it were not built. To be short, the Angel
spoke matter of salvation, plain and fortified by all scripture, by learned
expositions received in our Church, But by M. Lively, Iudaique trifling and
false matter. The Church shall be judge. The Angel continues the Chronicle. M.
Lively does break it of 137. years: to be gathered by Heathen. The Angel
tells of our L. his passion: M. Lively denies that. The Angel names the
Redeemer of the world, Messiah. M. Lively does utterly deny that. The Angel
says Messiah shall confirm the covenant for many: that is, for all nations:
as in Dan. 12. Many shall arise: that is, All. And Romans 5. In Adam many died:
that is, All. And our L. in the supper, for his blood, shed for the Jews and
many, that is al nations, expressly touches the Angels phrase. By M. Lively he
told a tale of a sure covenant betwixt the faithles Romans and faithles
Jews. The Angel prescribed for our Lord his preaching three years and an
half. And that is the compass of Saint Marks Gospel. And Saint John has
been noted by the Greek Church: as Eusebius notes: calling back his error,
which M. Lively would quicken: that by four Paschata: after our Lord his
baptism, and manifesting him self to much glory, he showed the half seven
applied unto his function. And Venerabilis Beda notes the same: and tells
that in the Apocalypse also the same is taught. And Carthusianus follows Beda
upon Apoc. 11.12.13. All this M. Lively disgraceth. The Angel taught how long
Jerusalem should be an holy City, for use of Sacrifice: that God should be
sought there: and how long from the day of Daniels prayer. M. Lively tells,
how long the stones shall stand in building undisturbed: after his gueshed 137.
years: as though the City were not restored and builded by the decree of
Cyrus. And to be short: he, by strong co^sequents denies that our Lord his
death, did end sacrifice and offringe.

An open denial of the New Testament.
THus M. Lively writes for a l^full continuance of sacrifice, after our Lord
his death: Fol. 219.
When Vespasian was come into Judea and wasted the country: then the unruly
rebels abolished the lawful custom of sacrificing, etc. And soon after, fol.
220. Not without cause in my judgment, may those words of Daniel, touching
the sacrificse ceasing in the midst of the last week be referred unto these
times of this war: wherein by means thereof the sacrifices of the Lords house
were Our Lord his supper is our oath that we believe his death to have ended all
sacrifice and oblation. And M. Lively with his comme^der teaches apostasy
from that faith.
hindered so many ways: some were quite abolished, and others done either not
by those to whom they perteyned, or not so safely and freely as they ought.
Julian the Apostata only, or one no better, and no true Christian, would
subscribe to this. And this denial of the N. T. might stir all Christendom
to reject the Bishops of England, as Jewish. For when this doctrine was
commended by public authority, strangers think all Bishops that openly
confute not this, to be of the same mind. M Lively must recant: otherwise he
will breed blame to all the Bishops: of whom, I hope, none now alive, gave
consent to his work. And this much for M. Lively: laboring to disturb all
concent of Scripture.

Of our enemies testimony, evil cited to disturb the truth: where even they
speak for it.
ABen Ezra expounds Messiah Nagid from Ier. 23. Behold a King shall reign,
etc. which is doubtless spoken of Christ. And to the same he refers these
words: He shall build me a Temple, 2. Sam. 7. But refers all this to
Nehemias. Wherein M. Lively should have taken all that he speaks well: and as
truth forced him: and not to follow him where he is most ridiculous. This
dealinge is a great corruption in our handling of Religion. This much Aben Ezra
is forced to confess: That the 490. years are from Daniels prayer unto the
sealing of the Messiah. And this is all that we need to desire. And the
ordinary phrase to annoinct he learnedly expounds to seal: and he says
Messiah is the Holy of Holy: even as the Angel meant and spoke. So Aben Ezra
showed that 490 years are from Daniels prayer unto the time when Messiah shall be
sealed, that is, manifested (as to the Centurion) that he was the son of God.
Although the faithles Jew said in his heart: Who can climb to Heaven to bring
Christ down: Or who can go into the deep, (as Jonas to the Whales belly) to
bring Christ from the dead? And did not believe that God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto him self: and that when he was made dead in the
flesh, he was the third day made alive hy the Eternal spirit, which preached
by Noe: (who first of all the fathers is spoken too since Adams first day, or
the day of his fall) although the Jew believed not this: yet his words fall
upon the maine truth: by the strenght of the Angels speech. And when Jews
speak for Christianity then we should cite them: and not cite our enemies
against our self. There is neither Christianity nor wit in that dealing.
Though I. C. borrowed Arch. authority to commend the fighters against our own
faith.

But belike some Chapleyn who made small conscience of the Gospel, deceived
him: whom justice should reward for teaching to deny our own Christianity.
All that do not their best to pay him, that may fitly move your M. are to
blame.

Of further grauntes by speeches of Jews profitable for the Gospel.
ABen Ezra says of the tenth part of Gabriels years that is 49. of 490. thus:
Behold the exposition of: mark and understand: from the going forth of the
word to restore and to build Jerusalem unto Messiah the governer, be seven
seauens of years: The seven seauens are unto the coming of Nehemias to
Jerusalem in the twenty of Artaxasta. This agrees with the truth: and such
citations strengthen our cause And for the three years and an half: This is
written in Midras Tillin: Ps. 10. and cited by Galatinus. R. John says, Three
years and an half was the Majesty of God standing upon mount Olivet and
preaching: Seek the Lord while he may be found* But they did not regard him.
This testimony is not plain historical: Yet to no better sense then to our
Lord his preaching can it be applied: as Christians have used it: who refer
the 49. years to works about Jerusalem: and one part of seven score, to the
preaching of our Lord. Whom all to disgrace Master Lively, has written a
whole work: called a true CHRONICLE. And the Hebrician differs in Religion
from all Christianes: in History for the Ebrews Temple from al Ebrewes
universally. And in Greek from all Grecianes that lived in the ages whereof
doubt is moved. And your M. must compel him and his commender to recant: Both
works printers soon descended to HELL.
God called quickly for both Printers to answer for the work: and for the
commendation.

A further hinderance concerning the time when the Redeemer of Israel should
come into the world.
THe Lord showed full many times in the Prophet Daniel that upon the fall of
the Macedonians, which ruled in Egypt and Syria, the redeemer would come into
the world. And ancient Graecians* long hid from us, whom I printed at Basil, so
understood the legs of the Image and the fourth beast: and expreslely the
Buck, Dan. 8. is named the end of wrath. And Chrysostom most learnedlie shows
that Daniels last Chapter speaks of Antiochus Epiphanes: and the Jews
universally hold, that the Saints of the most high, from whom the heathen
in Dan. 7. take away the Kingdom, are Jacobs house: and Salathiel his house,
heirs to the Kingdom: whose Kings by right be the last 14. Math. 1. and next,
Rhesa with the rest to Ely. Yet of a long time we have made the Romans the
Images legs: whereby the Jews hold yet, that the true Redeemer is not yet
come: and daily pray for his coming in Cether Malcuth, and all their common
prayers: in our expected translation we must be wiser.

Of the time when our Lord should be borne.
SEeing that all Christendom holds that our Lord was borne in Winter, the
altering of the day would breed great disturbance. But speaking an untruth
before God will breed anger. The Feasts in Moses foretold his times. The
Passover, his death: Pentecost when the Fire Deuteronomy. 33.
of the Law was given, the sending of the Spirit in fire: Act. 2.
And September had most days of meditating Gods dwelling in the Cloud: and
then the first Adam was made: and then was the Feast of Tabernacles: the memory
of Gods dwelling among Israel. And our Lord at Eeaster had an odd half year
in his age: for even beginning thirty he began his three years and an half.

Of the harm that comes by the error.
Whereas a modest and a learned Jew of Constantinopole, R. Abraham Ruben
holden to be the best learned Jew in the world, has sought christian
institution from England: and your Majesty's highest preferred are highest bound
to perform such weighty matters: they must be warned that by error herein
they disgrace not all the Gospel. Where God omitteth no help to faith. A Jew
would not soon believe that a wise Emperor, as Augustus was, would command
poor men to come in winter to their own towns. And the eternal son would
not require his mother after the flesh, to take more toil then need was:
neither was it the fit time for sheepheardes to be all night in the fields. And
as baptism was according to his birth month: It was not wholesome for men to
go up to the head in water, in midwinter: And by these our vnlikelyhoods, we
have caused the Gospel to be misbeleeued, over, almost all the world.

Of the erroneous ground that cast amiss our L. his birth.
AN old Greek Oration fathered upon John Chrysostom, cites Josephus the Jew,
for a work found once at Rome, but never showed to any again: wherein he
writes that Zachary ministered in the seventh month: and then was spoken to
by the Angel Gabriel: and soon went home: and his wife conceived, and bare
John, six months elder then our Lord, after the flesh. This authority though
it were true, were nothing. Scripture should be our ground. And seeing God
tells not the day, we should not say, that according to our feasts, the
truth of stories fell. And if we relied upon Josephus, we should have kept his
works.

Of confounding S. Matthew, and S. Luke, and the Kings.
A Table is prefixed before the N.T. which dasheth all the Gospel if it be
regarded: in these words it stands.

A Table to make plain the difficulty that is found in S. Matthew and S. Luke,
touching the generation of Jesus Christ the son of David, and his right
successor in the kingdom: which description begins at David and no higher,
because the difficulty is only in his posterity. FOR better understanding of
the contents of this Table, ye shall note, that the Evangelists S. Matthew. and
S. Luke, have diversely recited the generation of our Savior Christ, according
to the flesh, and yet tend both to one end: that is, to prove, that
(according to that which is written of him in the prophesies) he is descended
of the royal blood of David, and rightly succeeded him in the kingdom. So the
diversity of the said recital consists in this: that Saint Matthew sets
forth the said generation descending from father to son, and S. Luke
ascending from son to father, which comes all to one end. But to show the
agreement of Saint Luke with Saint Matthew, we have here seth forth the
generation by him described, descending after the order of Saint Matthew: to
the end that the one may be conferred with the other. Furthermore, Saint
Matthew describes the generation of Joseph, though it belong nothing to Jesus
Christ, after the flesh, and Saint Luke, that of the virgin Marie: for it was
very necessary to recite both, forasmuch as women were commonly reputed of the
line or kindred of their husbands: and so as well on her husbands side, as on her
own offspring, it is manifest that she was of the royal line of David.

Saint Matthew. Saint Luke. David begat Solomon king. Nathan the kings
brother. Roboam. The posterity of Solomon leaft in Ochosias, whereby the
kingdom was transported to the line of Nathan, in the person of Ioas son to
Judah. Mathatha Abia. Menna. Asa. Melcha. Iosaphat. Eliacim. Ioram. Iona.
Ochosias. Joseph. Judah. Judah of the line of Nathan, engendered Simeon, called
Ioas, which came to the royal seat, because the posterity of Solomon failed
in Ochosias: and therefore the kingdom belonged to Nathans posterity,
according to the ordinance of David, as Philo recites, that is, the youngest of
the children of Bersabe (which was Solomon) should reign after him, and that,
if the posterity failed, the kingdom should come to the posterity of the
next younger, which was Nathan, and therefore Nathan was called Ahischar, that
is to say, Brother of the Prince, and they of his posterity Ahischarim, that
is to say, Brother of the Prince, and Mathitim, which signifies, given to
succeed. The said Philo recites, that the posterity of the said Nathan, was
so honored of the King Iosaphat, that he called his children the brothers of
Ioram his son, and their children the brothers of Ochosias his Nephewe: and
this is the cause why the Scriptuere says, that Ioas was the son of
Ochosias, though he were not his natural son, but the son of Judah
descending from Nathan.

Note, that Saint Matthew going about to describe the generation by
fouretienes, did first leave out Ioas, Amazias, and Azarias, which are set in
between Ochosias the last of the race of Solomon and Ioathan. Further, he has
left out Achaas, and Ioacim placed between Josias and Iechonias. All which we
have here set in their order, to make the same description more perfect and
plain.


Simeon called Ioas, which begat Amasias. The names here contained, as well on
the leaft side, as on the right, issuing from Ioas, have diverse names, and yet
are all one person. Therefore note, that the persons on the leaft side, named
by Saint Ma. are the very same that are otherwise named by S. Lu. on the right
side, till Salathiel. Leui. Azari^ Matthat. Ioatham. Ioram. Achaz. Eliezer.
Ezechias. Jesu. Manasses. Her. Amon. Holmada^. Josias. Cosan. Achaas. Addi.
Ioacim. Melchi. Iechonias. Neri. Salathiel. Salathiel. Zorobabel which begat
Abiud. Eliacim. Azor. Sadoc. Achin. Eliud. Eleazar. Mathan. Jacob. Joseph the
husband of Mary the virgin mother to our Savior Christ.
After the people were returned in to the land with Zorobabel, being delivered
from the captivity of Babylon, he governed the same people 58. years, and left
diverse children, among who^ Resa and Abiud were the chief. So the government
and rule over the people, remained to Resa and his posterity, until Janne,
and thence descended the virgin Marie, as is declared in the generation
described by Sa. Lu. and Joseph* her husband descended from the said Zorobabel,
by Abiud, brother to Resa, as S Matt. delareth in the generation by him
described. Resa which governed 66. years. Ioanna. 53 years. Judah, 14. Joseph.
7. Semei. 11. Mathathias. 12. Nathat. 9 Nagge. 10 Heli. 8. Naum. 7. Amos. 14.
Mathathias. 10. Joseph. 66 Ianne. 16. Melchi. Leui. Matthath Hely, called
Ioachim. Forasmuch as it seems that S. Luke makes no mention of the
generation of Marie, but rather of Joseph: for he uses these words, That
Jesus was counted the son of Joseph, which was of Heli, that is to say, the
son of Hely: we must understand that in this place the name of son is taken
for the name of son in law, and that Saint Luke means that Joseph was the
son in law to Hely, for that he took to wife the Virgin Mary, daughter to
the said Hely, which manner of speech is common in the Scripture: for we find
that Noemi called Ruth her daughter, which was but her stepdaughter, her sons
wife.
Mary the mother of Christ.
JESUS CHRIST.

Of the faults contained in this Table.
THE cockles of sea-shores, and the leaves of a forest, and the granes of the
Popy may as well be numbered as the gross errors of this Table, disgracing the
ground of our own hope.

That Salomons house ended not in Ochorias.
THat Ioas was son to Ochorias properly, we may be sure: because 2. King
11.2. cha. 13.1. chapter 14.13. 1. Chro. 3.11. 2. Chro. 22.11. cha. 23.3.
six times the Scripture terms him so. And if he had not been son in
propriety the repetitions must have opened that. Prophets repeat not
narrations without some change, if the matters could suffer. And if Salomons
house had there ended, some speech had been of it in the holy story. And all
the Thalmudiques hold that the kings of Judah unto Sedekias were of Salomons
loins. And if our Gospel crossed the plain story, all Jews would swear God
never penned it. And well might they. So our Divinity gives strong occasion
to reject the Gospel of our own salvation.

That King Ioas, Matthew. 1. is not Simeon, Luke 3.
1 SAint Luke writing of the true light, was to refuse darkness. But if he had
called king Ioas, Simeon: all the world would have said he loved darkness.
Ioas was famous, Symeon was not heard off, but in private record.

2 Again, if Salomons house was ended for badnes in Ochosias, he that first of
Nathan should succeed, had been a good man. As God changes dignities for a
better to succeed. But Ioas the king was worse then Ochosias. For he fell to
strange Gods: and killed Zachary the son of Barachias, or Iehoiadagh. And our
Lord Mat. 23. makes him as a new Cain. And the Jews in Ierusalemy, in their
treatise of poenance fol. 69. hold, that for his sin the temple and nation was
destroyed, and 80. thousand sacrificers destroyed for the blood of Zachary.

And thus they augment the matter, saying fo. 69. Col. 1. Seven transgressions
Israel transgressed that day. They killed a Priest, and a Prophet, and a Judge,
and shed innocent blood, and polluted the court betwixt the altar and the
Temple (as our Lord tells them the same) and it was the expiation day. And
when Nebuzaradan came thither he saw the blood upon the pauement: and asked
whose blood was this. They say, the blood of a Sacrificer, and a Prophet, and
a Judge which prophesied against us all that thou have done unto us: and we
stood up against him and killed him Then he caused 80000. youths of the
sacrificers race to be there killed for him. Thus they write: in their
Rhetorique amplification of murdering the prophet, as their manner is: feigning
narrations to make lively short speeches. And this much does the Scripture
speak: 2. Chapter 24. of Zacharias and Ioas.

The spirit of God came upon Zacharia the son of Iehoiada the priest, which
stood by the people, and said unto them, thus says God, Why transgress you
the commandments of the Lord, that ye can not prosper? For because ye have
forsaken the Lord, he also has forsaken you.

And they conspired against him, and stoned him with stones, at the
commandment of the King, even in the court of the house of the Lord.

And so Ioas the king remembered not the kindness which Iehoiada his father had
done to him, but slew his son: and when he died, he said, The Lord look
upon it and require it.

And when the year was out, it came to pass that the host of Siria came up
against him, and they came against Judah and Jerusalem, and destroyed all the
Lords of the people from among the people, and sent all the spoil of them unto
the king to Damascon.

For the Sirians came with a small company of men, and the Lord delivered a
very great host unto their hand, because they had forsaken the Lord God of
their fathers: and they gave sentence against Ioas.

And when they were departed from him, they left him in great diseases, and his
own servants conspired against him, for the blood of the children of Iehoiada
the priest, and slew him on is bed, and he died: and they buried him in the
city of David, but not in the sepulchers of the King.

Thus shameful King Ioas lies in the holy Scripture: and yet our right
reverend Fathers would make him Father after the flesh to the King of glory:
who was to make his true Fathers the patrones of virtue in their ages: and the
Scripture well understood, showed that in all places. But weak is the heart of
our teachers: to make him father to our Lord, who was a Cain to the Prophet
that taught of our Lord his kingdom.

Of Ioachaz a younger brother made Father to Ioakim two years his Elder.
NO better masters of art be our Doctors in this Table for Amasias, Achas,
Manasses, and Iehaiakim: men extreemly hated of God. And one thing is of most
intolerable grosnes: that Achaaz (by true print, Ioachaz son to Josias made
king at 23. and after three months removed by Pharaoh: who presently made
Iehoiakim king being 25. years old): that this Ioachaz is made father to his
Elder brother. Greater means then ever Ovid spoke in fables: brought upon our
holy Gospel.
And Saint Luke must be in the same dotage: that Addi must be Ioachaz a younger
brother, and Melchi both his son, and elder brother. Machmad, Lucian, Ovid,
and all narratours of monstrous are not such in their faculties, as our right
reverend Fathers, in giving occasion to make the Gospel worse the^ the
Al-koran. And yet worse follows.

How the Table blasphemeth the oath of the Lord.
THE Lord swear thus: Ier. 22.24. As I live says the Eternal though Coniahu
the son of Iehoiakim king of Judah, were a signet upon my right hand, yet
thence I would pluck thee: and I will give thee into the hand of them that
seek thy soul: and into their hand of whom thou art afraid: into the hand of
Nabucadraesar King of Babel, and into the hand of the Chaldaeans. And I will
carry thee away: and thy mother that bare thee, unto an other Land: and there
shall ye die. And unto the Land unto which they lift up their soul, they shall
not return. Is this man Coniahu a vile idol, beaten into pieces, is he a
vessel of dishonor; wherefore are they carried away he and his seed, and cast
into a land which they know not; O earth, earth, earth hear the Word of the
Eternal. Thus says the Eternal, write ye this man Childles, a personnage that
shall not prosper while he lives. For no man shall prosper of his seed, to sit
upon the Throne of David, or to bear rule any more in Judah.

This vehement speech should have taught our right reverend Fathers: that
Iechonias as a man should beget no Children, though as a Prince he begat his
successor* even his own Uncle Sedekias. That does Ezra teach 1. Chron. 3.

And the sons of Josias were his first borne Iochanan, the second Iehoiakim,
the third Sedekias, the fourth He is Iochonias.
Sallum. Now before I go to the next verse, notes upon this verse may be
profitably cited. Thus D. Kimchi a principal Rabbin speaks upon: And the
sons of Josias the first borne, was Iochanan: He was Ioachaz whom Pharaoh
Necoh took, and carried into Egypt, and there died he: and he had two names.
And how is he said, The first borne; was not Iehoiakim elder then he by two
years, as it is written, Twenty three years old was Ioachaz when he And he
reigned but 3. months. 2. Chro. 36.
reigned, and it is written: Twenty five years old was Iehoiakim when he
reigned; A speech of sonnage to a kingdom strange to us.
The one was not son of a Kingdom: for the kingdom. So our DD. of blessed
memory, do expound it. S. Matthew. to such would not be heard.

Here we see how sons to Kingdoms are in other gate speech then natural
sons. Thus Kimchi the principal Grammarian notes the Scriptures phrase and
the Talmudiques, for sonnage in Kingdom.

The like speech we have for sonnage in Kings, in the next words, verse. 15.
For the sons of Iehoiakim: Iechonias was his son: Sedekias was his son.
Here the Uncle, by nature is son by the Kingdom: as the most learned
Tremelius well noted. And touching Iechonias and Salathiel, thus writes Ezra
the learned Scribe. And the sons of Iechonias The Uncle called son for
succession: as Salathiel 37. degrees of being heirs is called son
assir, (that is kept in strait prison:) Salathiel was his son: and
Malchiram and Pedaiah, etc. Here the Babylonian Thalmud in Sanedrin expounds
the word, Sabtile Kimchi to disturb all the N. Test. takes assir for Assir, a
man's name, and not a prisoner. We simple souls follow him to overthrowe our
foundation: that Salomons house is not gone, for Nathans to come in.
assir, not for a man's name, but for, kept in restrainct of prison: as
Iechonias was 37. years in prison. And Nabuchadrasar meant to have destroyed
the line of the kings of Judah: as he killed the sons of Sedekias: So Ezra
the ready Scribe shows, as commenting upon Gods oath in Jeremy. 22. above
cited, that Iechonias had no Children: bringing Sedekias his Uncle, for a
son: and Salathiel to be his son: when he was Assir: that is: was, in most
strait prison The Babylonians were not of Christian modesty: Herodotus lib 1
tells of the Babylonia^s honesty.
that wives might come to their husbands: And if they had humanity that way,
any of Herodotus lib 1 tells of the Babylonia^s honesty.
Thisbe ladies should as well serve. In that forth Ezra joins with Jeremy in
his style, to tell all the world: The earth, the earth, the earth: that as
Jeremy foretold. So Ezra did record, that Iechonias died Childlesse: and that
in him all Salomons house did fall: and that all the Jews hope for an earthly
Kingdom was become vanity of vanities: and that Salomons Kings overtherw the
world: but for Gods hid mercy: seeing Manasses did saw into pieces Esaias the
glory of heavenly eloquence, and was carried to Babel: and Amon for idols was
killed: and the godliest Josias was too good for the world, and his sons
unworthy of the world: that in them the Jews should see the last scepter
bearer, while the sun shined: that they might look better unto the sun of
justice. No bitterness can be bitter against Iudaique, Atheism* and mockers of
Scriptures concent.
And our Bishops error herein joins with most stubburne, blind and mad
Iudaisme: against the main purpose of the N. Testam. which teaches that the
kingdom of Christ is not of this world: but of men poor in spirit, to
possess the Kingdom of Heaven. But the Jews have yet their belly their god,
and look for a moneyfull King, and him, of Salomons race: and make it an
article of damnation, to deny In the Thalmud Babylonian in R. Aser fo. 18. B
articule 12.
that: and if they catch us therein, to deny Iechonias posterity failing; and
to continue it to Salathiel and Zorobabel they are sure, and well may be, that
they have overthrowen S. Luke, so far as our Bishops grant has authority,
and by them all the New Testament, for which Iudaisme, they should in open
Parleament, or before your M. confess, that as God stroke the Jews with
Madness, Blindness, and Astonishment of heart, Deuteronomy. 28. So herein the right RR.
FF. are in equal case that betray the Gospel to Jews: and agree with the
enemies of our L. which expect, to this day, the pomp of Solomon, that it
shall be restored upon mount Sion. But they consider not the lamentations of
Jeremy: to what end they were penned. The scope of that book was to teach the
Jews that Salomons glory was not the high blessing that Moses propounds. But
Christ was the end of the law. And as by the blood of the Pascha Lamb or kid,
Israel was saved in Egypt: so the son of God in the flesh should save us by
his blood: whom men by ignorance would crucify, being king of glory: who made
Heaven and Earth. This was their first confirmation: wherewith Moses the first
king of Israel strenghtened them. They rebel. A law is given, promising all
earthly blessings, even to the highest honor of a king. But menacies are
added, Leu. 26. that they will fall from God continually: and continually they
shall be beaten: even till their King shall be carried captive: and they shall be
in their enemies land seauenty years. And then God will remember his covenant:
when they pray, as Leu. 26. prescribes: confessing their sins and the sins
of their fathers: Then God would remember his covenant with Jacob, Isaak, and
Abraham, and how he brought Israel from Egypt. This the law tells: and the
story shows: that the Kings failed quite from the earth. And prophecies
show, through Daniel, seven times repeating the same matter, that Chams house
Sems house, and Iaphets Greeks shall rule Judah till Christ comes. And that he
shall give him self for the sins of the world: and bring to earth the
kingdom of Heaven. This Daniel saw: and abridged Ieremies lamentations: which
after the Kingdoms fall, the Jews studied for the space of a Iubily in
Babylon. And when Iechonias was dead, and in him all Salomons house: and
Zerobabel of Nathan was chief of David's house: then Daniel is told at what day
Moses policy shall end: and Gentiles shall be equal in the covenant: where no
Jews might hope for an earthly superiority, over the kings of the earth. And
all this gold is made dim, by our deriuing of the Salathiel from Iechonias.
So, all that ever co^mented upon the Kings or Chronicles will say: that we must
bring our Lord from Solomon: and so we openly deny Saint Luke: that brings
our Lord of Nathan: And confirm the Jews article touched before: which, to
teach our simple* shall be set out with the Jews further opinion. Fol. 18. of
the comment.
Rabbi Asser upon Sanedrin articule the twelueth writes thus.

The Jews faith.
The Jews yet look for Christ to be borne.
THE twelft articule is concerning the days of Messiah: and that requires a
constant belief that he shall come: and a man may not think that he will
differ: ab. 2. if he linger expect him: and a man may not prescribe him self a
time: and gather unto himself opinions by occurrantes, to bring forth the time
of his coming. And our learned say: Let the spirit faint in them that account
the limit. Also a man must believe, that he shall have excellency and
dignity: and glory above all the kings that ever have been. As of him
prophesied all the Prophets from Moses who rests in peace our Doctor unto
Malachi, who rests in peace. And who so doubts of him or holds his honor
small, denies the law. For so the law testifies of him, in the meaning of
Balaams prophecy: and in the meaning of the section: you stand here all (Deuteronomy.
29. and 30.) And this is a rule of foundation, The Jews ground to overthrowe
all the New Testament is granted by our right reverend Fathers, that also the
table prefixed to the Gospel.
That Israel shall have no king, but of the house of David, and of the seed of
Solomon only. And who soever willbe a schismatique against this family, he
denies the name of the blessed God, and the words of his Prophets.

Of our yielding unto this wicked article against the scope of the Old and New
Testament.
DAniel, as I showed, was taught by the Angel Gabriel, the very exact and
straight day for the kingdom of Christ: and to disgrace that prophecy, M.
Lively wrote a great book: full of dotage from the beginning to the end: yet
highly commended by our Arch. authority, in the Libel, written against the
Scottish mist and Brettish nation. Also the last fourtene which are in S.
Matthew. cha. 1. all of Nathan; Salathiel, Zorobabel, Abiud, Eliakim, Azor,
Sadock, Achim, Eliud, Eleazar, Matthan, Jacob, Joseph, Mary, Jesus, These were
termed Dan. 7. The Kings of the most hige God: which should possess a kingdom
for ever: And for urging those to bad religion and vexing of them the four
Beasts were cast into fire. The house of Nathan should have had more pomp
then Salomons if the Kingdom of Christ had been of this world.
And these had not so been used if Christ his kingdom had been of this world.
And Balaam spoke of Messiah, that should vnwall all the sons of Seth. Which
term Iekarker in Ebrew, to pull down the walls, S. Paul expounds 2 Cor.
10. The weapons of our warfarr are not carnal, but mighty in God: to the
pulling down of strong holds, pulling down thoughts, and every high fort,
that exalteh it self against the knowledge of God: and captiuing every thought
into the obedience of Christ. Thus graciously Saint Paul expounds Balaams
term of pulling down the wall. But while we deny Salomons house to end in
Iechonias, and make Solomon the youngest of Bethsebaes sons, and Nathan his
elder, and Patriarch: and inferior to his younger: and again give years of
government to Rhesa,- without all story, and bring the Kingdoms right to
marie: and talk of Jews marriage in their tribe for proof of kindred, by this
pretensed help of reconciliation, we have disturbed all the Bible, and become a
skorne to all the Jews. But one word of your Majesty's gracious mouth will
banish that Table for ever.

Now that the simple may perceive S. Matthew and S. Luke: their purpose shall be
told briefly. S. Matthew would teach Herodians and Pilateans concerning Christ
the king of the Jews: that earthly emperors should fear no less from him:
for that his kingdom was not of this world. That may be kowen by considering
his own ancestors, from To Abraham first Chanaan was promised.
him to whom Chanaan was promised: and after the kings, which were not of his
line: and again his ancestors Salomons kings were far from our Lords
kindred off: 1000. years.
two: and their house. From Abraham to David all the fathers were godly: and
Thamar, Rachab, Ruth and Bathsuagh, examples of faith, for all. David in rest
had nere overthrown his house. But Solomon with his house soon bread ruin,
fuel for Ieremies lamentations: and funeral verses for the burial of
Salomons race in Iechonias. Then comes in Nathans house in Zorobabel and
Salathiel fathers Salathiel and Zorobabel.
two to our Lord, after the flesh: but turns in Abiud etc. out of our Lord
his line, yet all were godly and poor: and the saints of the high Trinity,
Dan. 7. For whom God overthrew the iron legged Macedonians and the former
parts belly, breast and head of the image. Abiud Eliakim, etc were kings by
right: but far from our Lord in kindred.
And so tells how in poverty stands the kingdom of heaven: and Kings need
not to fear loss by Christ. K. of Chanaan, receaving thence no penny, but
vexed at his coming into the world. Now S. Luke going to show his victory over
Satan brings him by Mary and Ely to Adam, taught in his first day who should
destroy Satan's works. This meaned the Evangelist whom the former Table
rejected: A right and plain Table shall follow.

The right reconciliation of Saint Matthew and Saint Luke.
DAVID.
Solomon the eldest son of Bathsheba. Roboam. Abia. Asa. Iosaphat. Ioram. *
Achaziah. * Ioaz. * Amaziah. Ozias. Ioatham. Achaz. Ezekias. Manasses. Amon.
Josias. Iehoiakim. Iehoiachin or Ie-Chonias.
Here Salomons house ended, as though it had never been.

Nathan the younger and next brother. Mathatha. Mainan. Melea. Eliakim. Ionan.
Joseph. Judah. Simeon. Levi. Mattha^. Iorim. Eliezer. Iose. Er. Melchi. Neri.
Salatthiel. Elmodam. Cosam. Addi.


* These bad three: and worse Iehoiakim Saint Matthewe omitteth.

ZOROBABEL.
Abiud. Abiud or Mesullam 1. Chro. 3. to whom the Crown belonged: and from
whom Heathen took it. Eliakim. Azor. Sadoc. Achim. Eliud. El^azar. Matthan
Jacob. Joseph. * Joseph should have been King, if Tyrants would have given all
men their right: and our Lord, his Son by laws esteem, so had been King of
the Jews: And would have it in no other right: that his heavenly Kingdom
might be known.
Rhesa. Ioanna. Judah. Joseph. Semei. Mattathias. Maath. Nagge. Essi. Naum.
Amos. Mattathias. Joseph. Ianna. Melchi. Levi. Matthan. Eli father in law to
Joseph: only ye note was good in the former table Marie JESUS our Lord


Thus the Table never had doubt. For seeing Salathiel was the son of Neri (by
S. Luke) a private man: who must needs be a father naturally, and not as K.
Baasa, whose family was rooted out, was father to King Achab, in the speech of
King Benadad: and seeing God swear that Iechonias should dye childlesse: as
auctour of the Kingdoms ruin: there, and not in Ochosias should the Jews
place the Catachresis of begetting. Our Lord does nothing but he tells his
servants the Prophets: But he told not that he would end Salomons house in
Ochosias, and would not pass so great a matter in silence: a matter the
greatest for the kingdoms of this world. Therefore Salomons race ended not in
Ochosias* but our right Reverend Fathers are unspeakably to seek for the
truth of holy story. And Aggei with Zachary help S. Luke to be understood.
Aggei brings words from God for Zorobabel, that he shall be a signet upon the
finger of God at the day of glory when the Macedonian kings should be shaken:
and our Lord should come into the world 29. Rabbi Nehumias in Pet. Gal told:
This time 50 ye. Messiah shall be borne. and so the^ might all the nation have
told by Moses and Dan 9.
years (by Number. 4.) before he entered into the work of the Tabernacle. And so
by Moses and Daniel, in Aggeis time his nation knew in what year the west
Cittim named Number. 24. generally, and Dan. xi. more distinctly, should have a
full token of Empire and the Macedonians should be utterly bestript of all
government. Then Zorobabel in Christ should be a signet upon the finger of
God. Zorobabel a poor governor of 49000. captives which left Babel, having
little but what Daniel got by his wisdom, to help the Jews home: Zorobabel,
poor in spirit, and looking for a city whereof God was the builder: and soon
called away from Sion to Susan, as a Pilgrome and stranger on the earth.

But God swear (as was noted from Ier. 22.) that if Iechonias were a signet
upon the finger of the Lord, he would pluck him thence.

Therefore Salathiel may no further be son to Iechonias then a succeeder in
government, as Achab is son to Baasa: rooted out, 1. K. 20.34. Heathen used
Adoption: but Ma. tom. 4. tract. de regib.
David's house was bound to the next man of kindred. And in adoption the term
begetting is usual as in a natural father: So Ovid, the mirror of plain
Latin speaks of Julius and Augustus. Metam. 15. being of several families by
the father side: and Augustus is progenies of Julius: and, -- Nec enim de
Caesaris actis,
Vllum maius opus quam quod Pater extitit huius.
And again: Scilicet aequoreos plus est domuisse Britannos, etc.
quam tantum genuisse virum.
As they are very simple in learning, that know not Britanie famous 2000.
years ago: Before Brennus spoiled Delphos and Graecia with his A Britane word
for three horses to every captain: used in Pausanias
Trimarchia of our Britanie, and are bare Chorographers that know not all borne
within our Island seas to be: -- Penitus toto diuisos orb Britannos So they
have little stomach against Italy, that would not remember this place of Naso.
And as the Emperors are famous Diui: So the first beginning in Diuus Julius
and Diuus Augustus is famous, thus: Ne foret hic igitur mortali semine cretus
Ille Deus faciendus erat. Hence to all learned and specially to us, the term
of begetting for a successor should be familiar. Thus I speak only for the
simple: as for our right Reverend Fathers they do take it for succession in
all after Ochosias: as begotten of him by succession: and all that like of them
for the phrase there cannot mislike the Catachresis in Iechonias and Salathiel.
And all must grant that Salomons house must be broken off: unless they will
make two Salathiels and two Zorobabels: the one couple fathers to Joseph, the
other to Mary: So do some learned, but unlearnedly. For Zorobabel Aggei 2. was
both heyr to Solomon, and father to our Lord. And they had been rash namegeuers
that should name a couple of each family with the same names to disturb all the
world. Now that Zorobabel the governor in Salomons house comes of Nathan,
Zachary shows: naming Leui, and his chief family, Simeon, and David with
Solomon had no^ ben omitted, if Zorobabel had come of him.
Nathan: as chief in his family, Chapter 12.10. So this cause is past doubt to
clear the Table: that in Iechonias not in Ochosias Salomons house was buried:
that family and kingdom should end together. That Ier. 22. and all lam. might
be plain And an other as great a dotage as any ever came from brainsick head
have the right revere^d Fathers sold to torment the simple who over the realm
have marked them: how they make Ochosias to be two years Elder then his
Father: and many years Elder then his Mother.

Of Ochosias or Achaziah made Elder then his Father.
OF King Ioram thus it is written, 2. Chr. 21.20. When he began to reign he
was thirty and two years old: and reigned in Jerusalem eight years, and lived
wretchedly. Howbeit they buried him in the city of David: but not among the
sepulchers of the Kings. And the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Achaziahu his
youngest son King in his steed: for the men of war that came with the host
of the Arabians, had slain all his eldest sons: and so Ahaziahu the son of
Iehoram King of Judah was made King.

Which is to be understand that he reigned twenty years his father yet living,
but after his fathers death was confirmed King, when he was forty and two
years old.
Two and forty years old was he when he began to reign, and he reigned one
year in Jerusalem: his Mothers name was Athalia, the daughter of Amry.

Of the errors how many very gross follow upon one.
1. OChosias is called the youngest, and made king by the people. That had been
needles if he had reigned twenty years before.

2. Besides his father reigned but 8. years: And four of them with Iosaphat.
And it were senseles to make him reign 16. years or 12. at the lest before his
father.

3. Mo^reover, nether was Iosaphat king in Judah: nor Achab king of Israel: nor
Ioram borne 42. years before Achazias death. So, elder then his Father and
Mother and Mothers house should he be. For Omri was not the^ settled King: but
only made King by his soldiers: upon the death of Zimri. And Tibni was made
King by his men: and four years were spent, before the people made Omri King.
Now by our Bishops notes Achab and Iosaphat should be in affinity by their
Children, Ioram and Athalia before they were borne. This note of 42. years has
troubled Britanie 42. years and more. And here again the term son, referred
to the kingdom of Omri, which stood 42. years, into which year Achaziahu fell
being of his own age but 22. years, the term son caused the disturbance.
The Ebrew Doctors many hundredth years ago in Seder Olam warned the world of
this phrase. And Levi S. to Gerson upon the text: in the great Massoritique
Bible: the best work that ever by man's wit, came into the world: which if your
Majesty would cause all that you would prefer to know readily, you should
have in few years learned Divines: by that and other Ebrew helps. But very few
in the world understand it: for the 848. margent readings: and further it is
hard. Yet one professor might soon make a 1000. kunning.

Of the term Kingdom, translated reign how it makes K. Baassa war ten
years after that he was dead.
IN the third year of Asa King of Judah began Baassa to reign over Israel
twenty and four years, 1. K. 15.33. So he died in the six and twentieth of King
Asa. Yet in the six and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa came Baassa King of
Israel against Judah: By our Bishops translation: that Machmadistes may by our
Divinity look for their false Prophet to reviue, as did Baassa by our Bible.
When Gentlemen find such matters in our Bibles they see no hope of knowledge,
and some have turned to deny God to be the auctour of it. Ezra (1. chapter 16.)
meant by Malcuth the kindome of Asa: parted from Israel then six and thirty
years. Wherein the twelve tribes thrice twelve years forgot the glory of David's
house: so that Judah it self was plagued. God casts the Chronicle and other
numbers into pleasant and sensible meditations of his providence. And therefore
Ezra took his account from the Kingdom of Judah, which Asa held. In the same
tenor of number of 3000. soldiers Ios. 7. for Achans theft, even thirty six
were slain: thrice twelve. And after vengeance upon Achan twelve thousand of
men, women and Children were slain, by the 12. Tribes.

For the book of the Judges.
THE acts of the Apostles are drawn no better unto the book of Judges: to
corrupt many other books: even where S. Paul's words would have found most
high admiration: and utterly damn the Thalmudikes of extreme blindness in
the Judges story. Our error shall be first handled: And afterward S. Paul's
plainnes shall be showed: if God will.

Of Act. 13. v. 20. perverted to ruinate many books.
OUR translation thus speaks: He gave unto them Judges about the space of
450 years. Here Beza said, the text was corrupted: to deny that we had a New
Testament: and the Popes translation turns back from Joshua to Isaaks birth:
without all reason. S. Paul meant: after a sort 450. years. Proprely 339. from
Iosuahs death to Elyes. Within which times Judges of punishment oppress an
hundredth and eleven years: so arise 450. And 19. textes belong to that text of
Saint Paul. Which anon shall be laid down. Our Bishops absurdity thus
appears: years are from the coming from Egypt unto the building of Salomons
Temple, 1. K. 6.480. Now if the the Judges had 450. Thirty of the wilderness
would make up the number: that the stories of Iosuah, Samuel, Saul and David
should be all fables: and no time for David to be in the world. So our Bishops
Bible might well give place to the Al-koran pestred with lies.

Of wrong to Matthew. 1. Luke 3. Ruth. 4.1. Chr. 2.
RAchab Booz, Obed Iessei, are ancestors to David: borne ten years after
Elies death. And Iosuah reigned 17. years. Though Rachab were newborn when
Jericho fell: yet she must be about 120. when she bare Booz, and he 120. must
beget Obed: and he 120. must beget Iesse, and he nere that must beget David. By
the true Chronicle they were incredibly old, but for Gods auctority. And to
add an hundredth and eleven years moo, to four persons, that is a matter of
extreme oversight. And thus the acts ill translated brought our right
Rerevend FF. to disgrace many holy books with incredible grosnes in oversight:
where they might have made all the world admire the Apostles learning: how, to
show the disturbance of the times, as though the heavens were troubled, he
reckons the oppressors years alone: although they were within the company of
the defenders times.

These many are ioyed to the defenders: not as though they defended still the
people so long, but because their last dealings were so long from the former
state.

Othoniel 40. Ehud 80. Barak. 40. Gedeon 40 Abimelech. 3. Thola, 23. Iair, 22.
Iephthe, 6. Ibsan, 7. Elon, 10. Abdon, 8. Samson, 20. Ely, 40.
The whole sum is 339.

The punishing Judges have within this time Cxj. years thus. Cusan, 8, Moab,
18. Sisera, 20. So 339. and 111. make 450. after a sort: wherein Saint Paul
regarded the Jews manner of speaking to the phrase: as I will show by two
examples. Madian, 7. Ammon, 18. Philistines, 40.


How Samson that judged but 20. years is said to Judge Israel 40.
THus writes Elias Leuita, (the best learned Jew that ever holp Christians) in
his preface to Bomberges Bible in Hebrew with the Massoreth and chief Rabbis.
We find in the Ierusalemy, (the eldest volume of the Jews Pandectes or
Doctrinale is so called) that Samson judged 40. years. It teaches that the
Philistines were afraid of him 20. years after his death: as in his life time.
And in all the copies that we have, it is written: TWENTY years. Thus far
goes the commentary. Now I see there is no doubt touching the text, in this of
Samson. For the right stands, as the Drass, or comment upon the phrases
tells: WHEREFORE is it said twice, Iud. 15. vlt. and Iud. 16. vlt. and he
judged Israel 20. years. Rabbi Acha said. The text does teach: that the
Philistines were afraid of him 20. years after his death: and 20. years in his
life time: and so arise, FOVRTY by two several times. But the Thalmud said not
that the text has, and he judged Israel forty years: but that he judged
Israel 40. years according to the manner of speaking to the phrases. And here
comes a sweat elegancy: which is worthy marking. So far goes the Thalmud
and commentary upon it. These words the learned Elias brings against some
simple: who might think the text corrupt: by reason that the Thalmud differed.
To whom he shows, the speech to regard the phrase, and not propriety of the
text.

How the Septuaginta alter the very true text for Elyes 40. years to agree
with the Jews manner: reckoning after the phrase
Lxxii are in shortness called Lxx.
THE ancient Lxxij. translaters gave Ely but 20. years, as notes warn upon the
Roman edition of Xystus: and that with Eusebius testimony. But later copiers
seeing the Ebrewe sure, and not knowing how the 70. hid their mind: alter the
translation, and give Ely forty years, as the Ebrew has And thus the Lxx.
teach that the Jews highly regarded the phrase: for memory of story, to make
their nation ready in the numbers used in the holy Scripture.

How Josephus reckons the Judges times as Saint Paul does.
IT is most certain that Isreal's age since God called them from Egypt, at the
laying of Salomons Temples foundation, was 480 years. As Noah's when he began
the Arc. And like matters does God cast into like times, through the Bible,
And Josephus could not be ignorant of the time. Yet in steed of 480. years he
reckons 592. taking Cxj. from the Judges and beginning from Moses going unto
Pharaoh. So it is to be seen, Joseph Antiq. 8.2. This shows that S. Paul was
brought up at the feet of Gamaliel: that spoke thus learnedly, to show the
Jews that he knew Rabbiniques as well as the best of them: but held
Christianity the only learning: which to the perfection of story over matching
all even in schole elegancy, adds the logique, that draws unto the life in
Christ.

How S. Paul further settled the Judges times and Iosuahs, whereby a table
added to some of our Bibles appeared: bad and all Thalmudiques, The Ierusalemy:
The Babylonian: Seder Olam, and Maimoni in Beth-Bechira, and all be reproved.
WHere S. Paul says, God gave them Judges after a sort 450. years, unto the
time of Samuel the Prophet: our translation speaks thus, Act. 3.20. By not
marking the Ebrews shortness, we seemed to Abr. Zac to give Saul forty years.
So the Jew despises the N. Testament by our fault.
And afterward they desired a King, and God gave unto them Saul the son of
Cis, a man of the tribe of Benjamin forty years: Here we can not well be
understood. Saul reigned not 40. years. For David when he fought with Goliath
in the beginning of Saul's reign should be above 20. and at his 30. Saul kicked
against the spur of his own spear. The Apostle follows the phrase of the
Judges: where a small King makes a Period, as where we say: And so the land
rested forty years: the playner were, And so the land rested. Forty years as
Tremelius has: Quieuit terra. Haec gesta quadraginta annorum. S. Paul meant
that Samuels days and Saules made 40. years, and Samuel came to the last of
them. And dyed but 4. months before Saul, by the Thalmud in Themurah. And the
Rabbines can confess that, when they will. For thus they write in Middras ps.
25. It is said: And in Kimchi upon Ps. 99.
Moses and Aharon were among his priests, and Samuel among them that call upon
his name: Thou shall find all that is written of the one, written of the other:
The one was of Levi, the other was of Levi: the one made a Psalm, the other
made a Psalm: the one reigned over Israel, and the other reigned over Israel:
the one reigned 40. years, and the other reigned 40. years: the one made
wars, and the other made wars: the one killed Kings, and the other killed
Kings: the one built altars, and the other built altars: the one offered, and
the other offered: the one prayed for Israel, and the other prayed for Israel:
the one served as a Sacrificer, the other served as a Sacrificer. Thus speaks
the Old Rabbin, agreeably to S. Paul: But little pleasured his own side. And
that note of Midras must needs be holden Old. For since the Eldest Thalmud was
compiled, soon after great Constantines days, the Jews Rabbines conspired to
cross the Apostles in story, that their people should not embrace Christ.
Maymony praef. ad Misnah confesses in effect why the Thalmud was made: he
wrote Misnah 423. years ago, the greatest Rabbin of the faithles that ever
was: who plainly opens all the Iudaique to such as can overrule him. In the
Thalmud Ierusalemy 1200 years old, in Megilah fol. 72. Col. 4. from the
partitio^ of the land to Samuel, are 376. years: yet in truth Iosuah had but
ten after that: and in all, but 17. as it was told. And the Thalmud gives
but eleven to Samuel and two to Saul: yet the Rabbines have co^spired these
1200. years to overthrow the New T. by checking S. Paul for Joshua, Judges and
Samuel: as S. Lu. for Salomons house. And if they could prevail in either,
they had gotten the victory: which our right reverend Fathers gave them
without all entreaty: and grant them more fortifications then of them selves
they durst ever chirp to speak for. My poor self have answered this in Ebrew
print, as the Lords know, and Europe and Asia: and infull many Ebrew written
trearises, sent to Byzantium by post from Francfort to Venize. thence by ship:
and the Rabbin there is reported of our Merchants to accept, and commend daily
unto noble Grecians, that he had from England a greater light then ever he
expected from Christians. And at Francfurt in the company of many, a Jew being
present, I said to the company in French, which they all understood, that by,
1. Sam. 7.3. I would make the Jew confess before the^ all, that the Rabbines
were but as Elymas Magus. The^ I spoke to the Jew in Ebrew this much: Rabbi,
this you know, that all must sanctify the name of God, and bear witness to the
truth continually: or feel flames eternal: yea, says he, that wot I well,
and am ready to do all that touches me. Then said I, read this verse, 1. Sam.
7.3. Since the time that the Arc stayed in Kiriah Iaarim, the days were many,
they were twenty years: and all Israel with hearty sighing sought after the
Eternal. And Samuel spoke to all Israel, saying: If with all your hearts ye
return unto the Eternal, remove your strange Gods, etc. Does not this text
tell plainly, that ^0. years passed after Elies death, before Samuel meddled in
government; yea says he, that is plain: so much I fully hold, and none can
deny it. Then I told the bystanders what I demanded, and what he granted:
and how upon his grant, al his Thal. fell. And how, said I, ca^ your Rabbines
give Samuel from Ely but eleven and Saul but two and David seven in Hebron:
that he should within 20. of Ely call thence the Arc from Kiriah Iaarim by
this text. Then he answered me nothing, but to the bystanders words of high
revere^ce to his teacher: exceedingly beyond all that Christians would think,
a Jew would speak. So to all us Saint Paul affoordeth such weapons, in one
short sentence, to settle all the book of Iosuah, Judges, and first of Samuel in
a most Divine frame: by 450. years after a sort, for the Judges, and 40. for
Samuel. That one sentence of S. Paul, is more worth then a mountain of Gold,
to show the harmonious frame of the holy story from since Jesus of Nun gave
possession of the land unto Jesus death, when he did make his own name Nun:
Midr sp. 72 from his name Nun: teaches that Messiah shall raise up the dead.
that is, by Midr. Ps. 72. raiser of the dead. Even the very Midras notes that
Messiah should do so: and by allusion to Nun Ps. 72. in the Ebrew: as they
hold no syllable idle in strange terms touching Messiah. All these times have
an easy account: by S. Paul, and in all the rest by Jews thus: Seven years
the Land had for conquest and partition: whereupon the next year Iubilies
were to begin. Seven Iubiles Joseph's house had the Arc, till Sylon lost it:
thence the Philistines did carry it: and after six months Judah had it in their
power. Thence are seven seaventies to the first of Nebuchadraezar: when he
took Jerusalem, and carried King Iehoiakim to Babel: whom he soon sent home
again. Daniel and they ye quenched the fire are the glory of the first
captivity.
And carried thither Daniel the Noble, the Godly, the Wise, the wealthier then
the King of Tyrus, the beloved of Christ and his Angels, and cariried the
three noble men that quenched the fire. So, that part of Iudahs story has
famous Limits: and old Theodoret, and Jews when they are not malicious,
generally hold the disputable parts aright: when as we, they say, The Temple
stood R. Abraham Ben David in Gabalah
427. years. And very many of our men here speak truth, even following
particulars, and not marking how (Ezekiel 4.) God brings all past doubt, by
pains in particulars they agree with a truth unknown: So hitherto we have a
pleasant measure of times Now the captivity of Babel was but of 70. years
from Nebuchadrezars first year. Three captivities there were. The first of
king Ioakim, when he was sent home. The second, when he was taken upon
rebellion and carried for Babel, but was cast away unburied, as an ass, by Gods
judgment, Ier. 22. for burning Ieremies Lamentations: then was his son made
king, and after three months carried to Babel with many thousands: among whom
were Ezekiel and Mardochai, Ezekiel and Mardochai, ar the Gold in the second
captivity.
who made Hester mother to the Persian King Artaxerxes that a Persian king of
Benjamin his Jasper, Exo. 28. should be the first foundation of Jerusalem: as
Iapis has place, Ap. 21. This second captivity was 8. years after the first,
Darius borne when Nabycadnezar would be making a King over Gods people. Then to
him a reve^ger is borne that Madi and Elam of Iapheth and Sem may punish Cham.
and then was Darius borne, to proclayme Daniels God when he was 62. years
old, and took Babel. The third warning brought flames to the City and Temple,
and captivity: ten years after the former. Then the Arc and golden
Covering were spoiled by Babel, and the Candlestickes, and the Tables broken
with fire. For seeing we have no other record of them, we must hold that the
Temple being set on fire, the heat would break the Tables: that goodly
monument graving by the finger of God. And as Moses for Idol-worship of few,
brake the first tables, Gods anger destroying the kingdom for common Images,
would much more break the second tables. And full 18. years are spent in these
three captivities. The third captivity is glorious by Ezra. For Ezraes record
of life, confuteth al heathen millions that give Elam above 130. years over
Judah.
Ezra makes famous the third captivity: Being an other Moses drawn out of
the waters of troubles: when Saraias his father was killed by Nauocodrosor king
of Babel, with king Sedekias children. And Ezra lived to Philip Macedons times,
seeing he saw the Persians later times: and by the record of his captivity,
he captiveth Heathen writers: and by his record of kindred up to Adam, he
co^futeth Aristotle that denies the worlds creation. This third captivity was
but of 52. years, and the whole from the first 70. As Moses, Levit. 26. and
Jeremy 25. foretold. And Daniel cha. 9. and Ezra, 2. Chr. 36. and Zach. 1. and
7. observe what fell out. Then Daniel stopped the Lions mouths, and Darius
Iapetionides proclaymeth the God of Daniel over 120. nations: and the Angel
Gabriel which begins the first speech of the New Testament to Zachary at
the Altar of incense, and tells Mary that the Power of the Highest will
shadow her, otherwise then the Tabernacle, Exo. 40. where the same phrase is
used, Gabriel twice named in the New Testament, a teller of comfort, and twice
in Daniel, a teller of affliction for comfort, terming Daniel a man full of
Grace, shows (when Daniels prayer was like the evening offering,) of Christ
his offering of all offringes: that the captivity time seven times being
measured, shall see the redemption to life eternal for Iapheth, for Elam, and
all: when the Jews have served Heathen at home, and learn obedience, hating
strange Gods, so long as they ruled at home: but never could rule them selves
from strange Gods but only under David: against whom yet they rebelled. This
geometrical frame of Temple S. Paul does force us to acknowledge: seven
years of conquest, seven Iubilies for Ephraims glory: seven seaventies for
Iudahs glory: seaventy for captivity, to feel Ieremies Lamentations: and
again the former measure of time seven times 70. or 490. years to find
comfort in servitude: which none but the poor and mourning will ever find.
Also this last part Aben Ezra does confess, full sore against his will,
putting full many long Parenthesis into one little saying: Aben Ezra a malicious
Jew as it was noted expounds Daniel well against his will.
that he should be unspied of Christians, how upon his grant all Iudaisme
fails. Now as David 27. times in Psalm 137. repeateth of God: that his mercy
endures for ever, so I may well iterate the testimony of Aben Ezra for our
strenght: upon Dan. 9. THE SEAVENTIE SEAVENS are from the beginning of Daniels
prayer unto sealing Messiah (which is Christ) the Holy of Holy. This much Aben
Ezra confessed: the most headstrong and most learned Rabbin, and most bent to
his skill to overreach us. And the commentary upon Daniel he finished in the
year 4916. by the Jews 65. in Genesis 11.17. in ye Kings, and 90 from Daniels 490.
172. years they steal from the Scripture, to disturb us. So he wrote in
Rhodus city in the 5088. in October as he records: 423. years ago, for we
are now in 5531. The plain truth, forced him as Balaam: and yet we missed:
until good Calvin brought the truth into the open Church: with a sound heart,
though he could not answer all objections of forged astronomers: whose
fragmentes the great astronomer Aben Ezra held but fables, and of Greak toys,
never heard while Graecia was free in glory and eloquence. S. Paul's one
saying, Acto. 13. keeps all the Bible in a right frame. Which yet we corrupt
to disturb all.
And but for saint Paul, we could never have brought about the Jews consent,
from Midras Rabba, for Judges and Samuel, from Abraham son of David for the
Kings: and from the Thalmud for Babels 70. and from Aben Ezra, the time thence
to our Lord his death: without S. Paul we could never have found the heavenly
measures of the time. And this much for our disturbance of all our own
building by bad understanding of S. Paul, and as ill translating, of a most
rare heavenly sentence, worthy to be written in great characters of gold, that
they who pass by, may read it with delight: how God gave Judges offenders and
defenders after a sort 450. years: and not about 450. unto the time of Samuel,
and then God gave them Saul. Forty years, this much of these poinctes: where
one text evil translated and expounded marreth all Moses.

Of Moses five books disannulled by ill translating of one verse, Exo. 12.40.
and by speaking the same in the argument of the same.
THis was the text. The dwelling of the children of Israel, while they dwelt
in Egypt, was four hundredth and thirty years. Now in the argument this comes.
40. They dwelt in Egypt four hunderth and thirty years. This one error
overthrows all Moses.

1. He writes of Cohath his grandfather that he was one of the Lxx. souls
that came with Jacob into Egypt, Genesis 46. and that he lived but 133. years. And
his son Amram, but 137. Exodus 6. and Amrams son but 120. Deuteronomy. 33* All
makes but 390. And so Moses had descended to the dead: ad inferos, as Heathen
speak, and had left superos, the living: forty whole years before Israel left
the soil that Nilus waters. And he from whose hand the fiery Law came, the
Creator of Heaven and Earth should no more speak with Moses, then Iuppiter in
Creet smake with Minos. This oversight is exceedng great: that our Doctors and
Bishops should make Moses forget him self: his own age, his Fathers, and his
Grandfathers. And if every trespass receive just recompense: much of Gods
anger that has fallen upon our nation, has fallen for this corruption of the
Law.

Of S. Paul, disgraced with Moses.
AND S. Paul disputing of the promise made to Abraham which was made presently
upon the death of Tarah faith, that the Law came but fourhunderth and thirty
years after the promise: so we should corrupt the fame of Saint Paul by our
translation: and deny that he wrote by the spirit of God. And no simple can
read S. Paul Gal. 3.17. and Exodus 12.40. But will say in his heart, Who can
go up to Heaven to bring a solution of this knot: and who can go beyond the
sea to fetch a reconciliation of such disagrement: whereas the word, as Moses
meant, for the peregrination which concerned Israel, which was spent in the
land of the peregrination of their fathers, as in Jacobs story it is named, and
in Egypt when Israel had ended their dwelling there was fourhunderth and
thirty years to the very exact day.

And our right Reverend fathers might have learned so much of the Lxxij.
translaters, which translated thus: The peregrination of the children of Israel
while they and their Fathers dwelt in Egypt, and in the land of Chanaan: they
and their Fathers, was four hundredth and thirty years. Here any may marveile
that so learned men for Latin controversies, Objections with answer.
should never read the Lxx. But they will say the Lxx. are not extant now.
Pure and sound they have not been these 1200. years: but are now infinitely
maimed: with patches from Aquilas, Simmachus, Theodotion, and two others whom
Origene did set together with the Ebrewe double: in Ebrew letter, and in Greek
letters but Ebrew words. This eightfolde work was called Octaplun, and from
sundry translations the Lxx. which now we have, is corrupted. A friend of mine
bought at Alexandria in Egypt for me a Lxx. written in Diocletians time and the
Arabique Bible thrice over. But left all with our English proconsull, who
turned Turk, seeing disagrement in our Bibles translation, and soon descended
to Hell, and Turks his executours retained the books, yet 40 pounds was sent
to buy the^ again, and they are expected. Such a Lxx may be the true one: The
Cristia^ Aarabique follows ye Lxx. even where they hid their mind. to bring
years a thousand and many hu^dereths in Genesis 5. and eleven, moo thenever the
sun measured.
and the Arabique commonly, the Christian Arabique follows it. But not R
Sadaias Arabique.

But indeed as the Lxx. now stands with us, it is corrupted: that well our
learned Fathers might suspect it. And in the Babylonian Thalmud in a pleading
before Alexander the great, where Egyptians complain that Israel robbed them,
a Jew pleads desert for wages of 430. years service in Egypt. And Gilbert
Genebrard holden a great Ebrician, places Israel 430. years in Egypt:
defending the Latin translation. Whom Adricomius in a brave work does follow.
And Genebrard says that Moses might leave out some of his ancesters. And S.
Paul might speak of some later promise. And one Thaddaeus Dunus says, that
Moses text for his fathers years might be corrupt. Seeing so many have
perverted the text and other Scriptuers: so much more dangerous is our learned
fathers agreement with them. Whereas they might easily be answered. The
Thalmudiques iested: as Heathen, that knew not Abraham's peregrination, would
understand Moses: and Genebrard forgate that S. Paul made the promise of his
account elder then circumcision, and no sense can believe that Moses
Chronicling his ancestors years al to Adam, should leave out some personages:
when the person is more then the time of a person. And Dunus blaming of the
text would be hateful to all the Massoreth: full of auctority, now 2000.
years. And our Septuagint in this place, may not be suspected. For the Thalmud
Ierusalemy in Megilah, fol. 71. Col. 4. testifies that the Lxx. translated the
text of Ex. 12.40 in this manner. The peregrimation of the children of Israel
while they dwelt in Egypt and in all lands, was four hundred and thirty years.
So no color of objection can be rightly brought. And S. Paul must be holden
the right expounder: that the law of the passover was exactly 430. years,
after the promise of Christ drew Abraham from Charan to Chanaan.

Of the fourhundreth years of persecution.
IF one member suffer, all suffer with it. The mocking is expounded by Saint
Paul a persecution.
So here the story of the 400. years persecution is persecuted. As soon as
Isaak was come to judgment, to hear of the blessing, Ismael would be mocking
him. And when he was in his sixth year, both he might know what a mocking meant,
and then Ismael might grieve him by mockes: and all the persecution by Ismael
the Egyptian and Pharaoh is but of 400 years in the limits, and thirty full
after the promise it began: as S. Paul expounds the text. But by our Bishops
work, all that comes to nothing.

Of an exceeding gross oversight.
ALso a stranger impossibility comes from our right RR.FF. notes upon Genesis
15.13. Know this of a suritie, An open ro^sing of the 430. years, spent falsely
by our Church-Bible, not at all by truth of time in Egypt with a^ othermo^^
gross impossibility and dotage.
that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs: and shall serve
them, and they shall entreat them evil (k) four hundred years. There the note
is: K. reckon not these years from Jacobs going down to Egypt but from Gods
promise to the promulgating of the law. This note is most senseles: if it
begin the time at the promise, Ismael shall afflict Isaak long before either was
born. Jews and Gentiles hold that Ismaels mocking of Isaaks is the beginning:
which some refer Iewlike to Isaaks birth: so the promise that called Abraham
should be five years in his fathers life time: and again S. Stephen should be
crossed. Others rightly refer it to the sixth of Isaak, or fifth fully complet.
Moreover if Israel dwelt in Egypt 430. years the promise 215. years elder:
can not be within 400. of the law. This gross contempt of truth and judgment
has caused our nation to loath Gods word: and God to plague the nation. But
your M. will heal all.

Of Gods harmonious disposing of times, in other places and here
THE Lord who framed the world in such order that al has called and stirred
arts: who made the world for the just, shows an order in their times pleasant
to consider and easy to remember. So Moses saved in his Ark, lived 120. as Noah
spent so much about his Ark. And Moses parted his life into three equal
parts. He spent forty in the court of Pharaoh. So much S. Stephen durst
affirm: from the usual manner of God to govern matters in sorts equal, for
equal matter. So Moses had time enough to see what court life was, full 40.
years. And the Rabbis agree with S. Stephen. As Symeon Ben Iochai, being nere
S. Stephens time: in Siphri. fol. 63. and Col. 251. And Midras upon Genesis 50.
fol. 115. Col. 3. of the Crake edition. And Midras Exodus fol. 118. Col. 4. and
again, fol. 119. Col. 1. where this saying is added. Ben Ambaim Sanah Le Bynah.
He should be forty years of age that should be of ripe judgment. Now seeing
he spent forty with Pharaoh, and 40. with Israel, the remnant for Madian or
Jobs nation was forty: and well might he be acquainted with Jobs, Eliphaz,
Sophar, Bildad and Elihu. For Jobs sorrows fell about Moses birth. Doubtless
he was not idle in the land of Madian: but used all means for man's salvation.
So for court Moses was tried 40. years: for quietness in tending simple sheep,
40. years: and 40. years in being a servant to Israel. That phrase SIMMESS,
he served: is used Mat. 20. Let him that is the geatest of you, be the servant
of all. And thus in Moses God shows how fitly for man's memory gracious
wisdom divides times. Who ca^ (...) but 70. souls into Egypt.
So God gave Chanaan 215. years to learn faith of Abraham and Isaak, and
Jacob, and gave Egypt 215. years to behold multiplying unto six hundred
thousand valiant men, besides women and children. These heavenly distinctions
of times should not be confounded. And the like be through the old Testament:
and by us confused alike: though God be the God of order, and not confusion.

Of the miracle of multiplying, extinct by our translation.
WHereas of Abraham there were but 70 souls, of the line of grace and promise
to see Egypt in 215. years: it was a great miracle that 600000. men sprang in
the same space that only seaventy sprange. So they must multiply like fish. But
to multiply so in 430. years, that had been no miracle at all. For after the
flood 427. years was Abraham's calling: and many countries were full of people.
And many mighty Kings made wars with great companies. Now by us all this
grace of multiplying like fish were extinct. And endless be our absurdities that
a simple reader may say that of Naso: Tot premor aduersis, quae si comprendere
coner
Icariae numerum dicere coner aqua.
For the sea-waues may as well be numbered as the gross errors of our most
reverend and right reverend Fathers. But so reverend and so learned Fathers
will not stand in them, but yield a translation, that shall be square: settled
and sure how soever it be turned, to be examined. And further warning in other
matters will do no harm.

Of S. Stephen crossed by the Geneva: both the translation and notes: where the
Church-Bible has the right.
Our Church-Bible notes very well that Abraham was not borne at the
seaventieth of Tarach: (which yet the Geneva held:) but 130. years later, and
so it translateth that the promise of Christ might well be after Tharahs
death, as S. Stephen tells that Abraham was called to go himself to Chanaan
from Charan after his Fathers death presently: being 75. years old: so his
Father was 130. elder then he. This matter is of great importance, to defend
S. Stephen, where the Thalmudiques have to this day most deadly conspired to
have him counted a liar: that he might be counted no martyr, and the N.
Testament no Testament. They say truly, that if it has any untruth it is not
from God that cannot lie. But they, not S. Stephen, are the wicked. And their
own Greek Philo, the true, not the forged auctour, fights for Saint Also
Midras Rabba upon Gene. 11. fights for S. Stephen against their and our
de^ea^ed.
Stephen in this testimony following. (...). Ide^ de Abrahami aetate. (...).
fol. 284. Which words in Britane sound this much: It is not like that any who
have read the law can be ignorant how Abraham first remooving from the
Chaldean land stayed in Charan: and when his Father dyed there, he remooved
also from that land: that now he has left two places. And soon after. He
leaves it being seaventy five years old. This ancient testimony of old
Philo, who was Ambassador from his own nation to Caius Caligula, and might as
well have seen S. Stephen as Paul did, does confute all the Thalmud: even
where they go about to confute all Christendom, and in perpetual date of the
worlds age, lay an account that being accepted, denies most surely the New
Testament. To join with the Atheist Jews against our selves, this was in the
Latin Church an exceeding blindness.

Of two further errors, in the Genevah.
THey who place Abraham's birth at Tharahs 70. cross S. Stephen and deny the
new Testament: So do they that make Isaak mocked of Ismael at his birth, and
400. years before Israel came from Egypt: for so they ascending thirty higher
bring the promise five years into Tharahs life. Yet by the promise Abraham
was called from Charan, as it has been showed and after his fathers death. So
these poinctes must be held all alike.

1 That Abraham was 130. years younger then his Father.

2 That he lived (...) an idolater by S. Paul and Philo: and Maymony 40. years.
Tom. 1. tract. de idol.

3 That God appeared unto him in the vale of the Chaldeans, and said: Get thee
from thy country and kinsfolk. S. Stephen gathered that speech by the argument
from Genesis 15. and cites not Genesis 12.1.

4 That Abraham taught his Father of Gods appearance: that his Father took him,
Sara and Lot, Harans children, and they two went forth with THEM two: Abraham
being indeed principal of the journey.

5 That Tharah going for Chanaan stayed in Charan some few miles off from V R:
and not another country, (both were Abraham's country) and aged, and sick, and
dyed.

The Jews disgrace the N. Testam. among the blind by false date of the world:
subducting 65. years in Ab. 17 in ye kings and 90. from Dan. 490. if we dated
in all our books 5531. with 1604. we should protest a right plain truth of
Christianity to common good, and clearing of much Scripture.
6 God continues the journey, saying to Abraham: Go thy self from thy
country, kinsfolk and Fathers house (that is from faithles Nachor) unto a land
which I will sheew thee.

7 That from this journey to the Pascha be 430. years.

8 That the first thirty are to the sixth of Isaak. and 400. thence from Ismaels
persecution or mockage of Isaak for his hope unto Pharoahs last persecution.

9 That Abraham, Isaak and Jacob, spent in Chanaan half 430.215. and increased
but unto 70. souls: Theirs in Egypt 215. and multiplied like fish into six
hundred thousands valiant men, besides women and children. These positions
being holden, great light and delight comes to the story: and some to the
translation.

Of V R: that it is in the propre Mesopotania, and that our notes are idle for
defending S. Stephen, where the Jews defend him.
THE term V R is (...) Act. 7. and in Philo: (...) in the Lxx. Ghemek or
Bikeghah that is vale, or valley, in Salomoh S. to Melec Sat. a learned writer
upon all the old Testament, and in upon Es. 24.15.
Kimchi and many moo. The Jews say: The Chaldeans entroched upon Arams ground:
as upon Assure: and increased idolatry even to force of deceaving Thara and
Abraham. And no reason can be rendered why Abraham should be so far as Orchoe
beyond Tigris: or take Charan in his way thence for Chanaan. And Don Barbinel,
though full of rancour, yet herein defends S. Stephen: that the Chaldeans
vale was very near Charan: that both be called the country of Nachor. And the
field of the Chaldeans they call Syria or Aram of the two Rivers, and Charan,
Aram of Nachor: and again they have in Ebrew letters the Greek word
Mesopotania of V R, and Mesopotania of Charan. So the Rabbis defend S.
Stephen, better then Europaeans: who by weak defense, would overthrow him.

A digression to defend S. Luke for the 75. souls.
GRegory Martyn a Rhomist, but a man of our nation, says: That Luc. Act. 7.
for 75. cannot be reconciled with Genesis 46. where Jacob with his sons are but
70. And Theod. Beza blames Act. 7. and the Lxx. Genesis 46. as corrupted, and
corrupt some what lately. Beza must thus be aunsweared: That not only the Lxx.
in Genesis 46. has 75. souls. but also in Exodus chap. 1. and yet not in Deu. but
only 70. As Philo of old testified, how the Greek stood: alluding unto the 75.
years of Abraham's age: and Beza never heard of Greek copy that in Genesis 46. or
Ex. 2. stood otherwise, nor of any Greek, Act. 7. He would have cited them if
he might. And as he confesses the Arabique and the Syriaque: and as I am sure
the Ethiopian has seaventy five souls. And modesty would not think that all
ages would be deceaved. Wherefore Beza and Gregory Martin should have
confessed ignorance: and not have blamed the providence of God, or judgment of
nations.

How S. Luke Act. 7. is defended.
THE Lxx. translated as Paraphrastes, who as commenters, may for explication
take one text to explane an other* Joseph, Genesis 50. is noted to have seen
sons to the THIRD generation, and there a GREAT MEM is in the Ebrew. To make
that plain, they bring besides Manasses and Ephraim: which only were borne
unto him when Jacob came to Egypt: five of their children and grand children.
To Manasses, Machir and Galaad: To Ephraim, Sutale, Tahan and Eden. Five in
all, (where four would have served:) in honor of Abraham's age, when he
received the promise of Christ. And none could be so dull, as to think that
Joseph could in nine years have the second and third grand children: and any
might note for explication of what text Joseph only has addition, above the
Ebrew. S. Luke was to follow this: and all nations of old might see the reason
plain. Beza belonged not to my blame now. But as with Gregory Martin of our
nation he was to be handled. And this much for disturbance betwixt the promise
and the lamb. Many gross oversights must be oomitted: as that Iochebed
though she had been post-huma, should at 257. years bear Moses and Ezron,
Aram, Aminadab, Ruth. 4. 1. Chapter 2. Mat 1. Luke 3. should have incredible old
age, at father-hood. The troops of errors noted would weary any heart: and the
Bibles should be called in, or they will work much grief to God and man.

Of Sem made the Elder.
OUR Lord, making the younger brethren famous by his dignity, never comes in
Scripture record of the eldest. Seth was borne when Eve had borne children 130.
years, Iapheth was 100 years old at the flood: and Sem 100 two years after,
Abraham was 60. younger then Haran: Jacob and Judah, had elder, and Zerah his
hand came once to light before Phares: And David was the seventh, and Nathan
was younger then Solomon, and Malchiram was elder then Zorobabels Father,
Pedaiah, and Abiud, then Rhesa: yet against all grammar and plain account and
the Lxx. 2000. years old we make Sem eldest, that all his blessings might be
referred to natural dignity: without the praerogatiue of Christ, and all the
Greeks and most Jews should be deceived, and most learned Greek homilies in
this argument should be nothing worth. This error passes all that can be
spoken, yet this, which I am to speak, matcheth it.

Of the first general Apostasy whereupon the destruction of the old world
followed, that all, who perished in the flood, perished for ever: how this
Apostasy by our translation is turned to the We translate: Then men began to
call upon the name of God.
clean contrary.
THE first day that Adam was made, he disobeyed: as all may see a continued
narration for Eve and the Serpents speech, and temptation, and judgment for
curse upon all the earth: and the universal wits of Ebrewes cited by
Maymonides, cited by me upon Daniel, do confess, past all reply, in their
reasons and consent. Then was the earth cursed, to bear but briers and
bramlers: and in signification such minds. And Ebrewes, 6. All that eat not
of the tree of life, are in the same case. But the first judgment upon the
cursed earth should appear by the flood. And our mother Eve being a principal
prophetisse, in the name of our Father Seth, shows how he was set against
the flood: that Balaam, Number. 24. might well say, that we all are the sons of
Seth. So he named his child sorrowful Enoch: and he his woeful Kaynan, and he
his waterflowed Mahaleel: and he his descending Iared. But he consecrated to
God, the seventh, with holy understanding: And names him consecrated Enoch.
And the event proved his faith. For he walked with God: and in his infants name
told when the flood should come. Even when he should dye. That was handled in
the name of Meth-v-selach. He dies, and then that shall be sent which the first
day was told Adam. And Meth-v-selach names his son Lamec, that is: Borne in
times of stroke. For in his days all the fathers left this world. And he
learned of them all, the heavy curse that should oppress the earth. And at the
birth of Noe, shows his poverty in spirit his mourning and his meake heart,
mentioning how God cursed the earth: and how Noah, should be the comforter,
named by notation that way: Noah is a conforter. And thus the Patriarks in
their names told of the wrath of God for the flood, hastened by man's impiety,
yet by Gods patience differred long, as he would have none to perish, but all
to come to the knowledge of the truth, as he gives the open occasion to all.
Otherwise his close counsel has determined to how many he will give his
spirit. So, all the Patriarks preached in their names the curse of the earth.
Seth showed that bad calling upon the name of God should bring the flood* by
the name of Eno^ upon open apostasy.
And Seth, the cause, for all us the sons of Seth: at the birth of sorrowful
Enos. As Moses writes, Genesis 4. where it is written. Also to Seth a son was
borne: and he called his name, (sorrowful) Enos. Then sprang corrupt calling
upon the name of the Eternal. So the sway of Ebrews take it: in the Thalmuds
reckoning Dor Enos, the me^ of Enos time in the first Apostasy. The Cataloge
of their testimonies would occupy much paper. Yet the malicious of them who
know that we bring the hope of our Savior from the promise, told Adam on his
first day, that Christ should destroy the works of Satan, would feign have the
2000 before circumcision to be but a Chaos or confusion: that in Abraham their
glory might begin: and all before to be but some small calling upon God: and
that men began at Enos birth to call upon God. Aben Ezra is of this sort, and
later, David Kimchi, in his Spanish translation: but in his Dictionary he
brings first that which I first here laid down. And Kimchies own has
untruth and open folly, and a iarring from all Moses purpose. First, it is
untrue that until Enos birth men called not upon the name of God in 235.
years. They who believed that the Eternal word would be made flesh, were from
the beginning, and were many: as we read that troops were called the sons
of God. And Cainites the sons of men: and how their fair Daughters deceived
the better, that they took to profane Religion. And Seth the just for this
cause might name his son sorrowful Enos: for a perpetual memory of the first
Apostasy: But not without open folly: if men then began to call upon God. Now
we see that through the Bible in the Ebrew and Chaldy part of Daniel, man as
sorrowful is called Enos, after our fathers name. Whereby we might better
consider the first Apostasy. And Moses shows how the curse upon the earth
hastened by man's cursidnes the destruction by the flood: without any offer to
amendment: as our Father Lamec complained 1056. years after the fall, of our
wicked works ever since God cursed the earth: hopeless but for Noes few saved
by water: for that Noe called upon God with right knowledge. Where the corrupt
invocation brought the deluge. To this agrees the Arabique translation old,
and allowed so far as Arabique goes: that is as far as Daniels image of old
reigned. Thus it speaks in Britan letters, chinid thebadallah el daghva be
ism allah. Then was corrupted the calling upon the name of God. The root Badal
here is used Genesis 49. to the Hebrew chalal to corrupt. So the Arabique is
manifest, and the sense is clear: and we have observed the first Apostasy: and
reason why all men be called sorrowful Enos in the tongue of Adam and Aram. And
thus An epilogie of our many particular errors, and transition to some as
infect further.
our particular errors have disturbed all the Bible. Some that reach through
it all may be briefly considered.

Of Aharons Ephod.
OUR translation gives to the Ephod bleew silk, purple, and scarlat and white
twined silk. The Jews universally hold that wolle thread bleew and purple,
and scarlate and white linen and golden plates cut as thread made the cope: not
the unclean worm: and they will and may well hold us Battes and Moulwates
that cannot see that, for the tongue and ceremony by their so plentiful and
agreeable writings. And of touching a worm thus they Ierusalemy Thalmud, fol.
65. col. 1. v. antep.
write. If a worm be in a man's hand, though he wash him self in the waters
of Siloam, or in all the waters that God made, he shall not find absolute
cleannes. Now the worm unclean, by Ceremony, might not be in Ceremony figuring
holiness. This error our reverend Fathers will amend.

Of the twelve Stones.
THe holy Ghost translated all Aharons twelve stones: with fourfold Greek, the
Heathen, the Lxx, the Apostles using of an Heathen term fitter, and the
Thalmudiques that is, by a Greek term made from the Thalmud. The heathen and
Lxx. agree for eight of the stones, and the Lxx. give Iaspes to Zabulon, though
the Ebrew Iaspeh falls to bear engreauen the name of Benjamin, where their
translation would disturb conference with the Hebrew. So to Benjamin does the
holy Ghost give Iaspis. Also the stone of Judah is called Anthrax: which term
in Genesis 2. in the Lxx. was an other stone. The same in Chaldy is Cadcedona, in
Ebrew Exo. 20. Nophech, and in Ezekiel. 27. Nophech or Codcod was brought from
Aram to Tyrus Mar^. As Thargum Ierusalemy would expound Ezekiel. And as Kimchi
notes upon Es. 54. in the Jewel Codcod. Thence the holy Ghost makes Chaldy to
be Greek: (...). The Jewel that bare Nepthaly was Achates: SHEBO in Ebrew, John
calls it a Chrysoprase, named of a golden list and greenes in the white
Achate.

In the Septuaginta Sardius was the first, and Onychion Beniaminus the last.
Sardonyx compounded of both names pleases Zabulon for his Iaspis taken from
him.

Now by the New Testament, An help them the will tra^sl^ Exodus 28
thus should Moses be turned to our language, Exo. 28. v. 9. and 10. And thou
shall take the two Beryl stones, and grave in them the names of the sons of
Israel: six of their names upon the one stone, and the names of the six that
remain upon the other stone, according to their The Babylonian Thalmudin Sotah
fol. 36 makes this plain, as did Philo, of wc poinct more shall spoken.
birth: That is, as their mothers first bare, but all of one mother together:
That Isachar and Zabulon come next Judah: though they were borne after the four
of the two hand-mayds. And we have no prescription of order but here: whereby
each Patriarks should have his fit stone, whereof a little shall be spoken
anon. verse 17, etc. And thou shall embosse it with Embosment for stones: four
rows of stones: a row of Sardius, Topaz, and Smaragd, the first row: and the
second row of Chalcedon, Saphir and Sardonyx: and the third row of Hyacinth,
Chrysoprase and Amenthyst. Leshem or Hyacinth, befell Dan: a token that Leshem
the Town should be his, by his conquest mentioned Ios. chap. 18. and Iud. 19.
And the fourth row of Chrysolite, Beryl and Jasper. Thus the holy Ghost
teaches us to translate Moses. Also by the order in the revelation the Saphir
must be for Isachar the noble Leahs son, and not for Dan of Rachels
handmaid: though by birth in age Dan should have it: and the second foundation
in the holy city: and Isachar should be the last: where in truth Gad is last.
And the Greek Philo ends the strife: who lived in Caius Caligulaes time, and
saw the stones and tribes names ingraue^. He says Judah was in the Anthrax
(Chalcedo^ Apo. 21) and Isachar in the Saphir, fol 37. One testimony of Philo
for Isachars Saphir, is worth 1000 Saphirs to strengthen truth.
That one word discusseth all the doubt: in what stones each Patriark was
engraven: that is all of one mother together: and as the mother first bare. So
Chizkum learnedly expounds the term birth upon Exodus 28.

Of the Patriarchs order in the Jewels.
THus the stones held the Patriarchs: where the noble Matrones sons Leahs and
Rachels were in their own stomach as Lords above the hand-maides: all but the
blemished as Ruben and Symeon: who were made as the basest.

ODEM. Sardius in the 70. and Apo. 21. bare engraven, Ruben and he was placed
upon the Hagarens, and a red stone was a prophecy that he should have a warrier
Frontiers place: and God fighting for his Church, Ap. 4. is like the Sardius,
defending of his Martyrs against the Caesar's.

PITDAH Topaz, in the 70. and Apo. 21. bare Symeon, and is found in Cush, or in
South Arabia Job. 28. in the islle Topaz: by Pliny. A flaming stone, by
Dionisius: (...). By Eustathi. (...) a clear stone flaming brightness. By
Andreas upon Apo. like a Carbuncle. And this was for place and color fit for
Symeon, the frontier, and upon Cush and Amalek. As he was worst in carriage for
Sychem, and for Joseph, so his Tribe was Number. 24. and affoorded no Judge: but
the flabled Judith, in a scholars declamation. So his Topaz has not the second
but the ninth place: Apo. 21.

BAREKETH Smaragdus in the 70. and Apo. 21. bare Levi: who in his Doctrine was
to shine like the sun: as (Ovid. Met. 2.) In solio phoebus claris lucente
Smaragdis. Because Levi taught the covenant for the Heathen given by the
rainbow, Genesis 9. In Apo. 4. that is signified by the rain-bowe like a Smaragd
being about the Throne: The Gospel for the Heathen is meant thereby.

NOPHEC Anthrax in the 70. and Philo, but Chalcedon Ap. 21. of Cod^od or
Chalcedon, bare Iudahs name* Pyropus, The Carbuncle by Kimchi in his Spanish
translation: a fit Jewel for Judah in Christ the Sun of Justice in Malachie.
To whose kingdom the Poets words may well be borrowed: how in Scripture Regia
SOLIS erat sublimib. alta columnis.
Clara incante auro Flammasque incante Pyropo.


In Apoc. 21. The Chalcedon our Lord his stone, has the third place: the place
of Levy, to tell that our high Sacrificer has ended Levies place. And Levies
Smaragd has Iudahs place: The very placing of Judah in Levies place, tells
that in all the Bible Christ was our sacrificer, and that none but God could so
wisely place the twelve Tribes. The learned R. Abr. Ruben admired that. A.
Rabbi the Archisynagogue of Constantinople.


SAPHIR in Ebrew and Lxx. and Apo. bare the name of Isachar: the noble son of
Lady Lea: a Lady by Arabique policy above Dans mother: and the Saphir bare not
Dan. which opinion for Dan would shake all the Bible: when the uniform
providence of God is examined: and our Bible ^arreth.

Now the Saphir may be known by a phrase of Exo. 24. The God of Israel had
under his feet, as it were, a pauement of Saphir like the color of the
Heavens in pureness. God him self speaks the like, Job. 38.37. Who could have
made the clouds of Heaven like the Saphir. And whereas the ground of a wise
Policy is meditation of Heaven: as the old Eva^gelist Esaias teaches in all his
book, showing how the show of this world passes; in words purer then snow,
whiter then milk, ruddier then any Jewel, whose pullish passes the Saphir, so
he boroweth the Saphir to show that our (...), or civil carriage must be bent
to Heaven, saying: I will make thy foundation of Saphir. Isachar had this
reward: for his belief in Christ: Es. 54. This was fit for Isachar, that should
with Zabulon suck the richesse of the Sea: where Coelum vndique, as Maro
speaks: and nothing about, but the Saphirlike clouds. And this Saphir might
well have Symeons second place: Apo. 21. where the Shoam or Beryll should have
had the first: But that Ieroboa^ of Joseph marred the grace of it. As the
precious Shoham and Saphir come together in Job. 28. so in the Apo. 21. they
might have come.

IAHALOM Iaspis in the Lxx. but Sardonyx, Ap. 21. bare Zabulon not Nepthali. A
fit badg for a Sea man. Halam is, to BEAT: as in Vergil: Feriunt mare. and in
Homer, (...) Jacob told of Zabulon that he should border upon the Seacostes,
and have havens for ships: and his stone speaks the same: and Moses Deuteronomy. 33.
does make it more famous: when Levi, Judah, Isachar had their places, Ap. 21
Zabulon by order has his. In the Lxx. Sardius was the first, and Onyx the
last. When Iaspis was taken from Zabulon to the last, to Benjamin his Onyx, and
Iaspis was made first as of old Sardius: Zabulon has both dignities in
Sardonyx: and the tongue shows S. John to be the son of the thunderer.

LESHEM, Hyacinthus Lxx and Apo. 21. it bare Dan, who wan the Town LESHEM,
called DAN, in Abraham's time: and Leschem, for that the stone LESHEM was found
there: and called DAN, Ios. 19. and Iud. 18. The old name DAN, and LESHEM in
the Jewel told Iosuah and the Seniors that to DAN LESHEM should be given: in
notatiton, follow God. The dumstone sounded to the deaf ears to beware corrupt
calling upon God. But all in vain.

SHEBO Achates Lxx. Chrysoprase, Ap. 2. The white Achate: which has one side
green, and the golden list: the brauest of all Achates. Nepthaly was graven in
it: who dwelt by the Sea of Gennesaret: or princely Gardens. The
sun-shining-face of the Sea is in Greek, Gold: as the shining air in Job 37.22.
So the dumstone Chrysophrase spoke to Nepthaly, as Moses tongue, that he should
possess a Sea, and the South From Leshem, or Caesarea Philippi.

ACHLEMAH Amethyst, Lxx. and Apo. 21. by notation, God will keep safe.
Troupfull Gad, named of a troop, for Leas troop, Genesis 30.10. troupfull Gad
whom troops would trouble, Genesis 49. but he should trouble the Hagerenes in
the end: when Gad had good trust in God. 1. Chr. 5.10. troupfull Gad was graven
in this faith workfull stone, the bloody Amethyst, fit for one set against
Hagerenes in open fields, to defend his brethren, as Homer says: Il. 5.

(...). Through slaughter, through dead, through pikes and black blood.

As he was next after the two above, and as they, of hand-maydes, so he is
last, Apo 21. and next after the other two. By our Bishops Noble Isachar never
specially infamous should have that place: and so it would be doubted whether
God penned the revelation.

THARSIS, by notation the Sea, Lxx. and Apoc. 21. CHRYSOLITE, as the Sea in the
sun beams is Golden. Happy Aser was graven in it: whose bars of gates or
holds by Sea were of brass and Iron, Deuteronomy. 33. The name might tell Aser, what
part he should have.

And these three, Isachar Zabulon and Aser, were told by their dum stones that
they should be Sea men. And the packes of East commodities conveyed to the
West, took lodging for sea, in their tribes, that they might choose of all.
ANNA the Daughter of PHANVEL, who saw Phaneel God in Christ, face to face: and
spoke to all Israel, Phanuel, behold you, God: came of the happy Tribe of ASER.
For which ANNA the Chrysolite is preferred from the last of the
hand-maides-sonnes to be their former, and also before Symeon, and Ieroboams
Joseph.

As the Sea in trope, is affliction in allegory: and notably Dan. 7. where four
beasts arising out of the Sea, afflict Christ his kindred, in whose affliction
he had affliction: and being the Angel which had the name of God in him, Exo.
23. and Es. 63. he saved them: and expounding Daniels seventh in chap. tenth,
He has his body like Tharsis: as partaker of sorrow with Daniels people: till
ANNE of ASER should be in mind the daughter of Phanuel. And see that Christ
took a body, to pass the aerumnosum vitae salum, even to the death of the
Cross.

SHOHAM, is by notation, in which they shall be. Adam the Prophet which saw in
spirit all that should com, might so name it: as seeing that they, The twelve
stars of the world then, should be graue^ in it. Beryl. Lxx. Exo. 28.20. and
Apo. 21. The Lxx. translate this stone six ways: least the foolish Heathen
should skoff how Joseph bare them all. When Israel fell away, Joseph bare none
but all save Judah to destruction
By variety they hinder the^ for searching the case. Thus it is in them:
Prasimus, Sardius, Soom, Onyx. And Smaragdus, Ex. 28.10 where it bears the
twelve names, and Beryllus where it bears Joseph alone. Joseph for his
carriage might hear, that, which Albinovanus writes of kingly Mecoenas. Vincit
vulgares, vincit Beryllus arenas: And well be holden a Citizen of Eden or
Paradise: first for his own case: next for holding all the house in life and
faith: even that his dead bones and his brethrens buried together at Sichem,
whence they sold him, should keep them in expectation of Christ, and heavenly
brotherhood. For this he is graven in the Heavenly clear Beryll: and his
brethren are engraven in two of the same: in memory that he to his death held
them in expectation of God in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself: And
made them all to be of Eden, as Ezekiel tells.

IASPEH Onyx Lxx. Apo. 21. Iaspis bare Beniamins name. The colors of it be
many: but the operation one in open trial of all ages: that a woman in hard
travel having two Iaspers tide to her legs, shall so far as art helps, have
spedy travel. That of old Dioscorides noted: and in Francfurth of late, it was
notably manifested, 1602. the Mother of Benjamin, because she was somewhat
idolish in her Fathers Theraphim, died as soon as twelve stars arose to
Jacob. The tribe for their mothers calamity, might look to dye first: in
travels of state: and for the mothers idolatry, as Joseph's wife left such a
spice as 600 years after overthrew Israel. For that, Benjamin has the Iaspis
in allegory: and the Temple in history built in his Tribe, and half Jerusalem:
and Mardochai and the Emperesse Atossa the Mother of the great Artax: who built
the Temple, and caused his Nobles to help Judah: wherefore Ezra calls them
valiant Worthies: and God makes them, to tame the Graecians, proud for Xerxes
flight, and not knowing that the hinderance of the Temple, and not the force of
Grecia, caused all those Calamites. Such is Paul, that traveled of the
Galathians and Heathen Theraphim, to have Christ formed in them, and in body,
wonderfully: and has half Ierusalems N. Testament under his sh^bet or Pen. And
he only tells of his Tribe, of all the Apostles: that we may know how
worthily, when Joseph, who took Rubens dignity, and civilly was right heir, by
the first bethrothed when Joseph lost his dignity, Benjamin was to hold the
first place.

Of Ezekiel.
AND Ezekiel shows that thus the stones were to bear the tribes names, chap.
28. when he tells the late Kings of Tyrus, in what dignity old Chiram of
David and Salomons time, was; In the Garden of Eden: or policy of Israel, in
the holy mountain of God, or Jerusalem, among the fiery stones, David and
Solomon. Chiram was a Cherub, an uncted protector: all precious stones covered
him. The Sardius of Ruben the eldest: the Topaz, of Symeon, the second: the
Sardonyx of Sabulon his borderer, the Chrysolite of Aser his borderer, the
Beryl, of Joseph as a King of old, the Iaspis of Benjamin, in whose Tribe the
Temple was built: to which he performed Ceder trees: the Saphir of Isachar his
neighbor, and the Chalcedon of Juda his confederate in the Kings: and the
Smaragd of Levi, in whose office as a proselyte he sacrificed. Thus does
Ezekiel reject DAN and Nepthaly, of whom comes Chiram the workman, mentioned
1. King 7.2. Chro. 2. and 4. A Tyryan by dwelling, of DAN by his mother, of
Nepthali by his Father: which Father is described to excel in all work in
mettalles, tymbre, and tincture: that the son may be the better esteemed for
such a teacher: And the son Chiram is commended by testimony of experience:
his workmanship to old King Chiram. And the son after his works ended, has
the testimony of working according to his Fathers skill. Our translation and
notes herein wander to great blame and folly.
Now when a poor dweller of Tyrus had all glory that Dan with Nepthali could
afford, the Prophet might not object unto a King consort with hand-maides
tribes: excluding Isachar utterly, and Zabulon from his place: to exclude Aser
a borderer upon Tyrus. And thus our learned ware not the brestcare of judgment
with Vrim and Thummin, when thus the stones of the sanctuary are confounded:
which dum stones tell what lot each tribe should have: whose stories fall
still in the same tenor: as the holy Ezekiel and the son of thunder do make
the dum stones to thunder it out: though we be deaf as the dwellers at Nilus
Catadupa or downfall: who by too much noise loose the sense of hearing.

Of further warrant for this ordering of the stones.
AS Chiram the artificer is commended by his teacher, so all dealers in
divinity should make good their cause by ancient: who should have skill in
that kind, whereof they entreat. Now in this argument one doubt resolves all.
Whether Isachar whom his brother Zabulon must immediately follow, comes before
the handmaids sons being his elder: that all Leahs sons come together: or
Isachar must come after them: to have the Amethyst: and Zabulon the Chrysolite.
Which in dead is Asers: That should our Bishops Bibles infer. Against whom
this heap of witnesses I call together. First, the testimony of Philo touched
above: and now the words of the Babylonian Thalmud in Sota fol. 36. Rabbi
Annas the son of Gamehel, says: The twelve stones were ordered, not as the
Patriarchs be ordered in the book of Numbers, but as they be in Ex. 1. The
sons of Leah together, in the first stone: and in the second stone, (...)
translator.
according to their birth and age. This note of the Thalmud ends this
controversy. And the commentary there is to the same sense, for such as know
not the Babylonian tongue.

Of Thargum Ierusalemy.
AN old tra^slatio^ of Moses hard points in the tongue that the Jews used in
the Apostles time, called Thargu^ Ierusalemy, thus settleth fully the stones
order, to the Patriarchs engravement in them: In the first row was Sardius,
Topaz, Smaragd, and in the^ was written plainly the name of the three Tribes: I
take the (...) from Apo. 21.
Ruben, Symeon, Levi. And the second row was Cadcedona* Saphir, and Sardonyx.
There was written upon them plainly, the name of three Tribes, Judah* Isachar,
and Zabulon. And this ends the strife against our Bishops. And the third row
was Hyacinth, Chrysoprase, and Amethyst. There was written upon them plainly
the name of three Tribes, Dan, Nepthaly, and Gad. And the fourth row was,
Chrysolite, Beryll, and Iaspes. There was written upon them the name of three
Tribes, Aser, Joseph, and Benjamin. Thus says an old auctour, not unknown to
the Eloquent Cyril, nor despised of him.

Of Thargum Cant. Chap. 5.
AN other Chaldy paraphrast upon the Song of Songs, though he agrees in no
Chaldy name to the undoubted Ebrew stones order, yet he applies the Patriarks
to them just as the former did: seeing how so the Tribes arms told them what
part of the land each one should have, and dignity according. Whose record
keeps us from fastening folly upon Ezekiel, by our blindness, and from moving
the simple to despise the revelation.

Of Midras Rabba.
MIdras Rabba is a most curious work for the depth of the Ebrew tongue,
bringing witty fables to teach memory of sentences. This Midras upon Exodus 28.
tells of the Patriarks engrauement in the twelve stones, just as Thargum
Ierusalemy does: and is an auctour of high esteem, and drawing the consent of
many. So this auctour here may fight for Dan with his Leshem, to keep all
stories together by right settling of one Patriark to his stone.

Of Maymonides in the holy Jewels.
R. Moses Ben Maimon, often cited, he most curiously handles the same in two
works: one not yet printed, written upon the mysteries of the twelve Jewels,
and to the former order. An other printed, and famous, in tract of the holy
implementes. Him also R. Moses M. kozi cites, though he would have bred a
confusion to Moses, Ezekiel, and all the Bible: he cites him as mistrusting
his own judgment.

Of R. Eleazar Wormatiensis.
MAymonides in Spain, Egypt, and Arabia, was known ^423. years ago, as was
mentioned, and Eleazar; a Rabbin at Worms, about the same time. He has
written upon the Law: and on Exodus 28. following the former order. For L^shem
and Dan he handles Gods providence and Dans dulnes very sharply, even to the
letters: LE, SEM, follow God: and turned into Semel, Idol.

Of Salomoh Iarchi.
SAlomoh Iarchi is elder then both them. He lived in the time of the holy
war. As Barbinel records upon Obadias. Upon Iud. 18. thus he writes,
Laisha was the name of the city. And in the book of Iosuah they called the name
of it Leshem. Because they found there a precious stone called Leshem: and it
was set in the breast care of judgment, for the Tribe of Dan, and he knew that
in truth that should be their inheritance. Thus writes this old Rabbin, whom
Elias Mizraki and Chizkuni follow and urge upon others that would confound the
Jewel of all holy story.

Of R. Isaak Karo.
ONE Rabbi Karo keeps the same order: and writes bravely in applying the
stones notation or nature to the story. Specially in Achlemah: I WILL KEEPF
SAF, how needful it was for Gad to have that precious promise.

Of R. Bechaiah.
ONE R. Bechaiah writes very many good things. This one that all ever glorious
in the Fathers came by Faith. And convicteth Abraham of want of Faith, that
objected Sara to danger: and of other great imperfections. But that this Rabbi
says in his heart, Who can go up to Heaven to bring Christ down, or who can
go to the deep to bring Christ from the deep of the earth: (as Ps. 71.
speaks) but that the incarnation and resurrection was incredible to him, he
had soon learned our doctrine. This Rabbin follows the Thalmud, Thargumes
two, Maimony, Eleazar, Iarchi upon Iud. 18. and the true light of Scripture: to
be a frontyer against those late men, that to undermine the New Testament,
would not stick to confound all their glory.

Of the contrary, with confutation.
THE Jews of late have put forth upon Moses a short paraphrast: a forged
work: bearing the name of Jonathan the old most learned paraphrast: who wrote
upon the Prophets. Of whom the Jews say, that he wrote not upon the Law. He
was no less ancient then the holy Apostles. Yet the forged Jonathan mentions
Constantinopole upon Number. 24. This forged work breaks the stones order: and
some of the malicious and willing to disgrace our Testament follow him. The
true Jonathan bare sway so great that no Thargum nor Thalmudist durst check
him: and whereas he translateth nine stones Ezekiel. 28. onkelos upon Exodus 28.
follows him in every one of them. Against this Elymas I cited this troop,
that troops should trouble them, and they be troubled unto their end.

Of the Onyx ill set for Beryll in Exodus 28. by the Bishops Bible.
THE Lxx. naming Joseph's stone Beryll, being allowed of the holy Ghost, Apoc.
21. should not have been refused. Yet our translation has Onyx. Though the
enemies to the New Testament have the Greek plain, or by transposing of one
letter. The Chaldy of Job. chapter 28. has Berylin. Jonathan Ezekiel. 28 Byrela,
onkelos in Genesis 2. and Exodus Genesis 2. Exodus 28.
28. Byrela. And Aben Ezra cites the Syriaque common auctority, for Byrela. And
by transposition the Arabique has, Belyr: in Sadaias, in the Persian Arabique,
upon both places, and in an old Ebrew Arabique dictionary that I have brough
for me from Arabia. Also a most learned commentary of Sal. S. of Melec Sat.
records Belyr to be the Arabique. Thus the enemies favor S. John. But we
have not marked how the New Testament is the best auctour for the Ebrew tongue:
and have refused to follow God: and obscured the Symphonie of Moses, Ezekiel,
and John, and made all three to speak as sounding brass no distinction of
matter. The learned translaters will amend this.

Why the Lxx. set Smaragd for Shobam, Exodus 28.10. where Beryll is in v. 20.
AS the Greek Philo does apply Aharons attire to deep significations, so did
the former and the later. Now Joseph stood in glory 600. years, in Egypt his
house bare sway: and Jesus or Iosuah was King after King Moses dyed: and
conquered the land: and Ephraim and Manasse of one Patriark made two Tribes.
And 350. years the Ark was in Syloh. Besides, Debora, Gedeon, Abimelec,
Iephthe, Abdon, defended the People, and half Manasses joined with Ruben and
Gad and found glory in Saul's time over Hagarenes. Thus Joseph's Beryll might
well bear all names, on Aharons shoulders, as he like Atlas, bare all the
peise on his shoulders. For this, Israel saw a plain reason why the Shoha^ of
Joseph still should bear sway. And Ephraims kingdoms fall told that Judah
should fall, and Heathen come in their rowme: as Heathen only in Jobs time
stack to God. But Heathen could not see a reason of this. For their weakness
the Lxx give Levies shoulders his own stone. Chrysostom in Photius thought
Moses truth did so, whence Patriarchs and Popes willbe Shoham: which stone is
the Kings.

Of an open betraying of our Lord and redeemer, and befooling the rock of
salvation.
THE Pascha was to be killed not in private towns, when altars were free as in
Samuels time: but where God settled his name: as in Ierusalems Temple. And
there the Lamb could not be killed, but by the general consent of the nation.
And he that should kill the Pascha, ever since Jesus conquered Chanaan, in a
private house had been held an enemy to all truth of God. So the day of
sacrificing the Lamb could not be prevented. But all must kill it on one and
the same day. Now we say our Lord prevented the Jews one day: upon S. Math.
26. So we teach that he ate a Pascha not killed in the Temple: and make him a
destroyer of Salvation. Jews never did cast greather blasphemies against our
Redeemer. The Bishops should do well to publish repentance of that note,
before they give sleep to their eyes, after they see this reproof: or with all
speed. If not, they shall see him whom they have pierced, Apoc. 1. For the
trespass is doubtless tresgrand.

Of a slander cast upon the Jews: which they retort upon the holy Gospel.
THus we say to S. Mat. 26. Our Lord Jesus celebrated not the Passover the
same day that the Jews did. But he with his Disciples ate the Lamb the
fourtenth day of the first month (which is March) but the Jews celebrated the
Passover the day following, at even, after sun set, Jesus Christ being in the
grave. These be our words the very poison to all the Gospel. Which error
the Jews blase (for of old scholemen through Europe broched it and Jews read
it) and we by this and such are holden dogs.

How confidently the Jews protest that they kill him which passes the
fourtenth day: for the killing of the Lamb or kid Pascha.
THat the fourtenth day of Nisan the whole nation killed the Passover, thus
Rambam or Maymonides records that: in corban Pasch. From the Law. Exodus 12.
It is an express commandment, to kill the Pascha in the month Nisan, in the
fourtenth day of the month: and he that breaks this commandment and
kills it not the 14. day, being not defild nor in a far journey, by contempt
is guilty of being rooted out. Thus do the Jews protest against our slander,
old, and not ours first, above 423. years old: or the time that Rambam made
against us his Thalmud: against us Rambam does protest the day never to have
been altered: while we pretend S. John's Pascha cha. 18.28. for our warrant, we
draw errors upon errors.

How our note checketh the express word of our own Gospel.
THus it is written Mat. 26. You know that after two days the Pascha is kept:
and the son of man is given up, to be crucified. This speech imports a
general agreement for the Pascha. And so much says S. Marc. chap. 14. On the
first day of unleavened bread, when THEY sacrificed the Pascha, two of his
Disciples said: Where will thou that we go and prepare that thou may eat
the Pascha. This text tells expressly that our Lord and all Jews kept one and
the same day, for the Lamb: to kill it on the fourteenth day, and to eat it on
the fifteenth: the night that followed, that year, thursday. Friday night by
the Jews. So the Gospel tells how gross we are.

Of the Pascha called Chagigah, or holy day Feast, or peace-offring with the
Lamb, of Oxkind, that might be eaten two days.
THE New Testament searches all the Thalmud: and in few words tells of the
Pascha called Chagigah, so much as the Jews in many leaves. Moses says Deuteronomy.
16. Thou shall sacrifice a Pascha unto the Lord: of the flock and of the heard.
The practice came notable in Josias, 2. Chro 35. Josias gave the people flocks
of sheep, and kids, all for the Passover, and three thousand Oxen. This
passover is handled pla^nly by Aben Ezra, (upon Deuteronomy. 16.) comparing the Law
with the story. And thus says Iarchi there: If to a Passover many belong,
they add to it Chagiga, Oxen, for the holy day Feast. And soon after. The
propre sense of the Scripture is: The flesh of the Chagigah Passover, which
thou do sacrifice in the evening, shall not continue through the first good
day, unto the morning of the second: But it is eaten the fourtenth day and the
fiftenth. And so it is handled in the Masseceth or treatise of the Passover:
in the Babylonian Thalmud: Limmed Al chagigath Arbaa esser neeceleth le seen
iamim ve lailah echad. He teaches: The Pascha Chagigah of the fourteenth day,
is eaten for two days and one night. And of this addition the Law Deuteronomy. 16.
speaks. And thou shall rejoice before the Eternal thy God: and thou shall be
thoroughly merry. Wherein was used all feastiuity, as men do to chere up them
selves. Now for the Lamb Pascha, they worked half the day, as the Ierusalemy
and the Babylonian notes: and if it fell upon a Sabbath, they did kill it, and
do all the Temples duty: but did not roste it at home that day: for the Law,
Thou shall not kindle fire on the Sabbath. Wherefore our ignorance is
unspeakable, the ear can not be filled with the hearing of it, nor the ey
with beholding. That shall appear better by laying down S. John's words. chapter
18.28. It was morning, and they went not into Praetorion, that they should not
be defiled, but might eat the Passover. This shows not the Lamb but the Ox,
an addition for joy, here joined. And to make S. John yet more plain, the
words of Maymonides in korban Pascha, chapter 10. shall be translated.

Thus he says: When they offered the Pascha in the first month, they offered
it with the peace offerings of the fourtenth day: Oxen or flock beasts, great
or little, male or female, as all the sacrifices of the peace offerings, etc. The
Chagigah was not offered: if the Lamb sufficed the company: and it was a
voluntary: not of commandment: and it was eaten for two days and one night.
Thus Maymonides clears the Gospel: and tells that Saint John spoke from
the depth of the Thalmudiques knowledge.

Of HELL, Hellish in our Creed.
Jews seek no more nor ever sought, the^ that we said our Lord went to HELL.
Thereupon they adventure their salvation and safely may, that so he should not
be the son of God. For his own words say: Luc: 16. That none ca^ pass from
the one place to the other. Yet in England the Princes Religion was disturbed.
Our Princes swear to the Gospel. And it is Atheism to say that it is not
plain, to the Godly. Paradise, the hand of God, the Holy, Heaven, received our
Lords only holy soul going hence. By the Greek Creed Hades: as Hades has for
the godly, eue^ by Heathen, the meadows of the godly. And by the Latins: Apud
inferos, the good have: Certu^ in coelo and definitum locum. D. Bilson
disturbeth all. He grants, that our L. went, not hence to Hell, but hence to
Heaven. And we never heard of contention but for one of these two poinctes. The
first he pretended to defend: but he betrayeth that: and agrees with his
adversary, reformed Churches, and most constant truth. After all he inventeth
new, and rages upon him that forced him to faith, in these words: in his
Sermon book against M. Jacob, folio 419. Tell then your abettor that all the
Realm will take him not only for a rayler against all honesty, but a lier
against all duty that voucheth so confidentlie: King Edw. the sixth and his
subjects held that Christ his soul never went to Gehenna: and the Realm
knows the Qu. oath, as also the Q. adventureth her eternal state. A man would
not think that a reasonable creature would so rage against one for the common
opinion of Christendom. With the same skill he makes S. Paul Ro^. 10. speak
matter senseles: and Abysson nether after Heathen, nor Lxx Ps ^1. (wc place he
regarded) nor any Ebrewe, nor Thalmu^iques: but after the Deuels Luc. 8. and
Devilish Zoh^t upon Genesis ^.
These be no states to come within his unclean mouth. He may do well to
remember who they be of whom it is written: They despise government: and
speak ill of them that be in authority, as raging waves of the sea, foming out
their own shame. Now to confute him the Zurick confession shall be sufficient: it
was allowed in England. Thus it stands. Per inferos intelligimus non locum
supplicij designatum impijs, sed defunctos fideles, quemadmodum per superos
adhuc superstites in vita. Proinde anima Christi descendit ad inferos, id est,
delata est in sinum Abrahae: in quo collecti fuerunt omnes defuncti fideles.
Ergo cum Latroni secum crucifixo dixit, hodie mecum eris in Paradiso, promisit
ei consortium vitae, and beatorum spirituum. Licet enim Dominus descendisse
dicatur, fit tamen ex more loquendi. Confitemur in hoc articulo animas esse
immortales, easque protinus a morte comporea transire ad vitam. To this may
come his own words, fol. 219. We have no warrant in the word of God so to
fasten Christ's soul unto Hell for the time of his death, that it might not
be in Paradise before it descended into Hell. And for his new, these: fol.
154. The sense of the Creed may and must be, that Christ after his body was
buried in soul, descended unto that place which the Scripture properly calls
(Hades) HELL. The Lybian sands may as well be reckoned as Bilsons heresies upon
this course. His pen tells all learned, he is a babe: and he deliteth to show
his folly. Archb. WH. could confess error: and send Geffrey King his Chaplein
for Basil to confess so: when he saw, all the world should force him. D.
Bilson has a mind to be famous for millions of errors. But your Majesty will
make him yield. Francfurt mart would make all loath him. If it please your
highness that shall discuss the Question. I will defend your Majesty's
Religion: and accuse him of strange, new fangled, and most detestable heresy.

Of a greater injury to Christ and his nation.
THE Archisynagogue of Byzantum or Constantinople, sent an Epistle to England,
desirous to be taught in the conference of both Testaments: and how all things
falling out in our life may be discussed without traditions, which Jews say,
Moses gave by word of mouth to Iosuah or Jesus: and so man unto man still. Upon
this, all the Thalm. speaks. And his demand argued a scholar: who knew that
none of wit would meddle with him, that knew not the Prophets and Thalmuds as
well as he. This Epistell was sent to England: thence to me to Basil. There I
printed two impressions. And gave the copies to be dispersed quickly over
Europe and Turkey: And I printed in Ebrew and Greek to Archb. WH. and his
brethren, how they might honor Christianity, handling such and such poinctes
learnedly. And I continually sent treatises to Constantina, showed before to
Jews of Germany. For this a libell was allowed, against God, and against your
M. termed the Scottish mist: and aganst my poor self, that the printed
Epistle was forged by me. For this I gave I.C. the Anathema Maran Atha: and if
he had done so in Germany, an axe had cut off his head. His G. protested he
never spoke, never dealt against me: and turned the Anathema upon his Chaplein.
This contempt of Christianity was the greatest that ever has been heard in
Christendom: and a Greek Oration complaining of it to all Christendom was
allowed by the Lords of Francfurt, a little before Q. Elizabeth's death: upon
that, not printed: that if justice be showed at home, foreign complaints may
surcease. God will plague all that put up such injuries against Christ: and the
clearing of all the Bible for Jews and Gentiles: wherein our Machmadean
errors have been detected to be ridiculous to all Jews.

How the Jew should be answered.
THE Lords of Bearne in Zuitzerland offered me a good place of professing Ebrew
and all my charges for Printing aunsweres to this Jew: But with this addition.
No stranger that means not to dye amongst them, shall be preferred: who
afterward may grieve them, in opening of their affairs. That I refused: and
told of my hope in your Majesty. Now if it be your highness will to allow me a
pension to buy all Hebrew and Thalmudiques helps, and to hyre common Ebrew
setters at Venice or Basil, the Bible and the Thalmud shall be opened by Gods
help, to the contentment even of the Rhomists: or if your highness grant me but
your princely letters of favor to Germany Princes, they will deffray my
charges. A Prince to whose ancestors all the Jews of the Empire paid for their
dwelling: saving them of Francfurt, and has many of them now his tenants,
would willingly have employed me that way. But without your highness leave, I
could not then resolve.

Epilogue.
THVS I have showed your Highness of our corrupt dealing against our own
Religion. And your Majesty's bare word may cause the Bishops to put forth some
little book: as amending faults escaped. Seeing many thousand copies
translations of the Ebrew and Greek Testament have been sold, their escapes
will vex many, unless particular warnings be given of the^. Only the time of
our Lord his birth as we hold it: where the conception should be, this common
error can not and needs not to be amended: Seeing we reckon from the
conception. And the memory of story we may celebrate, as we hold it convenient
But he that shall defend S. Luke must be circumspect herein: Jews have long
examined what to object. I hope your M. shall see that by the right handling of
this cause, Jews shall more confess that your highness kingdom, in the ends of
the earth, is a chief possession of Christ: and has a Cherub, an oincted
defender of faith in the Garden of Eden, in the holy mountain of God, Sion the
Heavenly: and fiery stones of noble Princes: where one is the Beryl that
bears all the Tribes: and the flaming carbuncle overshining all: and that
such shall be in your glorious Majesty, and in your most noble posterity, while
the sun shines.

Your Majesty's most humble, hearty and faithful subject, HVGH BROVGHTON.

Amend the faults thus.
A. page 8. hightened read lightened.

B. page 4. Athosskes, read Atoss. page 8. Alexander read Philip.

C. page 2. greath reed great. page 3. for, in Babylon read under Persia. page
4. the stretch. read to. Exatost read Erat. page 7. line vlt. for 10* read 20.

D. page 3. we fetched. reed were.

E. page 1. of here, read or. Eraunce read France.

F. page 7. Ocharias, read still Ochosias.

G. page 1. is bed. read his. page 2. in the marg. means read Madness. page 7.
hige read high. page 8. kowen, read known.

H. page 5. in the margent for understand, read understood.

I. page 3. appeared: bad. read appeared bad, in k. page 1. for 423. read 543.

K. page 2. smak read spoke. page 8. for 130* read 60.

L. page 5. for sorrowful Enoch, read Enos. page 8. for Iaspes read Iaspis.

M. page 1. Beniaminus read Beniamins. page 6. dnm read dum.

N. page 1. dead read deed. page 2. Gemehel, reed Gamaliel. page 8. greather
read greater.


