DEMANDS TO BE PROPOVNDED OF CATHOLICS TO THE HERETICS. By Richard Bristow,
Priest, and Doctor of Divinity.

Taken partly out of his late English book of Motives to the Catholic faith,
partly out of his printed Latin book of the same matter.

For John Heigham. With permission, Anno 1623.

Mat. 16. Aedificabo Ecclesiam meam: and portae inferi non praeualebunt
aduersus eam. I will build up my Church, and hell gates shall not prevail
against it.

Marc. 1.3. Caelum and terra transibunt, verba autem mea non transibunt. Heaven
and earth shall pass: but my words shall not pass.

Hic libellus est Catholicus, elegans, apprime vtilis, and praelo dignus.

Ita testor Gulielmus Alanus, S. Theol. Duaci Professor Regius. DEMANDES TO BE
Propounded unto all Heretics.
UNDERSTANDING (gentle Reader) that many are desirous of my late book of
Motives to the Catholic faith, who notwithstanding cannot come thereby, partly
because there were but few printed, partly because a great part of those few
fell into the Heretics hands, God so ordaining it in testimonium ills, for a
witness unto them: and not minded to repair the Printe, although of some
desired: I thought good, for some satisfaction of the said, and for further
propagatio^ of the truth, to the salvation of my dear deceived countrymen, to
set out this little Pa^flet. which albeit to some may for the quantity seem but
a trifle, yet whosoever will voutsafe to peruse it, shall find it (I trust)
full of most just and weighty considerations to believe the Catholics, of
this time also, and not the Heretics.

The manner of it I have conceived by way of Demaundes to be made by Catholics
unto Heretics, to confound therewith the obstinate, and to convert the^ that
be more tractable. And although in these Demandes I will be very brief, as only
to put the learned in mind of that they have read or may read, and to show
them how to use it, to profit both the^ selves and others: yet shall I touch
the matter in every one of them (by the grace of God) sufficiently for all
sorts. But if any man desire a larger declaration of them, he shall in my late
book of Motives for most of the^ find enough; and for all of them much more in
my latin book (which work, the^ only promised, he has since most learnedly
performed) of the same matter, and that somewhat of an other sort, and in
another order the^ I did before in English, which by these Demaundes may partly
be coniectured. Beseeching most humbly the deceuers, if they shall clearly
see in their consciences, that they can not reply to these Demaundes; that
then they will for Christ's sake vouchsafe to be good to their own souls, and
to spare the seely people.

The 1. Demand. Touching the disputation made at Carthage.
FIRST then in the name of God, let it be demanded of the said deceauers, or of
any other Heretic, and especially of them that will seem to be learned,
whether they have not read or heard of Collatio Carthaginensis. The conference,
or disputation made a Carthage in Afric, almost twelve hundred years ago,
between Saint Augustine (on the one side) and his fellows the other Catholic
Bishopes of that Country; and on the other side the Bishops of the
Donatistes, who were Heretics, likewise of that Country. Which disputation
being then presently taken word for word of diverse swift Notaries, was
afterward more briefly written by S. Augustine himself, and is at this day to
be seen in the seventh Tome of his works, in his book called Breuiculus
Callationis: An abridgment of the Conference.

If they know of the said conference, let them then be asked, whether the
Question there between the Catholics and the Donatists, were not the same
that is now between the Catholics and the Protestants with all other
Heretics of this time: to wit, Which of us have the Church of Christ,
wherher we, or they. And because these Heretics call earnestly for plain
Scripture, and make as though they would yield most gladly thereunto: Let them
say, whether those Catholics did not bring for their church very many most
plain testimonies of holy Scripture: as is more orderly to be seen there in
another book of S. Augustins, named De vnitate Ecclesiae: Of the Churches
unity. Whether S. Augustine (I say) and those other Catholics, did not there
most manifestly and most mightily out of the Scriptures, prove a visible
Church, beginning visibly at Jerusalem, and lasting visibly not only unto their
time, but also unto our time, and even so continually to the worlds end. And
whether such a Church make not as much against the Protestants, and all other
Heretics, as against the Donatistes; and as much for us that be Catholics
now, and for such as shall be Catholics at any time to the worlds, end, as
for S. Augustine and the other Catholics of that time: because neither the
Protestants, nor no other Heretics, no more tha^ the Donatists, have so
lasted, or ever shall so last continually, nor no other company of Christians,
but only ours.

Finally, if they will say, that S. Augustine and his fellows there did not,
nor could not out of the Scripture, prove sufficiently such a Church, let them
be demanded whether they dare take part with the Donatistes against those
Catholics; and whether they will, or be able to answer their Scriptures, for
and in behalf of those Heretics. At leastwise, because they talk so much of
scripture, and of only Scripture; whether they be able all the pack of the^
(as S. Augustine also there requires of the Donatistes) to allege for their
own Church, or Churches, so much as one plain text of Scripture (as he there
alleges for our church, in manner aforesaid, very many, and very plain,
showing also there, that it cannot err) whether they can bring us (I say) in
so weighty a matter, as whereupon depends al our controversy, any one plain
saying of holy Scripture, to prove that Christ's Church beginning visibly at
Jerusalem, should so continue but a time, and then afterward should utterly
either perish, or vanish away: and that many hundred years after, one Luther
in Saxony, or one Calvin at Geneua, or any other in any other country,
should bring it to life, or to light again?

The 2. Demand. Building of the Church.
WHEREAS Christ and his Christians have, besides Schismatikes and Heretics,
two other kinds of enemies, to wit, Panimes and Jews: and whereas the ancient
writers have made many goodly books against those enemies, either to confound
them or to persuade them, that Christ is God, as it was then, in the first
beginning of Christians, very necessary for them so to do: Let the learned
Protestants be likewise demanded, whether those christian writers in those
books have not made, amongst others this argument, to prove that christ is God:
namely Saint Chrysostom, both against the Panimes, in his book named, Contra
Gentiles demonstratio, quod Christus sit Deus: A plain demonstracion against
the Gentiles tha Christ is God, and also against the Jews, in the second of
his five Orations that he made against them.

That Christ (I say) is God, because his church, although it had but a small
and poor beinning, and eue^ then very many, very mighty, and very fierce
enemies, yet could not, nor cannot ever possibly be suppressed: but
contrariwise, being in the beginning as it were but one little sparkle of fire,
and whole floudes, yea seas of persecutions being poured out upon it; yet could
it not be extinguished but contrariwise (I say) partly has, and partly shall
set all the world on fire, first or last bringing all to christ: according to
christ's own prediction, which he also does there allege: Aedifieabe Ecclesiam
meam, Mat. 16.
and Portae inferi non praeualebu^t aduersus eam. I will build up my church,
and Helgates shall not prevail against it.

Now let it be considered, whether this argument do hold, if it be true
which they say, to wit, that the church of Christ was not invincible, but that
it has been these many hundred years quite suppressed; yea and in
Chrysostomes own time no church of Christ at all. For they know, if they
grant that the^ to have been the true church, that they must grant also ours
now to be the true church, as being all one with that. If then they will say,
that this is not a good argument, let the^ be further demanded, whether they
dare take part also with the very Jews and Paynims against the Christians,
yea and against the Godhead of CHRIST himself; and whether they will go about,
or whether they be able (which the Jews and Paynimes were never able, nor
never shall be able) to answer this argument.

And the^ again: How they can for shame say, theirs to be the Church of
Christ, and not rather a plain Apostasy from Christ, that must needs labor
to answer the arguments of CHRISTIAN men, which they have made against such
infidels, to prove that Christ is God. And therefore again, whether it be not a
sufficient Motive for any Christian man to be of our Church, which he so
plainly sees, and anon more plainly shall see, to stand upon the very same
arguments against these Heretics, whereupon the Divinity of Christ himself
does stand against the Jews and Painymes.

Finally let the^ consider, whether it be not evident by this, that when they
talk so much of Persecution, to bring us thereby into envy, and themselves
into favor, they do not give wise me^ occasion to mark that they cannot be
the Church of Christ. For Persecution is not a Motive of it self alone to
believe any. Otherwise not only one sort, but all sorts should be believed,
because all are persecuted, Iulij. 22. Stow.
as themselves of late did burn certain in Smithfielde.

But persecution is a Motive after this sort as S. Chrysostom here does
handle it, to wit, that Christ must be believed to be God, because, according to
his own saying no persecution could, or can overthrow his Church, which being
once granted, that the Church of Christ (I say) always stands and
contineweth, let the Heretics say, whether they had any cause to rise: and
therefore if they be wise, let them lie down again, and return to the Church
and save their souls.

The 3. Demand. Going out.
WHEREAS it is manifestly written in the holy Scripture of the Apostles acts,
Act. 2.4.5. and 28. Act. 15.
that the Church of Christ, (a) began visibly a Jerusalem and visibly growing
on, (b) came at length also visibly to Rome. Whether the Protestants can show
us out of Scripture or story, that the Romans (with whom, as it is manifest,
we agree in all points) who then were in the church, went again out of the
Church, forsaking at any time the communion or company of other christians then
living, and making a new several church or company by themselves asunder. So,
as it is known themselves have done, being first of our company: and their
Captains, for the most part also of our Monks and Friars as Luther
Oecolampadius, Hooper, Bale, with many others: and afterward breaking from our
company by disobedience, and contempt of their ordinary Superiors: and so,
seditiousely setting up these factions of theirs, which now we see. Whether
also they can name us any company, that ever since the Apostles time so did,
and obstinately stood in it, that was not Schismatical?

As it is plain, that they are Gono out, so it is plain (I say) that we never
went out, whereof it follows sensibly, that as they be notwithin, so we be still
within And therefore let them be urged, what they can say to this, either for
themselves, or against us. Or rather let them, if they be wise, give over, and
quickly without more a do come in again.

The 4. Demand. After rising.
WHETHER they be able, to name any time, since the Apostles time, when our
Church first Arose: Or (because they refuse not only our company, as
Schismatiks, but also our Faith as Heretics, and also almost all our Religion,
as plain Apostatats) whether they can name any certain Author and first
beginner of the peculiar Articles of our Faith and Religion, but Christ and his
Apostles only? Let them be urged to name the Article, the time, and person.
Sure it is, that they can name no such.

But on the other side, it is evident, that their company or companies
began, of late; the Author thereof is known, the time of his rising not only
recorded in Histories, but also fresh in the elders memories, and very many
Articles of his Doctrine before unheard of. Many such companies are noted in
Histories, rising so with new Articles, after the beginning of the church as
Nouatians Sabellians, Arrians, Pellagians, and very many more. Now for defense
of their own doing, let the^ look amongst them all, and name us some one of
them, that notwithstanding this their rising afterward, was not Schismatical,
nor their Articles Heretical? Sure it is again, that they can name no such,
and therefore is it evident, both that we be still the true, and Primitive or
first christians: and also that they be of a new false making, and not true
christians.

The 5. Demand, VVondred at.
ALso whether at any time the christian people wo^dered at our Religion and
Doctrine or any point thereof, as then first appearing, and before not heard of:
and whether the Pastors and Doctors of the church then presently controled the
same as new and diuerrs from the Doctrine that was before? And whether that all
Heresies were not so wo^dred at, and so controlled at their first appearing?
WHETHER also that which seemed so strange to them that stood in unity, which
was so gainesaid and resisted, in books Disputations and councels, by them
that had the charge of the Church of Christ, were not always Heresy, and the
Professors of it (if they were obstinate) always Heretics, without exception?

As our doctrine therefore, which even from Christ and his Apostles, is come
quietlye to our hands without such co^tradiction, is sure and Catholic: so
that of the Protestants and Puritanes, which was straight with the sword of
Gods Church sticked in Luther, and never since has ceased to be by learned
Catholic men confuted, and has been by a General Council also examined and
accursed, At Trent
nor never shall be able to get one day of quiet possession, but ever oppugned
and assaulted, until it be quite again dispatched, as all other Heresies have
been before it: is most certainly without all doubt heretical.

The 6. Demand. The nature of Catholics.
WHENSOEVER there was such Going out, and such after rising of some, and such
wondering at it of others: whether al ways then, in talk and in books, one
sort of Christians were not commonly called Catholics, Aug. co^. ep. Fund cap.
4 and de vera relig. c. 7
and well known by that name. And whether the said Christians were not always
true Catholics; and so at length of all men confessed to be, Victor
deperse-Vand. l. 3. fol. 34
whatsoever smoke for a while their enemis made against the^, by putting other
names upon them?

And now at this time of their Going out, and new rising, let the^ say, whose
name that is, ours or theirs? for example: At Paris very lately a young
Gentleman of our nation, called M. Culpeper, lying on his death bed: the
night before he died, there came unto him a country man of ours, as he said,
upon a message, And being there upon admitted unto him, by them that were about
him praying for him and teaching him how to dye; after that he had done his
Masters commendations, by and by he broke out, and said unto him in these very
words: O Master Culpeper, In any case renounce the Catholic faith. Now, who
hears this, and knows not, what faith that good fellow meant? as himself
also would not so have spoken, but that he knew well enough, the term to be
neither strange, nor ambiguous, nor obscure? Or whether should I also not be
understood if I should tell further, how the Gentleman died Catholikely,
notwithstanding, and that a little before his death he said, as in an agony to
a Catholic learned holy man, his leader and director in soul matters that
stood then by his bed side: O tell me, I pray you, am I in the right way?
And he assuring him that he was: That is well, quoth, he: And will you go with
me: The said catholic affirming, that he would: That is well, quoth he
again: and so lay still a while. And anon again he said But tell me, I pray
you, am I right? And he again with good words assuring him: That is well,
says the Gentleman again: And will you go with me? Then after his answer, a
little silence again: and with very cheerful countenance the Gentlemen
says: O now I see my self, that I am right. Behold, my good Angel has
most glorioussye appeared unto me, and showed me the door open for me, that I
nay even now enter in. But you (quoth he to the good man, with whom he talked)
may not yet come. And so lying a while longer with a smilinge countenance, gave
up his happy ghost: Iul. 24.
Dying, I say, a Catholic By which name here I ask the Protestant, whether
they know not what I mean? As likewise in all other books written now adays,
when they happen commonly upon that name, whether they or any body else stagger
at it as not knowing, whether we or they are meant thereby?

The 7. Demand. The name of Heretics.
LIKEWISE, whether they that have been of christian men, at any time since
heresies first rose, commonly called Heretics, and plainly known by that name,
have not always been heretics also indeed, and so ever in the end, Soz. li. 7
ca. 4. Iren. li. 3 ca. 15.
of al men confessed to be. Let them run over the Ecclesiastical Historyes,
and writings of the Fathers, and bring us some exception.

And let them say withal, at this time, whose name that is, ours or theirs. As
in books written now a days; upon whom that name runs, and that so
roundly, that the Reader (I warrant you) whosoever he be, never sticks at the
matter, but knows well of whom he reads, to wit, of them, and not of us.

The 8. Demand. The Name of Protestants.
WHETHER out of all this time since Christ's Ascension, Hier. co^. Lucif, Aug.
de vtil. cre. c. 7. Chris. ho 33. in Acta. Ire. li. 1. ca. 20. Lact. li. 4. c.
30. Opt. li. 3.
they can bring us any that in respect of the doctrine, which they did
profess, or in respect of the several company, with which they did
communicate, had a new name, made of some man's name, or otherwise taken up;
whereby they commonly termed themselves, and in the world generally were
termed, and immediately known thereby (but if they were obstinate) they were
ever Heretics or Schismatikes: as Arians, Pelagiaus, Donatists, etc.

Again, at this time, which of us have such new names, as whose names these
be, Protestants, Puritans, Precisians, Unspotted brethren, Fellows of love,
Superilluminate, Porklinges, Lutherans, Caluinistes, Anabaptists, with many
such more? And further let them be asked, whether they can avouch their common
slander, that among us also there are such names, as Dominicans, Franciscans,
Jesuits, with such other names of our Religious? Let them tell us then, what
several article of faith, or what several co^munions those Religious have:
and briefly, whether it be not evident, that they, and we that are not Monks,
be both of one faith, and both of one communion, that is to say, both
frequenting the same churches, and the same Sacraments. And as for the name of
Papists, let them show, that it was ever heard of before Luther. Sure it is,
that it was not: and therefore can it not be the name of us, who (by their own
confession) were many hundred years before Luther was borne; and not all that
while without a name, but then, and now, Aug. de vtil. cre. c. 17. and to. 6.
Ser. con. Ar. and Col. 3 diei. nu. 2. Basil. ep. 71.
and ever named Catholics, although it pleased Luther to nicke-name us
Papists, as other Heretics before also nicke-named the true Catholics, our
forefathers, calling them Homousians, Caesarians, and such like.

Let them tell you this also: why they do not term us by some one Popes
name, as, Gregorians of Gregory, or Leonians of Leo, that was when Luther
began, or in like manner of some one or other. So as we term them of Luther
Lutherans, of Calvin Caluinists, and others, Arrians of Arius, Pelagia^s of
Pelagius etc. Why (I say) do not they likewise term us by the name of some one
Pope, but generally Papists of Pope, whereas there have bin Popes always since
the Apostles times? What is the cause of this difference in our dealing. Let
them (if their wisdom can) give me any other cause, but only this which
bitterly condemns them, and plainly clears us: That, whereas we have truly
to charge them, and all other Heretics, with following some one man, that was
a new Master, and a deviser of some new doctrine: they cannot so charge us
with any one Pope at all, because the Popes doctrines that we do follow them
in, were not at any time newly devised by them, but received of the Apostles,
and so kept continually of them al, even unto this day. And therefore Luther
having nothing to charge us with in this foresaid manner, invented this general
term of Papists, manifestly against himself, being rightly scanned, as the
wise do see.

The 9. Demand. Conversion of Heathen Nations.
VVAEREAS Christ did say that All Nations should be converted from their
Paganism, and be taught, Io. 10 16. Mat. 28 19 Mar. 16.20.
and hear his Gospel preached unto them: and whereas his Apostles began
most gloriousely to do the same: let the Protestants be asked, who they are,
that did, and do accomplish the same? Romans 20 c. 18.
whether they ever converted any Nation from Paganism to be Christian, and not
rather do only auerte Christians from the faith of Christ, so as all other
Heretics have done before them? And on the other sid, whether they know not,
how even at this present our church fills very many and most ample Nations of
the East, and weast India with the Ghospel, and knowledge of christ? And whether
they do not confess themselves, that likewise all the other Nations, which
have been converted within these 1000. years, which are very many, were
converted by our Church? Then, of other nations before converted, let them be
urged to name any one, either converted by them, or not converted by us, but by
some other Church and to some other Gospel, or some other Christ?

Finally let them peruse all Histories, and report truly, whether they do not
al note, those nations, then to have been converted unto christ, when they
were converted unto our Religion: and if any but we chanced to have to do with
the conversion of certain, that their conversion was never accounted right and
good, until they were amended by us, and (namely) united to the Sea of Rome.
And therefore let them be asked, whether we be not, or who else be christ's
witnesses vsque ad vltimum terrae, Act. 1.
even to the furthest end of the earth.

The 10. Demand. Touching Miracles.
WHEREAS again Christ confirmed his own preaching to the Jews by working of
Miracles, Io. 10.37. and 12.37. and. 15.24. and 20 30.31. Mar. 16.17. Io.
14.12. Mar. 16.20
and sending his Apostles with their Successors to convert all other Nations,
promised and fortold, that he would comfirme their preaching likewise with
Miracles, as also the Gospel says that he did.

We ask the Protestants, whether they know not by Historyes, that at the
conversion now of the Indes, and before also at the conversion of those other
nations, by our church, great Miracles are, and evermore were wrought by our
preachers. And whether it follow not thereupon, that our Preachers are they,
whom Christ sent out, and with whom christ works: and that their preachinge
is true, as christ's preaching was true, and his Apostles preaching true, and
that our Nations therefore be well converted as S. Peter, S. Barnabee and S.
Paul do prove thereby (I say, by Miracles) that the first Gentiles were well
converted by them? Act. 11.17. and 15.9.12.


And besides the first conversion of Nations, whether they read not in most
approved authors, that afterward also almost continualy in every Nation of our
church, most undoubted Miracles be, and have been wrought, innumerable holy men
and women of our church approved and honored by God with that gift, as S.
Bernard S. Frauncis S. Dominicke, etc. and very many articles and points of
our Doctrine also in particular so confimed, as the B. Sacrament, the sign of
the Cross, Relikes. etc. In so much that the ancient Christians writing
against the Jews and Paynimes for the Godhead of Christ, Aug. de ciui. Dei
lib. 22. ca. 5.8. and de vtil. cred. c. 14.15 16. and Re. lib. 1 cap. 14. Chry.
to 5. cont. Gent. de vita Babila. col. 885.
do first show, that the miracles of Christ him self and his Apostls were
wrought to set up avisible Church, that should continue for ever (whereof it
follows, that all Heretics do rise in vain:) And secondly they do by such
Miracles of the Church, as I have said daily to be seen, prove unto those
Infidels the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles, recorded in the holy
Scripture, which those Infidels did deny, because they did not see the^.) Let
the Protestants therefore be asked, whether they dare join here in also with
the Infidels against the christians, and answer for them, that the argument is
not good, because these Miracles of the Cross, and of Relickes, and such like
are not Miracles, but illusions. And then when they shall by and by hear the
Infidels say even so also of Christ's and his Apostles Miracles, let us see a
Gods name, how wisely the Protestants will reply, and show them a plain
difference between christ's Miracles, and our Miracles? Or rather shall we not
see them hereby not only confirm the Infidels in their incredulity, but also
prepare weak christians to infidelity, yea and them selves also ready to
give over thereunto: as in our country (God help) who sees not?

The 11. Demand. Touching England our own Country.
AND here namely of our own Country a few questions: whether it be not plain
by the History of Venerable Bede our Countreiman, and other Authors that our
English Nation a thousand years ago, in S. Gregory's time, was converted lib.
ca 23.
by men of our catholic Roman church? and converted to al points of our
catholic Roman Faith, as lib. 1 ca. 26
Mass, lib. 3. k. 14.24
Purgatory, lib. 1. c. 32
Saints, etc. And, that our said conversion was confirmed then lib. 1. ca. 26.
l. 2. ca. 2. l. 4. ca. 13 f. lib. 1. ca. 4
by wonderful Miracles.

And if this be not enough, whereas the Britons or welsh men were converted
before us more then four hundred years, above fourtene hundred years ago, in
S. Eleutherius time: whether they were converted by S. Eleutherius to one
faith? and we English men by S. Gregory to lib. 1. c. 7.8.15.18
another faith? Or, whether lib. 2 ca. 2
the greatest point, wherein the Bipes of Wales differed from our Apostles,
were not about the Sunday upon which Easter should be kept, which the
Protestants pardy (although ignorantly, and falsely) make to be no great
matter. And, whether in that point also, and in any other of less weight,
wherein they did differ, the truth were not (even by the Protestants own
confession) on our Apostles side, and not upon the welshe men's side.

Now for them to depart from this faith so long continuing, so confirmed, so
ancient, so close to the Apostles time, and therefore (as also because it came
from Rome) sensibly Apostlicall? having also the plain divine testimony of so
many Scriptures, Ps. 71. b. 10. and 96. a 1. Isa. 41. a 1.5. a 2. a 4.49. a
1.60. 5. b. 9. Soph. 2. a 11.
as amongst the conversion of Nations speak expressly of Islands: let them say,
what moved them? what Miracles did Luther work? what Miracles did Calvin
work, or any other of their new masters, and false Apostles? yea what other
thing carried away our country into this Apostasy, but only sin, as all the
world knows? and the same also daily so filling it with all kind of sin
and wickedness, that there must needs follow of it, destruction both temporal
and eternal?

The 12. Demand. Visions.
Whether they know not that both in Bed. Hist. l. 2 a 6.12
our Country and also in all other Christian nations, innumerable holy Persons
of our communion, and very many points of our doctrine, have been by God from
heaven approved with most undoubted visions, and them also very often sensible:
as for example. The Amb. sermon. 61. Aug. de unit. Ec. cap. 26. Paulin. ep. 12.
ad Seue c. Io. 1. c. 33. Act. 2. c 17 and 22 b 6. 2. Cor. 12. a 1.
Relikes of S. Geruasius, and Protasius revealed at Milane to S. Ambrose
himself; with infinite more of like sort? And whether it be not evident (c) in
the Scriptures, that God used the same means to commend unto us Christ
himself, and his Apostles, and their doctrine? And therefore whether it be not
likewise evident, that whiles they scoff at al visions, they prepare the world
hereby also to scoff at Christ himself.

Finally ask them, why, when they are disposed to scoff at visions, they go
to certain obscure writings, and pick out of them that seems for their
purpose? Why are they afraid to do so with the foresaid visions of S. Ambrose,
and innumerable other such like, most famous, and most certain, which make no
less against them, and no less for us, then those others that they accoumpt
to be uncertain.

The 13. Demand. Honor of Crosses.
WHETHER they have not read in ancient Christian Books made against the
Paynimes, also this argument, to prove that Christ is God: because although a
Galous tree, and every other instrument of execution, be accounted a vile and
dishonorable thing; Deuteronomy. 21 d. 23. Gal. 3. b. 13.
and of al a cross was accounted most vile, and most accursed: yet Christ has
set his holy Cross in such high honor, and estimation, that Emperors and
Emperesses, Kings, and Queens, and all other, men and women, do not only
think themselves happy, if they can get never so little a piece of it, putting
it most honorably in silver and gould, and so hanging it about their necks;
but also make very great account of the only signs thereof, setting it even in
their Regal crowns, and daily printing it in the most noble and most notable
part of their bodies, even in their foreheades. In so much that S. Chrysostom
says boldly thereupon: Vellem audire a Pagano etc. Chrysostom. to. 5. con. Gent.
quod Christus sit Deus. col. 1033
I would feign learn of a Paynim, how it is that the Sign of so cursed a
death is so much desired of all men, but only because great is the power of him
that was crucified?

Ask the vnsigned Heretics, what they can answer here for the vnsigned
Panym? yea whether they be not ashamed and weary of that Religion, that cannot
be defended without pertaking with the Paynims against the Christians, nor
without answering the arguments of Christ's own Divinity: which yet they are
not able to do? And let Christian people remember, that Christians have ever
used to cross themselves; and that therefore these vncrossed Protestants,
unlike and repugnant to Christian men of all times, stand post alone. And then
let the^ further consider, whither so deserte away is like to carry them, if
they return not the sooner to the common Christian way.

The 14. Demand. Virtue of Crosses.
AGAIN, whether they have not read in such Books, Chrysostom. ibidem. Eus. de laud.
Constant. pa. 365. 266 367. Lact. l. 4 cap. 27.
not only (as I have now said) the Honor of the holy Cross, and the very
Signs of it, but also, and much more, the wonderful power and miraculous
virtue of the same, both (I say) of Christ's most holy Cross, and also of the
very Signs thereof, taken and used in argument, to prove unto the Painyms,
that Christ is God? As, because the same drives away Devils out of Idolles,
and out of men's bodies, and heals all diseases, and raises also many times
the very dead them selves. Let them show the Painims the^ how this argument
also may be answered, if they can. Or rather let the^ forsake that Religion,
that so joins with the Paynims against Christ? and return to Christian men
and stand with the^ for Christ.

The 15. Demand. Honor of Saints.
WEATHER they read not like wise in such books, Chris. ibidem. Aug. ep. 42.
and in Psa. 44. Theod. de Cur. Grac. affect. l. 8.
also this argument to prove unto the Paynimes, that Christ is God: Because he
has set his holy servants in so high honor, that the very highest, as
Kings and Emperors, and al others do pray unto the^, and runn to their very
Graves and Relikes, and, think them selves happy, if when they be dead,
chris. ibi. Col. 1033
they may be buried, not only by their Bodies, but also nighe to their
Chapelles. Let them therefore here again help the Painims, if they can. Or
rather let all true Christians look to them selves, and defy both the
Painims, and them.

The 17. Demand. Chris. to 5. cont. Gent. de vica S. Babyla. Theod. ^ ibidem
Aug. d. Ciu. l 22 cap. 9.
Virtue of Saints
AGAIN, whether they read not in such Books, not only (as I have now said) the
Honor of Saints, and of their Relikes, but also, and much more, the miraculous
power of both, of Saints (I say) and of their very Relikes: used in argument,
to prove unto the Painimes, that Christ is God As, because they destroy
Idolles, that is to say, the very Gods of Painims, they yet being but the
Servants of Christ our God? and because they expel Devils also out of men's
bodies, and heal all diseases, and raise many times the dead? and also
mightily and very beneficially do amend corrupt manners of men, and inflame
them with devotion toward God? Let the Protestants here once again help the
Painims, if they can. Or rather let them at lenght leave that Religion, by
which they have so filled our country with Painims and Atheistes because (as
all men may see) it stands so openly against so many most certain grounds
and arguments of Christ's own Divinity.

The 17. Demand. Exorcising of Devils.
YET once again: whether they read not in such Books also this motive
propounded (according to the Luc. 9.1. and 10. c. 19. and 11. c. 20 Mar. 16. d.
17.
Gospel) by most ancient Christian Justin. con. Triphon. Tertul. in Apol. and
ad Scapula^ Cip. adu. Demetr. and de va nitate Idolorum. Arnob. contra Gentes
Lact. l. 2 cap. 16.
writers to the Painimes: That their Idolles were not Gods, but that Christ is
God; because Christian men have amongst them an ordinary power; given by
Christ, to adjure Diuelles, yea and the same Diuelles that were the Painimes
Gods: and with marvelous authority to increase upon them infinite
torments, until by such constraint, they both confess their names, with other
things that they be asked, and also finally depart out of the bodies which
they had posessed. The practice whereof any man that list, may see also at this
day in our Church: as my self, and many other of our Countreimen have seen,
and in all ages the like practice of our Church, (as the learned Protestants
do know) is recorded in Histories: as the Devil never ceasseth thus vexing of
men, so the church never ceasing to use this power of hers against him for such
as seek unto her.

Now let the Protestants that resist this church be asked, what they can
answer to this Motive, in behalf of the Painimes, and of the Devils
themselves, whether they dare say, or can show, that the argument proves not
the Idolles vanity, and christ's Divinity? S. Cyp. de vanitat. Idolor. number. 4.
Con. Car 4. ca. 7. Paulin. in Nata 4. S. Fe licis.
Or that in old time it did, but now does not? And what difference they can
give us between the churchs Exorcismes then, and now? Or rather let the^
humbly confess their fault, that in drawing men away from this church, they
have drawn them from their undoubted sauegarde, and so left them desolate and
open to the Devils invasion, working thereby for the Devils kingdom so
manifestly, that his reigning in their countries, people, and proper persons is
most evident and notorious: which our Exorcistes would (if they might be
suffered) give them to see in many of themselves no less, the^ to Demetrian
the Proconsull of Afrike (who yet thought himself for wit and tongue, against
christ in defense of his Devils, a passing orator) to whom it were good for
the new preachers to consider deeply what S. Cyprian writes: O (says he) that
thou would hear, Cyp. ad Demet. number. 6.
and see them, when of us they be adjured, and tormented with spiritual
whippes, and by torments of words, cast out of bodies by them possessed, etc.
Vent and cognosce vera esse quae dicimus. Come and see by experience, that we
say true. etc. Aut si volueris and tibi credere; de te ipso loquetur, audiente
te, qui nunc tuum pectus obsedit. Or if thou will believe thy self also; out
of thy self shall he speak, in thine own hearing, that has now possessed
thy heart.

The 18. Demand. Destroying of Idolatry.
WHETHER they see not by this that I have said, that as it is our church,
which has converted, and does convert all Nations unto christ, so it is our
church, that has destroyed, and does destroy Idolatry?

Or let them say, whether that both our Nation, and all other Nations now of
christendom, were not before their christening, worshipers of Idols, as
Jupiter, Mars Venus, etc. And whether that upon their Christening by us, they
have not been so fully turned from those Idols, that the Multitude has
forgotten their very names also? And therefore, whether it be any other church
but ours, Zac. 13. a 1.
that fullfilleth the Scriptures, which foretold of the destroying and
forgetting of Idolles, over all the world? C^^^^ S. Babil.
And whether ancient stories and other writers do not report, the same
oftentimes to have been done by our holy Images, signs of the Cross, Relikes
of Saints, and most blessed Sacrament of the Altar? And therefore again,
whether Protestants in calling most blasphemously these points of our Religion,
Idolatry, which (I say) have destroyed, and do destroy Idols be not as blind
as he that says, Isa. 5. c. 20.
white is black; or rather as perverse, as he that says; God is bad?

The 19. Demand. Kings.
VVHERAS the holy Scripture speaks much of the conversion of Is. 49.
Kings at length and namely of the 7. f. 23 b Is. 60. c. 14. b 11.
Roman Emperors, though first most cruel persecutors of the Christians: ask
the Protestants, first whether this do not argue clean against them, that
whereas they say the Church and faith of Christ did soon begin to perish and
vanish quite away, that clean contrary to them (I say) even then, to wit
certain hundred years after the beginning it increased much, and flourished a
great deal more, catching then hold also of those mighty Powers, before, her
persecutours and by their help, in very short time, destroying Idols, and
building Churches; and spreading it self over all the world?

Secondly ask them, whether any one of those Emperors were converted to their
Religion: or whether such of them as were to be commended (for some, and they
well known, fell afterward to be Heretics, though not Protestants.) But of
them, I say, that were most Christian and catholic, as Constant. Theod. etc.
Ask the Protestants whether they are not plainly reported to have been of our
Religion, as Aug. ep. 42. Eus. de vit Constant. l. 3 c. 1. l. 4. c. 58.71.
running to Relikes, praying to Saints, praying for the dead The^ hist. l. c.
17.
submitting themselves to the Church, and generally in all other points so to
be gathered by their laws, and specially by the time when they lived, which
time the heretics do so plainly see to have been ours, that they are fayn to
say, that Christ's church did fail before that time. Thirdly we ask them else,
whether they will (for trial of the truth) get us leave to appear with them
before the Queens highness, and both of us to join, with her Majesty, in that
Religion, which shall be clearly proved to have been the religion of those
Emperors: not only of so many Kings and Queens at home her noble
Progenitors, but of those very Emperors: (I say) whose Religion and conversion
was so long Isa 60. c. 14. d 11.
before more plainly foretold and promised in the Scripture: and there, most
specially the Religion even of those, who^ the great Orator of VVoodstocke
namely commended of late unto her Highness, to wit (a) Theodosius,
Valentinianus, Theod lib. 5. c 36. Soc. l. 7. c. 21.46 Soz. l. 9. cap. 1.2.
and Pulcheria the Virgin and Emperesse?

The 20. Demand. In all persecutions.
BEcause the Roman Emperors first were persecutours and Protestants have
talked much of persecution, as though we used them so as those Tyrants used the
first Christians: to the end that the truth many be plainly known, ask them,
whether they will be content to try this co^trouersy of Religion which is
between us, Comfort sor Catholics in England. Eus. hist. l. 4. c. 14 l. 6. c.
4.9.35. l. 8 cap. 2.17. Cyp. ep 5 34.37.57.69.
by the religion of those ancient Martyrs, and others then in persecution, as
S. Ireneus, S. Cyprian, S. Laurence, and such others as we read of in the
Ecclesiastical Histories, where they write of those persecutions, and was
sensibly the true Religion of Christ? and yet, I warrant you, the learned
Protestants, that have read and seen all, will never be content to be tried by
it. They know to well, that it was not theirs. Otherwise ask them, what it
means, that they and we be so contrary in setting out the lives of Martyrs:
their Fox (for example) being most occupied about their new found Martyrs of
this our age: and our Surius (besides many others) being altogether occupied
about the lives of old Saints, such as have been even from the Churches
beginning? read their lives, and you will not marvel, neither at Fox on the
one side, nor at Surius on the other side.

And not only in the sundry persecutions of the heathen: but ask them likewise
of the sundry persecutions of diverse Heretics; as in the persecution of the
Arians in Afrike, a little after S. Augustines death, whether the Catholics
whom those Heretics did persecute, were not of the same religion, as we whom
these heretics do persecute (S. Victor who then lived with them) writting
that the Arrian King Hunericus permitted the Catholics Vict. de perse. vand. l.
2. fol. 12.
Missas agere, to say Mass in certain Churches; and afterward charged them f.
19.
contra interdictum Missas egisse, to have said Mass in other Churches that
they were forbidden: writing also, that before him the Arian King Gensericus did
forbid them all churches ( Neque Lib. 1. fol. 3.
vsquam orandi aut immolandi concedebatur locus. Neither any place was
permitted us to pray or to Sacrifice: And that thereupon caeperunt Sacerdotes,
qualiter poterant, and vbi poterant ablatis Ecclesijs, Diuina Misteria
celebrare, The Priests began when their Churches were taken from them, to
celebrate the Divine Misteryes, as they might, and where they could: so as they
are feign to do now also in England: Saint Augustine himself being to those
Priests fol. 2.
fellow both in persecution and also in Religion.

The 21. Demand. Churches.
Whether they will be content to be tried by the Relihion of those first
christian churches, or temples, and chapels Eus. hist. l. 7. c. 24. l. 8. c.
that in the foresaid persecutions were by the pagane Emperors ouerthrown? Or
Eus. l. 8. c. 28
by those churches, that were afterward by the Emperors, specially when they
were converted, built up again? 9. c. 8.9. l. 10. c. 2.3.4 and de vit Co^st.
l. 1. c. 40. l. 3. cap. 41.58. Bed. hist. l. 5. c. 12.18. c Bed. l. 3. cap. 2.
Chrysostom. to 5. con. ge^quod Christus sit Deus. col. 1036
Or by the Churches that are now over al Christendom to be seen being the
most lively, and most principal Monumentes of Christianity?

And whereas the Churches now bear plain witness to our Religion, both in
their fashion, and in their furniture, as that they be builded at length into
the East, and the chiefest also in the form of a Cross; and furnished with
Chauncells, Altares, Crosses, and other Images, with holy Relikes with
Chalices, and other holy vessels, and with Holy Vestimentes, etc. Ask the
Protestants, what they read of the ancient and first Churches, whether they
also were not so builded, and so furnished? yea whether very many of these that
are now to be seen, are not of the very first and most ancient. Or when the
Churches began to be changed and altered from the first, to a clean
contrary form and furniture?

As for example in our own Country, whether of late years they were changed
from Bed. l. 2. c. 3.14.16. l. 3. c. 2.7.
those of our first conversion. Or whether those of our first conversion did
differ from Bed. l. 1. c. 6.8.26. l. 2. cap. 5.
the former of the Britons or welshemen? Or, whether of both, English (I say
and Britannes) there are not yet some to be seen: and they, and others as well
in that Island, as in all the rest of Christendom, so like and uniform, that
neither the Heretics can point out so much as one that was of their Religion,
and the Catholics may see Aug. ep. 118. and de bap l. 4. c. 24
by their uniformity, I say) that they have been, and be al of the Apostles
Religion and tradition. And therefore put the Heretics in mind of their
heinous Sacrilege, partly in pulling down so many of the Churches, partly in
usurping the rest, and the Liuinges of al, being the possessions of Christ and
Dowries of his only Catholic Church, and no one of them all builded by
Protestants, nor for Protestants, nor for their women and children.

The 22. Demand. Service.
WHETHER they will be tried by the prayers that were said, or Service that was
done in the foresaid Churches, either before they were throwe^ down by the
Tirantes, or after they were reedified by the Christian Emperors, or any time
since then?

Let them say, what they read thereof likewise^ in all Antiquity, whether they
read not expressly that always there was in the^ Cyp. ep. 69. Eus. de vita
Constant. l. 4. c. 56.71 Aug. de cura pro mort. in fine.
Praying for the dead, and Praying unto Saints; and in administration of the
Sacrament of Baptism, those very August con. Iul. l. 6. c. 8. l. 2. de nup. c.
17 18.19.
Ceremonies which we now use, and which they have laid away, as Exorcisme,
Exufflatio^, Inunction, Consecration of the Font with crossinge of the water,
etc? And, whether they read at any time, when Mass did first come into the
Churches: ye whether they find not expressly as always Altares, chalices, and
Priests, so always Mass and Sacrifice, Cyp. ep 66. August. Confess. l. 9. c.
12 14.
even for the dead also, which they most abhor; with the wholle substance of
the most holy Canon which they have presumed to lay away, not considering that
euidentlye it came of the Apostles, no Heretic being able to bring forth any
other origin of any piece of the said substance thereof? Finally, whether in
all the Mass or other Service of our Church (the which Catholics most
worthily do admire) they find any piece (although it were afterward brought
in) contrary to the old faith, and therefore what cause they have to find
fault with that, more then with Gloria Patri, Te Deum, Quicumque vult, Gloria
in excelsis and very many more such, afterward (I say) brought in and yet
retained now by themselves also? being all nothing else but godly exercises and
daily preachinges of the Faith, that the Apostles taught, Heretics impugned,
and the Church has always kept?

The 23. Demand. Apes.
WHETHER they have in their Service, or any where else, any thing to be
commended, but they have, like Apes, taken it of us by imitatio^: as may be
seen in their Communion book comparing it with our Mass book: in their
spiritual Courts, Visitations, Conuocations, Councels, Excommunications,
Burning of Heretics, Deprivations, Degradations, etc. And therefore ask them,
how that can be the true Church, which so must, and so does imitate; or that
the false Church which so is imitated, and so worthy to be imitated?

The 24. Demand. Priesthood.
ALSO whether they be content to try Religion by the Priesthood, that not
only these later hundreds of years, but also from the beginning, has served
in the foresaid churches of Christendom? As, whether S. Hierome S. Augustine,
S. Cyprian, S. Ireneus or any other, were made Bishop or Priest by a King or
Queen, and not by Bishops and Priests; Or, whether it be not expressly
written in many Tim. 4. d 14. and 5. d 22 Tit. 1. b 5
places of the new Testament, that Bishops and Priests should be, and also
were made by Bishops and Priests?

And as the most ancient priests of Christendom were made by such, so again,
whether they were not made Hie. l. 14. in Ezec. 45 Paulin. ep. 4. ad Amand. c.
Cyp ep 66.
to offer Sacrifice, yea also Ang. co^ fess^. 9. c. 14.
for the dead. And whether therefore there were not besides Priests, and
Deacons, which they seem to retain (even in the first Churches, I say) also
Eus l. 6. c. 35.
Subdeaco^s, Acolytes, Exorcistes, Lectors, and Ostiaries, or Dore-keapers, all
which they have plainly laid away? Whether these orders were not, I say, Cyp.
ep. 66.
in respect of a Sacrifice; and there upon so distinguished, that although they
might all be with in the Chauncell (which the Lay people, were he the King or
Emperor, Theod. l. 5. c. 17. Soz. l. 7. c. 24.
might not) yet some of the^ might Dion. Ec. Dion c. 3. p. 2. and ep. 8. ad.
Demoph.
not come at the Altar, others might: and there, Hier. in Ezec. 45.48.
some able to do less, others able to do more? Let them say, whether they
find not all this in Antiquity, yea, and that it was the^ so observed, much
more straightly, then we observe it now? and therefore, where as our observation
plainly shows, that we believe a Sacrifice, and also whom we believe to be
there sacrificed. so, whether the more observation of the same in Antiquity,
be not a plainer demostrantion, that they also then believed the same? And
whether this be not so evident, that they also, to prove Christ to be GOD, Eus.
de laud. Constable. page 384. Cyp. Test. l. 1. c. 16. Chry. to 5. Con. Iud. or. 2,
co. 942.
objected this their Priesthood and Sacrifice to the Jews and Painims, showing
unto them, that whereas then both in Herusalem, and in all Nations, both the
Iudaical, and also pagane Sacrifices, had given, and daily did give place to
this Sacrifice, that the same (I say) was even so promised and foretold by the
Prophets Mal. 1. c. 11.
of the old testament.

And therefore ask the^ again, whether by all this it be not evident, that
they have changed the priesthood of the new Testament, both because they are
made by the Prince: and because they are not made for the Altar, or to offer
Sacrifice? As it is also evident, only by this that they go about to change
the name of Priests. For as the Apostles bringing into the would a new Order,
changed the old names of the Jews and Gentiles, to wit, Pontifex and
Sacerdos (for which we have no English) and said for them, Episcopus and
Presbyter, whereof are derived our English names Bishop and Priest: so, who
sees not, that the Heretics changing again those Apostolic names into
Superintendent and Elder, do manifestly bewray them selves, that they have
also changed the Apostolic Order? And that we who are found still to have
retained the Apostolic names, have therefore never gone about to change the
Apostolic Order? In so much that whereas we (as they know) account their
Orders, no Orders: yet they accept our Orders for true Orders, and having been
Ordered by us, seek not to be reordered, as may be noted in Parker, Grindall,
Sands, Horn, and many more that are Priests of the Catholic making.

And herevpo^ may al men note how it is: that whereas aforetime, Heresies have
troubled the world under the name of christians, these men have brought in not
so properly an Heresy, but (as it may rather be called) an Apostasy, from
almost all the Law of Christ. For as Saint Paul says. Upon the changing of
Sacerdotium, Heb. 7. c. 12.
that is to say Orders (or Peiesthoode) there must needs follow changing of
the Law. because the Law runs so much upon the Priests as is to be noted
both in Moses Judicial law, and also in our Catholic Christian law: which
one thing I would to God they would quietly, sadly, and with the fear of God
consider: that they I (say) go about to do against Christ and his law, as much
almost, as the Turk, if he should come, would do? and where he comes, does?

The 25. Demand Monks.
THEN whether they be content, Eus. hist. l. 2. c. 15.16
that the matter be tried between us by the Religion of the Monks, Nuns,
Ermites Anchoretes, Soz. l. 1. c. 12.13.14. l. 3 c. 12.13.15. l. 6. c. 15.17.28.
and other such like persons in state of perfection, that were in those first
times of the church of Christ? Yea whether it be not a plain confounding of
them, and their doings, to hear that then also, as ever since, Aug. de
moribusec. cat. c. 31 and de un Ec. c. 14.
there were such persons in the church of Christ, specially to see that Eus. de
lau, Constable. p. 385.
christian writers have against the Painimes made of the^, for their straight
life and great numbers, an argument to prove Christ's divinity?

The 26. Demand. Fathers.
WEATHER they will be tried by the faith, and Religion, of the ancient Fathers?
Or, whether ever any refused to be so tried, but only Heretics? Or, whether
the Fathers Faith and Religion, were not the faith, and Religion of all the
church in their several times? Or whether the Fathers were not all of one
faith, of one church, and of one religion? Or, whether these (besides many more)
be not good causes for christian men to believe the Fathers, in so much, that
the Protestants themselves think it good, and necessary, to make a show of
the fathers in their books and sermons, unto the people?

But yet let them say in conscience, whether they were not al of our church,
and of our religion? Or else, why do they put us to defend their authority? Why
do they in writing and speaking (as most men know) so derogate from their
credit? yea let them say, whether they were not all Bishops or Priests of our
churches making (which I touched a little before) and many of them also Monks,
as Soz. l. 6. cap. 15. Ruf. l. 2. c. 28.
S. Basil, S. Gregory Nazianzen, Hier proae. l. 4. in Iere.
S. Hierome, Aug. ep. 89. q. 4. and co^. Petil. l. 3 cap. 40.
S. Augustine, Greg dial. l. 4. cap. 55.
S. Gregory, of Rome, Paul ep. 7. ad Seu.
S. Paulinus, and many others? And these, and all the rest (I say) of one
religion, and therefore no one of them all of the Protestants religion: and
therefore again, the church at no time of the Protestants religion?

The 27. Demand. Counsels.
WHETHER they know not that their Religion has been of late examined
diligently, and finally condemned, and ours confirmed in the General council
of Trent? And, whether ever any refused to yeald to a General council, but
only Heretics? And, whether they can give any just cause, why me^ should
believe that in old time General councels might with authority define and
determine of faith and religion, and this council might not?

Yea, whether not only this, but also any other General councels, were ever
holden by Protestants, or for Protestants: and not all, as well as this, by
men of our church, and for our church, as by Bishops that were made after our
manner aforsayd, many of them being also Monks, and all of the same religion
with Monks having there also their Deacons and Subdeacons, and Acolytes, etc.
waiting upon them: and no one of them ever that married, or thought it lawful
to marry, after that he was made a Bishop? Besides many other points of their
doctrine also, that may for us against the Protestants be noted in the acts
of those councelles? Finally, if ever any such council were for them, let them
tell us, why they write and speak so much against all counsels, co^pelling us
to defend their authority? and yet let them say, whether all other catholic
Bishops, and all the church, were not, at those several times, of the councels
religion: and all those councels of one religion: and therefore the church never
of the Protestants religion?

The 28. Demand. Sea Apostolic.
WHETHER they confess not, that we at this time do believe, and communicate
with the sea Apostolic of the church of Rome? Whether Catholics did not
always so do? Whether ever any refused obstinately so to do, Opt. l. 2. frl.
15. Vict. de persec. Vand. l. 2 fol. 20. August. cou. ep. Fund. c. 4.
but only Schismatikes and Heretics? Whether the holy Fathers by their so
doing, did not use to confound al Heretics and to show thereby, that they
did believe and communicate with S. Peter and S. Paul? Away, as, most easy, so
continually most sure and certain, to avoid all error.

The 29. Demand. Traditions.
VVHE THERE they will be tried by traditions most certain that have been always
in the Church of Christ? Yea, whether it be not a plain overthrowing of all
their buildinge, only to hear, that there have been always such Traditions
in the Church of Christ? Or let them say whether theyfind not in most approved
Antiquity such Traditions? Chrysos. hom. 69. ad popul. Antioc. Cyp. ep. 63.
Aug. ep. 118. c. 6.
Or whether they find any such Tradition making for them, and not for us? Or
whether ever any denied obstinately all Tradition, crying in every thing for
only Scripture, but only Heretics?

The 30. Demand. Their own doctors
WEATHER they will be tried by their own Doctors, and Fellows, as by Luther,
Calvin, Lib. in Zuing. an. 1545
and such like? And whether they know not, that Luther has written many Books
full bitterly against them, and condemned the^ to Hell, because they be
Sacramentaries, denying the real presence of Christ's Body in the B. Sacrament?
And that Calvin likewise calls it a blasphemy, to give to the King, In Amos
7.
(and much more to a Queen) the Headship or Primacie of the CHVRCH of England?
And therefore ask the^, with what conscience, yea and with what face they can
say theirs to be the true Church, which compels men so to blaspheme, and
that with book oath: their fellow Puritanes at home also abhorring it? That I
speak not of many other points also of their Doctrine, condemned also by
their own fellows, as they know themselves, and whosoever else that reads
their Books.

The 31. Demand. Universality.
WHETHER they know not, vin. Lyr con. omnes. Ha^ c. 3.4.31.41. Opt. l. 2 f 13.
Bed. Hist. 4.5 c. 16.
that the Ancient Fathers have taught us in such a doubtful time of Heresy
as this is, to try out the truth by Universality: and that they mean
thereby; if at any time we see a piece of Christendom divide it self from the
whole, that we follow then the whole (the Universality, (I say, of the Church
in our own time) and not the piece. Ask the Protestants now, if this had
been done in Luthers time, whom should Christan men have followed, Luther, or
the Pope? And if the Pope then, now also the Pope pardie; Gregory the
thirtenth that now is, agreing in all (as they know) with Leo the tenth that
was the^? Ask the^ Finally, whether they singe not therefore against themselves
in Te Deum, when they say, Te per orbem terrarum sancta confitetur Ecclesia,
which is to say, that the faith or confession of the universal Church, that is
the true confession?

The 32. Demand. Antiquity.
WHETHER they know not that the same Fathers have taught us, Vine. Lyr c.
3.4.6.7.8.9.38.41.
for trying out of Truth to look likewise unto Antiquity? and that, as by
Universality they mean our own time, so by Antiquity, they mean the time
that was before our own time: teaching us therefore by this, if in our own
time any Novelty do reign and that perhaps universally, that then we have
respect to the former time, before such Novelty did arise? Ask the
Protestants then, whether they be content so to do? And whether three score
years ago, before Luther arose, Christendom were of their Religion? yea,
whether it were not of our Religion, both then, and many hundred years before;
and that, by their own confession?

The 33. Demand. Consent
WHETHER the same Fathers have not taught us, to try out Truth by Consent
also. And, Vin. Lyr. c. 3.4.8.10.11.38.41. Bed. hist. l. 3. c. 25
whether they mean not thereby, that supposing both the Universality of our
own time, were corrupt, and also the Antiquity of former time, were at
variance, we should the^ have an eye to Consent in Antiquity. As if there had
bin of old some one Father or some one Provincial Council for the Protestants
(as yet there was not) to see the^, whether there were not some General Council
against them? Ask them now, whether that before Luther was borne, there were
not many General Counsels, yea all General Counsels against them? and yet
neither any Prouincial Council, nor so much as any one Father for the^, nor
for any one thing that they hold against us?

The 34. Demand. Authority.
WHETHER the Church of Christ did not evermore take her self to be of
Authority irrefragable, and so bear her self, as necessary and worthy to
be believed upon her onelyword; and therefore no man to control her Aug. ep.
105.
Sentence or Judgment, no man to misdoubt her Aug ep. 118: c. 3. and ep 105.
Practice? And whether S. Augustine have not written a book thereupon, which he
calls. De vtilitate credendi; Of the utility of believing the Church in all
things: showing how profitable, how necessary, and how sure a way that is, for
the finding out of true Religion? And, whether the Maniches then, as the
Protestants now, found not fault with that way? And whether the true
Christians, notwithstanding, did not for all that hold the^ against those and
all other Heretics upon the Churches Authority: Chris. con. gent. de S. Ba^
coll. 882. 884. Et con. Iud. ar. 2. col 928. Eus Hist l. 1. c. 3. Devt. or c.
14.
yea and allege it also unto the Jews and Painimes, to prove that Christ is
God, and that the holy Scriptures, with the Miracles and all other things in
them contained, be true: because (I say) the Church or company of the
Christians so says and so believes? And, whether Saint Augustine, and that by
true reason, does not infer thereupon, that, seeing we believe Christ and the
Scriptures, because of the church, we must therefore believe the Church in all
other things also, whatsoever it says against the Heretics?

And, whether this Authority do not therefore argue, that the Church can never
err? And whether never erring do not argue, that it can never perish. And
therefore again, whether it do not now also well and worthily claim the same
authority? Yea, whether the Protestants themselves have not received many
things, as Christ himself, and the Scriptures themselves, etc. upon our
churches credit; the church (I say) that now is? Ask them then how they can
possiblye be the church, who willingly do renounce the claim of such
Authority, and do by their doings, confess it to be in the company of their
adversaries? Finally bydde the deceived consider this well, that they have no
forte or number of men amongst them, whom they may trust in all things; with
whom, and in whose steps they may venture to walk the way of Faith and
Religion toward salvation.

None of all the Sects in our country, nor in all the world so happy, none
so secure, and therefore no Church amongst them: because (I say) they openly
renounce the claim of Authority, confessing thereby that it is not of them
that the Creed says: I believe the Church: in so much that they have suffered
of late an unlearned Christian (as he is called) to set out in Print, a vain
libell against the Authority of the Church of God, comparing and opposing
unto it, the Authority of the word of God, as though the word of God, and the
Church of God, were one against the other: it being yet so plainly written,
that as the Father said of his Son: Mat. 17. Mat. 18.
Ipsum audite, Hear him. So the Son said of his church: Si Ecclesiam non
audierit, sit tibi ficut Ethnicus and Publicanus: If he will not hear the
Church, do thou use him, (as the Jews did) as an Heathen and a Publican. And
yet this fellow trusts so much in his own folly, Prou. 17
that he is bold to provoke all catholics to answer his childishnes, or else
they must be accounted (says he) no less then very Murderers. It were good
for him, poor man, that he had in him no more pride then learning. My best
counsel to him for his salvation is, that he read humblye these Demaundes,
and look whether any of his great Masters will answer them. And if after
this, his stomach serve him still, let him set out his Libel more orderly with
his name, and with approbation of their Rabbis, and with privilege, that we
labor not in vain: and with the grace of God he shall quickly see it
answered, as unworthy as it is.

The 35. Demand. Unity.
THEN whether unity proced not of the said Authority: And, our Church therefore
one for ever, and not possibly by any question or controversy to be desperately
divided within it self. They on the other side, for lack thereof, running
every day into more and more division amongst themselves, and multiplying
Sects (as all men do see) without hold or measure: not being able to aleage
herein any excuse for themselves, which the Arians, Donatistes, and other old
Heretics might not as well aleage for excuse of their divisions: yea even
their own Doctrine, being the very cause thereof, and they therefore guilty of
all these sects? that doctrine, I say, wherein they teach, that the Scriptures
are so easy, and that therefore every one may follow his own sese, yea and
vant also that it is the sense of the Spirit himself?

And, whether the Churches inseparable unity be not so sure an argument of
Truth, that it is a most just Motive (by Christ's own saying) for the world
to believe in Christ: that no man marvel, seeing the infinite Sects that be
now in England, that there be also so many incredulous that believe not in
Christ?

The 36. Demand. Kepers of Scriptures.
Whether it were not our Church, that notified to the world the Canon of the
holy Books of the new Testament? Whether it were not our Church that has had
the custody and construing both of the foresaid, and of the other Books of
the holy Bible, ever since the Apostles time? Or else, whether before this time
the Expositors thereof were Protestants. And whether the Protestants had not
the said Books of us? And whether they can charge our Church, all this long
while of her possesion, with adding or minishinge any jot thereof? Or whether
they can not be charged, this short while of their usurpation, with robbing us
of many wholle Books thereof (Books, I say, canonized in aproued Concels) and
of many a particulare portion more? or whether ever any could be so charged,
but only Heritikes? Finally, whether our Church therefore be not the only true
possessor or keeper of this treasure, as to whom only the Apostels co^mited it:
and therefore again ours the only true Church?

The 37. Demand. Storehouse of all Truth
WHETHER not only all Canonical Scripture (as I have said) but also all
other truths agreed upon at any time by the Church of God, and as it were
laid up for ever, are not at this tym to be found in our church? as, that
which was agreed upon against the Arians, that which was concluded against the
Donatistes, briefly that which was defined aganst all other Heretics? Ask
them whether it have not been hither unto, and whether it be not still? safelye
keapt in our Church? And, how them selves came by the said Truths? whether
otherwise then at our Churches hands?

Ask them again: Whereas some ancient writers have been justly noted for
certain errors, whether our Church may be taxed with any of those errors? yea
whether our Churches Faith be not the Rule, whereby both Protestants and all
others safely may and do now read those writers, and so most easilye avoid
those errors, being nothing moved with the authority nor antiquity of those
writers? nor with the great show of many Scriptures, which either those
writers or also sundry old Heretics made for their errors: knowing
undoubtedly by the Rule of our Churches faith, that those Scriptures have not
that meaning: being otherwise like to think (as any indifferent man will bear
me record) that the Scriptures make for those old errors and heresies, no
less, yea much more, then for Luther or Calvin, or any other Heretics of our
time? And whether it be not plain by this, that our Church is that
Depositorium dives, Iren. l. 3. cap. 4.
that Rich Storehouse, wherein all Truth either by the Apostles, or by any
other, 2. Tim. 1. d 14.
has been laid up? and wherein every man that will, may without danger, and
without labor, find, what soever Truth he seeks?

The 38. Demand. Old Heresies.
WHETHER on the contrary side, amongst the Protestants, any other Truth be
to be found, but only such as they receued of us? yea further, whereas very
many Falsehoodes, Errors, and Heresies have been from time to time by the
Church noted and condemned, whether a great number of the same Heresies, be
not now to be found amongst the Protestants? So many old Heresies, I say
(whereas one were enough to prove the^ heretics) as be enough to prove them
almost Apostatates. As, Against Epip haer. 75. Aug. haer 53.
Praying for the dead, Against prescripte Fasting days Against Aug to. 6. de
fide. con. Manich. c. 9.10. Aug. haer. 82. and Ret l. 2. c. 22.
Free will Against (c) Merit of Single life, Against (c) the Vow of the same,
and at least twenty more. And therefore whether, as our Church is the
storehouse of Truth, so their Sinagogue be not the Sink of false hood and of
Heresy?

The 29. Demand. Where grew their doctrine.
AGAIN, whether the Persons that of old professed the said points of these
men's doctrine, and were of the Church therefore noted for Heretics, were not
also otherwise most notorious Heretics: for certain other points I say,
confessed also by the Protestants to be heresy. As whether Epip haer. 75. Aug.
haer 52.
Aerius who held with them against praying, and offe^ring for the dead, and
against all the prescript fasting days, were not besides that also an Arian:
and the like of all their other Parteners? Ask them now what it means, that
their doctrine always has been found in such naughty ground, and with such
stinking weeds: And contrariwise our doctrine touching the same points, found
also at the same time in such as they confess themselves to have been good
ground, as in S. Augustine, in S. Epiphanius, and others, who did so hold our
said doctrine, that they with the whole Church condemned Aerius of heresy, for
denying the same.

The 40. Demand. They never before new.
WHETHER of this it follow not, that they must needs confess, that their
church was never in the world, never (I say) at no time, before this our time?
Or else let them say, whether one that is an Arrian, denying Gods Son to be
Consubstantiall that is to say, Of the same substance with his Father, may be
of their Church. Yea also of VViclef, and Husse themselves do you ask the^,
how they could be of this their Church, holding with Pelagius Justification
Tho. wald. to. 3. cap. 7. Melanct. hom. ad Friden. Micon.
by man's own merits; and also Heu Syl. in hist. Bohe. c. 35.
that a King or Queen committing any mortal sin, leeseth straight his
office, and is no longer to be obied?

The 41. Demand. Studying all Truth.
WEATHER our Church, to keep safely all Truth in manner aforesaid: do not
diligently studdy all Truth: her Masters therefore, in their Books, and
Schools, teaching all Truth, and her scholars therefore learning all Truth: to
defend (I say) all Truth of Christ, against all enemies, against Painyms,
against Jews, and against all Heresies? And whether Protestants, on the
contrary side, and but a few of the^ (God wot) do study any more then a few
questions of this time only, and that so lightly, that they be afraid to
reason with common Catholics: Being all rather occupied about wyuing, and
thriuing in the world, then sincerely and learnedly to defend Religion. Or let
them tell us, why else our Country is so full of Atheists, Achristes, and all
kinds of most detestable heretics? Ask them, whether in their universities
they have the whole course of Divinity, within a certain term of years, yea
or in Anno Platonis (proceeding as they do) all read over? Yea, whether their
Students, or Doctors also, and Readers can tell you almost, what the course of
divinity means? And again ask them, who for christian study, and increase
of godly knowledge founded those universities, builded those Colleges, and
instituted those degrees of learning, whether our Church or theirs, and who
has authority to make Doctors of Divinity? whether Kings and Queens, or only
Bishops? And therefore, if our Church have again taken from them her grant,
and annullated their degrees (as it Bulla Pij 5. Anno 1564.
has done) ask them, by what title they will claim the same?

The 42. Demand. Unsent.
WHETHER the Preachers ever of the Church of Christ did take upon them to
preach and teach, without Ioa^. 20. c. 21 Act. 15. cap. 24. Romans 10 cap. 15.
sending. And whether ever any all this while had authority to send forth
Teachers, but only the Apostles and their Successors, and such as received it
of them?

And if they say, their sending to be extraordinary: ask the^, why all this
time God did so send non other, but only to bar such as they be from so
saying? Ask the^ likewise, where then be their Miracles? Or whether any, also
before Christ's Church began, were sent out of order, without the gift of
Miracles, or of prophecy, or of both? Finally, you may ask them, what warrant
they have to hold such an office of a Lay Prince? Or how without that office,
they can pretend to be the true Church of Christ?

The 43. Demand. Succession.
WHETHER it be not evident in the Act. 1. d 21. and 14. d 22.
Acts and Tit. 1. b. 5.
Epistles of the Apostles, with the Eus. l. 2. cap. 13.15.23. l. 3. c. 2.4.10
Ecclesiastical historyes of the times that followed, that the Church once
begun by and in the Apostles, did afterward grow on (as Christ Mat 13. c. 14.
f. 4. and ^6. c. 18.
did promise that it should) and spread it self over all places, and through
all ages, by Succession? And, whether our church cannot show in plain
authentical writing the continual Succession of her Bishopes and Pastors,
with their flocks, ever since the Apostles time? Or, whether the Protestants
Church can do the like. Yea, whether they can in our Country refer them
selves, any further, then to the letters patents of the Prince? And whether
this have not been Opt. l. 2. f. 15. Hier. in Mic. 1. Aug. in Psa. con. par.
Do. not.
always used as a mark most certain, to know the true Church from
Schismatikes and Heretics even in the 3. Reg. 12. g. 31.
Old Testament also?

The 44. Demand. Apostolic Church.
VHHETHER in the Creed, that we in our Mass, and they in their Communion do
use, this word Apostolical, were or could be put in as a plain mark to know
the Church which we must believe, but only as it directs us to the Church of
Rome, seeing by experience, that all other Apostolical Churches, Trent. de
praes. Har.
are now failed? Or whether the Roman Church be not Apostolical, as being the
Sea of the two most glorious and chief Apostles, Iren. l. 3. c. 3. Opt l. 2.
Aug ep. 165.
S. Peter and S. Paul? Or whether in time of schism and heresy, the Fathers in
their times having many Seas Apostolic, did not chiefly look themselves, and
direct others, to the Apostolic Sea of Rome, showing thereby that the Truth was
theirs, because the Bishop of Rome that came of the Apostles by lineall
succession, was theirs? And therefore whether we have not just cause to follow
their example, specially seeing that Sea still hold on and continue (as the
Fathers said it should) to the number now of two hundred and thirty Bishopes,
Aug. in ps. cont. part. Don.
whereas to those Fathers time there were not forty.

The 45. Demand. Changinge.
WHETHER we have not yet again just cause to keep us with the Church of
Rome, seeing that the Romans never changed their Faith, which Act. 2. g. 31.
Romans 10 c. 12. and 6. 17. and 16. c. 19.
they received of S. Peter and S. Paul? Which is so plain, that I appeal to
the Protestants them selves, whether the Romans did not (for example) Pray for
the dead, even then when those Fathers aforesaid did avouch that they were
vncha^ged: yea so wonde^ring, even the^ also, at Aerius for denying the same,
that together with all other Churches they condemned him as an Heretic, for
going about to change that which always vnitll then they had keapte unchanged:
as they do keep it still, both that and all the rest: and that, by the
Protestants own confession, these thousand or twelve hundred years? Whereby
no wise man can doubt but that they remain also the rest, up to the Apostles
time also, without change. Yea to consider no more but that since Luthers time,
the Popes have not changed one jot, and that the Heretics (on the other
side) have not since then left, nor do not leave changing every day, may to
any man of indifferent judgment seem a demonstration, that the Popes never at
all did chang. And as for one or two amongst all the Popes whom they charge
with erring: first we deny it, for it is most false, as the learned Catholics
have well declared. Secondly we say, supposing some Popes had erred, yet never
did any Pope go about to chang the Romans faith with his error. Thirdely we
say, and let the wise consider it well, that were it so, those Popes did err,
and also go about to infect the Romans with those errors, yet is it not those
errors, wherewith the Protestants do now charge the Pope and the Romans. And
therefore when they blasphemously burden S. Liberius with Arrianisme, or any
other with the like, they might better hold their peace, then so to lie, and
yet their lie nothing at all unto the purpose.

The 46. Demand. Our Ancestors saved.
THEN whether all this while that they confess our church to have been, at
least 12 hundred years, they will say, that all our and their fathers and
mothers grand fathers and grandmothers, and other Anncestors, Kinsefolke and
Countreimen, and all others that have gonne so long for Christian men, Justin.
l. 4. cap. 2 in fine c
are all damned in Hell? yea, whether Calvin him self do not confess the
contrary, that our Church (I say) served well the turn all this while to save
men from Hell, and to bring men to Heaven? Ask them then, why it cannot serve
still that turn as well? Or if they say, that ignorance before did excuse, and
now (because of their preaching) it cannot ask them, why they do confess that
S. Augustine and such like, are of all most surely saved, who yet had not this
ignorance, but knew right well their new doctrine (as in Aerius, Iouinianus,
Vigilantius, etc) and condemned it for most wicked Heresy? And therefore
whether it be not wisdom for all men to hold the^ still in our chuch or to
return again unto it?

The 47. Demand. Communion of Saints
ALSO whether their church as it never was in the world before now, so now at
their first appearing have not committed many most foul absurdities, in
pinching up it self so narowly into the streightes of one small Country, that
in it one Christian man to another, even in spiritual affairs is a stranger?
that in it an Ecclesiastical and Apostolical power erected by Christ, is
deemed a foreiner: that in it any General Council that ever was or ever can
be gathered of the Bishops of other Nations of al christe^dom, yea or of their
own confederats, can take, bear, or have no whit of authority: that in it
Epistles directed from beyond the Sea by S. Paul himself, if he were alive,
such as his Epistles to the Romans, Corinthians etc, could bear no sway: that
in it all the Apostles together writing from their Synod of Jerusalem, as
they did to the Antiochians, Act. 15.
might bear no stroke: that in it Christ himself without the King and the
Parliaments consent, might not dispose of his own churches: but hold his peace
and leave his meddling (like a Foreiner as he was) unless he would say, that he
were the natural King of England, and displace the lawefull heirs of the
Kings before time: because by their saying that headship cannot be separated
from the kingshipe, being (as they say) a real, natural, and essential part
thereof: and therefore they should not write the King of England, Head of the
Church of England, no not under Christ, unless they would write him also King
of England under Christ.

Of many other their absurdities, Conf. l. 9 c. 12.24
as that S. Augustine there (with our Priests doing his request) should
forfeite an hundred Marks for saying Mass for his Mothers soul, etc. I here
say nothing.

The 33. Demand. Where Christ works.
WHETHER it be not our Church only, which now, and ever, is so blessed of
God, and so embrued with Christ's Blood, that she has grace in her Sacraments
(as well for remission of sins after Baptism, as of sins before Baptism;
to the unspeakable comfort of all that be heavy laden) merit in her works,
force in her word, power in her teaching, so that she breeds devotion,
turns to Religion, and to the search of salvation, strangely alters the
hearts of men: yea her children therefore being the saddest sort of people, men
of best order in all families, towns, and cities, for all goodness best
beloved both of God and man. And whether with the Protestants, all be not
clean contrary: No preaching of Penance, no grace in Sacraments, nothing but
sin in good works although they be done in Christ, no power to bring under
Devils, no blessing no comfort. And their folowers therefore easy to be noted
by their ill conditions: All persons as they fall from order and godliness,
more near they become to their Religion: a general observation, that all men,
as they return to our Church, bettered and amended; as they fall to their
Synagogue, much worsed and more then before corrupted. And yet be they never so
wicked and flagitious, have they Only Faith, and (no doubt) they shall be
saved. And what Faith, I pray you? Not our Christian faith, which is contained
in the articles of our Creed, and such like: but a special Faith, or an
undoubted persuasion that he is predestinate. For who soever so persuades him
self, doubting no more thereof the^ he does of one God, and of Christ's birth
and death and other Articles of the Creed: he (they say) most certainly is
predestinate and shall be saved, and his sins are thereby remitted. And it is
(forsooth) a goodly comfortable way, because it teaches men to be so
certain. But in truth and in deed (if it be a little examined) no greater
teaching of uncertainty. For (say we unto them) not only English
Protestants, but also any wicked man continuing in his wickedness, may firmly
persuade him self that he is predestinate, and all other Heretics of this time
do so teach and so persuade them selves, eue^ those two Anabaptists also who^
for damnable creatures, themselves of late did burn in Smithfielde. How the^
teach you, that the said faith or persuasio^ saves all? hereunto they say,
that such Heretics and wicked persons can not have this wonderful faith:
because it cannot be without true doctrine nor without good works. But (say
we) they persuade the^ selves? and they will swear, yea and die in it, yea
(and which is greatest of al) they know, that they so persuade the^ selves: as
who knows not, when he persuadeth him self of any thing, as of One God of
Christ, and so forth; O say our Protestants (and the like say the others of
them to) but they do not so persuade them selves. And where (I pray you) is
now become this great certainty? the matter being brought now to this pass,
that (by their own saying of one another) no man can tell when he is certain:
in so much that also of any one of their own fellows standing now in true
doctrine (as they esteem it) and in good works and so persuading himself to
be predestinate; if he fall hereafter, they must then and will say of him that
he did not before persuade him self: and so none of them all can say to day
that he is certain, because he cannot tell what he shall do to morrow. Is not
here then (trow you) a great certainty? (that I use no other reason against
this vain and sinful point of their doctrine, being yet the groundeworke of
all their innouations.) Well, whatsoever they say, every man sees, that all
Heretics and naughty packes may, and that some of every sort do thus
persuade and assure themselves. And we (on the otherside) be sure, (and that
not by our only bare persuasion, as they see by this Book) that none of them
all so continuing shall be saved. And therefore best it were for them to
confess the vanity of their new special faith, and to return to the
Catholic faith, and so living through the grace of Christ in good works, to
hope assuredly for salvation, whereof now most vainly they do presume: or
rather in deed they neither hope nor presume, but think verily that there is no
salvation at all, using therefore their own religion, as if they thought it,
and as it is indeed, no religion at all, as now at length the wiser sort and
principal of the Realm have proved infinite ways by experience of their
doings, according to our Saviors true prophecy, Mat. 7.
Ex fructibus eorum cognoscetis eos. By their fruits, you shall know them.

The 49. Demand. All enemies.
WHETHER it be not our Church only, which all the enemies of Christ do fight
against conspiring all against us, as the company that only stands in their
way, and that only bears off their brunte: specially all Sects, and
Heresies for that cause bearing intollerably with one another blasphemies, and
(as it is called) syncretizing, and tied together by the tails (like Sampsons
Foxes) their heads being most far a sunder, Iud. 15.
and counting Turks and Jews and very Atheistes, for their friends, and all
that be not Papists. And therefore, whether our Church be not the true Church
and our Church only: as which only, both now, and ever, has been of all
maligned, and by Hell gates impugned.

The 50. Demand. Sure to continue.
WHETHER our Church, for all this fighting and conspiring against it, Aug: de
vt: cred. c. 8 and Psa. con. part. Do^. Chri. co^. Gent: quod Christus sit Deus
col. 1039
as it has hitherunto stood upright, so be not sure to stand and continue
likewise hereafter? Or else, how is it, that the Fathers, which in their sundry
times have been bold so to say of the Church, and namely also of the Church of
Rome, that it (I say) should stand forever, could not all this while be proved
liars? yea whereas they have further said, that the Church by oppugnatio^
should not only not be ouercom: but also more increase thereby and flourish:
Whether this saying of theirs, as always heretofore, so now likewise be not
plainly justified: innumirable persons, as well of our own country (and that,
against all hope of man: but to the gracious safety hither to) no doubt to the
wise (of the State so much maligned by the Puritans) as of others also, daily
seeing, and confessing, that ours is the true Church, and ours the true
Religion, and the Heretics have fowely abused hitherunto their ignorance: The
Heretics in the mean time, partly by the conversion of such, partly by their
continual dividing into so many strange Sects, daily diminishing, and (as all
other Heretics before them) going to nothing. And whether they were not best
therefore to put up their pipes, (as Humfreie his wise Syllogismes in his Onus
or prophecy of the ruin of Rome) to hold their barking against the Moon,
and to leave with Saul their vain kicking against the prick, getting nothing
thereby but only the eternal hurt and destruction both of themselves and of
their folowers?

The 51. Demand. Apostasy.
LAST of all (to be short, and to cut off many other questions of like weight
that I could demand) whether, as in every one of these Demaundes it is evident
that they be Heretics and Seducers, so in many of them, and much more in all
of them, it be not likewise evident that they be little better the^ plain
Apostataes, as?

First in changing the Priesthood, Heb. 7. c. 12.
whereupon the change of all the Law ensues: as, we see, they also thereupon
have cha^nged well near all, which no old Heretics ever durst to do, except
it were the Manichees: Orat. de 5. Haer. c. 7.10.6.
whom S. Augustine for that cause did note to be something else then Heretics in
saying, that there were five sorts of people in the world, Jews Paganes,
Manichees, Heretics and Catholics?

Secondly in reviving not one or two, but so many old Heresies; besides (as I
am bold to say) at least a thousand more of their own invention?

Thirdly, for taking from Christian men so many arguments of Christ's God head
and Divinity: as, the invisible Continuance and Authority of his Church, the
Honor of Crosses, the virtue of Crosses, the Honor of Relikes, the virtue of
Relikes, Miracles, Exorcismes, Unity, Sacrifice? etc.

Fourthly, for leaving nothing vndenied, not Fathers, not Councels, not
Traditions, not Scriptures, nor (the only witness of all Canonical Scripture)
the Churches authority, and departing from the Faith of al ages since Christ's
time, agreeing with no Christian time, nor none with them?

Fifthly, in place of al Religion and goodness which they have removed, devising
a new gospel of their foresaid only vain Faith, which teaches all Sins and
all Heresies to presume of salvation. Besides much more that I need not to
repeat?

And whether therefore people now a days be not to to careless and negligent
of their souls, that whereas they should not, under pain of everlasting
damnation, yeald to any one Heresy, have so fowly yielded to so foul
Apostasy? How beit as S. Peter said to the Jews. Act. 3.
Et nunc fratres scio quia per ignorantiam fecistis, sicut and principes
vestri: so I doubt not, but that in our Country likewise many of all sorts
may be somewhat excused by ignorance: and therefore the more hope there is for
such as will repent. But otherwise if any for all this, list wilfully to follow
on, most fowly and most miserably deceauing them selves by cause before God they
can not possibly have any excuse of their so doing, no more, then if they
should consent to follow the proceedinges or to frequent the churches of the
Arrians, or of any other old Heretics, yea or of the Turks them selves, if
perhaps they lived under the reign of such. And therefore (I say) if any
list to contemn still all wholesome counsel, and desperatelye to follow on,
and not to return to the Truth so manifoldly, and so plainly opened? and some
also to perfecute it most malicioussy: their blood, at least wise, Ezecb. 3
shall not be required at our hands hereafter, when they shall repent to late.

CERTAIN OTHER DEMANDS ANNEXED TO THE FORMER.

VERY FIT Also to be proposed to our En-English Protestants, but principally
unto our Puritans.

EXTRACTED Out of a learned book, made by the Reu. Fa. John Hay, Priest of the
Society of Jesus and proposed, unto the Ministers of Scotland.

With license, Anno 1623.

Stand ye upon the ways, and see and ask of the old paths, which is the
good way, and walk ye in it, and you shall find refreshing for your souls.
Jeremy 6.16.

There must be heresies, that they who are approved, may be known among you.
Cor.

And I desire you brethren, to mark them that make dissentions and scandals,
contrary to the doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them: for such do
not serve Christ our Lord, but their own belly, and by sweet speeches and
benedictions, seduce the hearts of innocents. Romans 16.17.

I know that after my departure, there will ravening wolves enter in among you,
not sparing the flock: and out of your own selves shall arise men speaking
perverse things, to draw away disciples after themselves. Acts 20.29.

THE PREFACE.
GENTLE Reader, by the little experience that I have in matter of disputation
against Protestants, I find the Proverb to be verifyed, which says: That
Aristotle's Ass is able to deny more, then Aristotle himself is able to prove.
For the most ignorant companion that ever handled a cudgel in school, makes a
show to be some tale and iollie fellow, all the while the skillful Fencer,
suffers and wills his young scholar to lay at his Master, he in the mean time
lying only at his lock, and defending himself, and not offending his
unskillful scholar. But when this Master, begins to let fly at this
ignorant fellow, and to teach him the Art, as well to defend himself, as to
offend others, alas, how do the standers by laugh at this poor apprentice? To
see him who seemed somebody a little before, to be now nobody, and to be
knocked and rapt, how, and where his Master listes?

The very like is to be said, of the combat or Controversy in Religion, where
let Protestants alone, still to stricke, object, and lay load at Catholics,
one would think (I wosse) that there were some matter in them: For in opposing
the Real presence, Purgatory, Images, Prayers to Saints, Railing at the Pope,
and the like, you would think them to be some iollie fellows, but alas, turn
the offenciue weapon toward him, lay at him a little, and do but teach this
bold offender of others, to defend himself, all the beholders burst out in
laughter, and the poor scholar proves so unskillful, that the blows he
should receive upon his buckler, he bears them off with his head and
shoulders, and is knocked and rapt, every where, where the Fencer listes. For
even so Protestants seem to show some small skill, in offending us, and our
Religion, but being put to defend their own, alas, what poor Fencers do they
prove? Let the Reader be but an indifferent behoulder of this ensuing combat,
and I assure him he cannot look on, but he shall laugh for his labor.

The 1. Demand. Their first Preachers.
WHETHER the gospel of Christ, was at any time preached in Scotland before
Paul Methuen, and sir John Knox, yea or no?

2. Whence their Doctrine?
Seeing no man ought to preach any doctrine, but that which he has learned in
the Church of God (because as witneseth S. Paul) says comes by hearing; Romans
10
I demand from what Doctors or Pastors John Calvin, sir John Knox, and their
like, first learned their new doctrine, now preached in the realm of Scotland?

3. Whence their vocation.
And since it is written, that no man may preach unless he be sent; Romans 10
I dema^d by what power Sir John Knox, with other Apostataes, Priests, Monks
and Friars, took upon them this vocation?

4. If Conform to predecessors?
Seeing you acknowledge in your Confession of faith, that the Sacraments ought
only to be ministered, by such as are called thereunto by ordinary vocation, I
demand, if your vocation unto the ministry, be like unto the calling of all
others, who have gone before you in the Church of Christ, since the time of the
Apostles? whom both ye and we repute and hold to have been Iawfull pastors
and teachers of his flock, as, S. Cyprian, S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, and diverse
others? wishing you to shewin al points, the conformity of your vocation with
that of theirs.

5. who their Doctors?
Seeing after the discourse of the election of your Ministers, Elders and
Deacons, ye acknowledge that the Scriptures make mention of a fourth kind of
Ministers lest unto the Church of Christ, which also are very necessary and
profitable, Ephesians. 4. 1. Cor. 12.
and are called by the name of teachers and doctors, whose office it is to
teach and instruct the faithful in sound doctrine, providing with all
diligence, that the purity of the gospel be not corrupted, either through
ignorance or false opinion; I pray you to show, at what time any Doctors of
such calling, have been in your Church before John Calvin? because the places
of Scripture noted by you, teach and declare, that God has appointed such
means in his church, that it should never be left desolate, nor yet his
Doctrine to decay, for want of Doctors and other teachers.

6. Their admission of Tinkers etc.
And seeing ye confess in the same place, that men cannot profit so well in the
knowledge aforesaid, unless they be first instructed in the learned tongues, and
humane sciences (for now God does not commonly work by miracles) and that
therefore it is necessary that seed be sown for the time to come, to the end
that the Church be not left barren and wast unto posterity: and also, that for
this effect schools be erected, wherein youth may be trained up in the
knowledge, and fear of God; I demand why ye admitted at the first entry of
your doctrine into Scotland, and yet do, Tailors, Skinars, and other
Artificers, who were never instructed but in their own craft and occupation,
which they left and abiured? and out of their own heads without any further
calling unto the ministry, began to teach the people? having for all their
learning and form of preaching, some English books only, which yet themselves
very hardly understood?

7. If the only written word be Judge?
Seeing that among other heads of your alleged faith, this is one principal,
that nothing is to be believed, Call. l. 4. Inst. c. 8. sect. 8.
but what is found in the written word, I demand what testimony ye have in
the same, for assurance of your faith in this point? And whether the faith of
the Apostles, was grounded on the written word or not?

8. S. Thomas Gospel.
Where is it written, that there is only four Ghospels? and that the Gospel
of S. Matthew, with the other three ought to be recea. ued, and not the
Gospel of S. Thomas? Or what authority has moved you, to receive some books
or chapters for canonical scriptur, and to refuse or reject others? Or if any
man deny any book of the new Testament (as Martin Luther does the epistle of
S. James) what arguments have ye from the Scripture to condemn him? Praef.
in nou. Test


9. Why Jews credited.
Seeing ye give so great authority to the Synagogue of the Jews, that
according to their canon, ye admit, and reject sundry books of holy
Scripture, why give ye not the like authority to the Christian church which
has gone before you, in receiving such books as are approved by her for
canonical Scripture? And if the only cause which moves you to reject such
books, be because they were not approved by the Synagogue of the Jews: why by
the same reason reject ye not Christ himself, seeing that Synagogue would not
admit him for their Messiah?

10. Churches authority.
If it be the office of the church, to discern betwixt canonical Scripture
and not canoniall as De capt. Bab
Luther In prologo cont. Pet. a Soto.
Brentius, and other of your own masters do confess; why should not the same
church be heard of you, in giving her interpretation upon any doubtful place
thereof, called in question? Or why call ye more in dout the interpretation of
the Scripture given by the Church, then the very books themselves? Or why
prefer ye, the private opinion of John Calvin and your selves, before the
universal, and uniform consent of all Christian people before you?

11. Citing only the written word.
Why esteem ye, Calu. l. 4 Inst. c. 8. number. 13.
that ye have an infallible mark of the true religion, because ye cite only
the written word, seeing this has been common to all heretics from the
beginning? Or what have you more to say for your felues, then they had for
themselves in this point?

12. If Scripture be easy?
If the Scripture be so easy as ye teach it to be Luth de ser. arbit.
what has moved your own writers, to make so many co^mentaryes thereupon? Or
what is the cause that there is so great controversy in religion, as we see at
this day? Yea, eue^ upon the express words of the last Testament of our Lord?
which according to the nature of a Testament, should be most clear.

13. Conference of places.
If the private judgment of every, one conferring Scripture with Scripture, be
a certain and infallible rule of right interpretation as ye say: how is it,
that so many gross contradictions are found in your writings, gayn-saying,
not only one another, but your selves also, as is evident in your own books?

14. No means to be resolved.
Seeing that the Lutherans, the Zuinglians and the Caluinists, besides an
infinite number of other sects, do every one allege the written word, for
confirmation of their contrary opinions: how shall it be known to any man,
that would resolve himself in matters of religion, which of them have the true
word? since it is the true understanding that makes the word, and not the
outward sounding of the voice, as Christ himself says; who objected to the
Saduces, Mat. 12.
that they mistook the Scriptures, because they understood not the meaning of
them?

15. Traditions.
Why deny ye, any credit to be given to Traditions, contrary to Call. l. 4.
just. c. 10.
the expres commandment of the Apostle, writing to the Thessalonians in this
manner 2. These. 2.
Stand and keep the Traditions which ye have received, whither by word, or by
our epistle? And also contrary to the doctrne of all the ancient doctors of
the church? Or how have ye the Scripture it self, but by Tradition? And
seeing ye will give no place unto Traditions, what assurance have ye, that
since the Nativity of Christ, there is only 1623. years? Or whither it be
lawful for Christian men, to call this point in question, yea or no?

16. Things unwritten, ordered.
If no Traditions ought to be received, show me where those things are
written, which S. Paul promised to set in order at his coming to the
Corinthians? 1. Cor. 11.
for if all things were contained in the written word which the Corinthians
had received, what needed S. Paul to promise, to putt the rest in order at his
cominge, chiefly concerning our Lords supper?

16. Church not invisible.
Seeing Christ says. If thy brother will not hear thee, tell it unto the
Church, and if he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as a heathen
and publican: and therefore apoints his Church to be judge in controversies
concerning doctrine and manners, how shall a man find the church: if it be
invisible? And why affirm ye it so to have been, seeing no recourse can be
had to an invisible judge?

17. Their Church how long?
How long esteem you your Church to have been invisible? And during the time
of the inuisibility thereof, if there were any of your Ministers that preached
the word of God, and administered the Sacraments in the realm of Scotland? Also
who they were that during that time, opposed themselves to al heresies, and
confuted them; seeing ye acknowledge with us, sundry heresies to have been
even almost in all ages?

18. The Sinagogue visible.
Seeing Christ has rejected the Sinagogue of the Jews, and erected and
builded to himself a Church of the Gentills, Mat. 28
which he has promised to asist and maintain to the end of the world: how it
is possible, that the church of Christ (against his said promise) has been so
many years invisible as ye suppose? Seeing that the aforsayd Synagogue,
notwithstanding the reiection thereof, has ever been visible, and is yet at
this present in diverse countries? so that by this your false doctrine, ye
give unto it, even after the reiection of it, greater prerogative, then ye
vouchsafe to give to the church of Christ.

19. Time of decaying.
Seeing ye confess with your master Calvin, l. 4. Inst. c. 2. n. 3.
the Roman Church, sometime to have been the true Church: in what time, and age
suppose ye that it decayed, so that the adherents thereof, by reason of
idolatry could not be saved?

20 Sucession of theirs.
Seeing God has given some Apostles, some Prophets, Ephesians. 4.
Evangelists, and Pastors, for the gathering to gether of the Saints, and for
the edification of the body of Christ (which is his Church) to the end of the
world: I require you (if you be the members of the said body of Christ) to show
your Doctors and Pastors who have succeeded one another since the Apostles,
with continuance of any Uniform doctrine as the Catholics have already done?

21 Condemning herefies.
Why rail ye so much against the seat of Rome, seeing by that seat, all
heretics have been convicted and condemned? hier. ep. 17. ad Dama s Aug. cont
Pelag.
an evident token that it is of God. And if ye have the true Curch (as ye
allege) show that ever any of yours, have opposed your selves against any
heresy before our days

22 Imitation of heretics.
Why follow ye the footsteps of the Donatists, who called the chair of Rome,
Aug. co^t. lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 51.
the chair of pistilence? Or how could it have been possible, that the seat of
Rome, could have withstood, and prenailed against all kinds of perpersecutions
since the beginning, and against so many infidels and heretics, if it had been
the chair of pestilence, as ye say?

The 23. Sacraments, seals.
If the Sacraments be only outward tokens and seals (as ye teach) what
prerogative give ye to the Sacraments of the gospel, Call. l 4. Inst. c. 10.1.
above the Sacraments of the old law?

24. Faith assures not grace.
Seeing ye teach, that faith assures you of grace received before the
reception of the Sacraments, how can you say, but that they be altogether
unprofitable, and can give no fur there confirmation? For as much as, where
assurance of grace is already, no confirmation is required.

25. Value of Sacraments.
Why affirm ye the Sacraments to be of no valor, except they be received by
faith, and not withstanding baptize infants, who can receive nothing by faith?

26. Necessity of Baptism.
Why abuse ye the people, teaching that infants without baptism, obtain
remission of their sins by the faith of their parents, since the faith of the
parents, cannot hinder them to be borne in original sin, Ro^. 3.5. Ephesians. 2.
and to be the sons of wrath, as S. Paul affirms?

27. Preachatiue Baptism.
Seeing Baptism, Call. l. 4. Inst. ca. 14. n. 4.
as ye teach, can not consist without preaching, and for as much as no
preaching was made at the time ye were baptized by the Catholics: what
assurance have ye that ye ar yet baptized? Or what does preaching avail to
alitle infant, who wants the use of understanding?

28. Baptism. of Infidels infants.
Why affirm ye with your master Calvin, In Antid. co^. Trid.
that the Sacrament of Baptism ought only to be ministered to them, who have
already obtained the remission of their sins? Seeing thereof it follows, most
evidently, that infants begotten of Infidel parents, should not at all be
baptized: because they cannot receive remission of their sins by the faith of
their parents, when they are Infidels, or unfaithful?

29. Ceremonies of Baptism.
Why reject ye the ceremonies of Baptism, which always Dionis. Ar. c. 2.
etc. Hier.
have been used in the church of God since the days of the Apostles, name what
age soever you please? Or how can ye defend your master Calvin l. 4. Inst. c.
15 n. 19.
who is not ashamed to affirm, that in the primitive church, the right and
lawful administration of Baptism, was already corrupted?

30. Confirmation.
Why deny ye the Sacrament of Confirmation? seeing it is so clearly expressed
in the Acts of the Apostles, Act 1.19
who by the imposition of hands, gave the holy Ghost: and also confirmed by
all ancient writers, yea and as yet retained by the English Protestants?

31. Real presence.
If the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, be not really in the B. Sacrament, l. 4.
Inst. c. 17. n. 10. and 14
why affirm ye with your master Calvin, that in this Sacrament, by the spirit
of God, those things are conjoined together, which are seperat: to wit, the
body of Christ which is in heaven, with us who are beneath in earth?

32. Receiving by faith.
Why affirm ye, Call. l. 4. Inst. c. 17. n. 10.
that we receive the body of Christ really by faith, if it be not really
present in the Sacrament; seeing our faith cannot make that thing to be, which
is not? If therefore his body be not there really, we cannot believe that we
receive it really, except we flatly deceive our selves.

33. lifting up to heaven.
In what scripture read ye, that which ye profes with your master Calvin, l.
4. Inst. c. 17. n. 3^^
that when ye receive the sacrament, Christ is made verily present unto you?
Not that he should be on the earth where ye are, but that ye should be lifted
up to heaven where he is: and to which of the heavens were the Apostles lifted
up, when they had our lord Jesus Christ, sitting with them in the last supper?

34. In two places at once.
Why attribut ye more to your own faith then to the omnipote^t power of God?
Call. l. 4. Inst. cap. 17. n. 31.
saing, that by your faith, ye are truly lifted up to heaven (and so at one
time ye ar both in heaven and earth) and deny that Christ can cause his body
to be really present at once in heaven and earth?

35. Penance.
Why deny ye the sacrament of Penance, Call. l. 3. Inst. c. 4.
by the which the lawful ministers of Gods word (as instruments of his
Majesty) give us remission of our sins, according to the word of Lord Jesus
Christ. Ioh. 20.
Whose sins ye forgive, they are forgiven, and whose ye retain, they are
retained?

36. Order.
Why deny ye holy Order to be a sacrament, l. 4. Inst. c. 14. n. 20.
seeing your master Calvin, does most evidently confess it to be one: as is most
manifest in the written word of God? Mat. 10. Luc. 9.


37. Extreme Unction.
Why deny ye the sacrament extreme Unction, seeing the Apostle S. James, cap.
5.
speaks so manifestly thereof, saying? Is any sick among you? let him send for
the priests of the Church, and let them pray over him, and anoint him with
oil in the name of our Lord?

38. Matrimony.
Why deny ye the sacrament of marriage, Ephesians. 5.
seeing S. Paul witnesses in so plain words, that it is a Sacrament? And why
does your master Calvin lie so loudly affirming, that no man until the time of
Gregory the first of that name Pope of Rome, In c. 5. ad Ephesians l. de fide and
op. c. 7.
ever saw, that it was given for a sacrament? seeing S. Ambrose (a) S. August.
(b) and other Doctors (long before Gregory) affirm the same in most manifest
words to be a sacrament?

39. Two wives at once.
Why permit ye any man to marry, his first wife being yet alive? seeing S.
Paul says. That the woman which is in subjection to a man, her husband being
alive, is bound to the law: but if her husband be dead, she is delivered from
the law of her husband? Therefore if she take another man, whilst her husband
yet lives, she shall be called an adulteres.

40. Breaking of vows.
Seeing S. Paul affirms, that those who marry after they have made the vow of
chastity, incur damnation, what has moved your Apostata Priests, Monks, and
Friars, to attempt marriage, after their so solemn vow of chastity, and so
most wilfully to damn themselves?

41. Sins not imputed?
Why affirm ye, that ye are so assured that your sins are not imputed to
you, as ye are assured that God is in heaven, because ye believe the one and
the other with one faith as ye say? And yet not withstanding, ye beg daily
in our Lords prayer, that your sins may be forgiven you? which prayer truly
were superfluous, if this your assertion were so assured.

42. All good works sins.
Why affirm ye, Call. l. 3. Inst. cap. 14. n. 5.11.
that all our works, how good soever they appear to be, are nothing but sin
in the sight of God, since it is impossible, that any work, be good and evil
all at once? And in the Scripture it self, Genesis 4.22.3. Reg. 10.
we read of sundry that have been commended for their good works. Or if all
our works be sins, then is it all one, to rob a poor man, and to give him
alms, except the one be less sin then the other?

43. False assurance.
Why affirm ye with your master Calvin, l. 3. Inst. c. 2. n. 40.
that who soever has once embraced the light of your gospel, can never
perish? considering that many who have been of your sect (yea Ministers
themselves of the highest rank) have turned to us, and have dyed in our
Catholic faith: and so (according to your doctrine) ar utterly Damned.

44. Absurdity by denying a third place.
Seeing on the one side, ye teach that the spots of sin remain so long as
we live: Call. l. 4. Inst. c. 13 n. 10.
and on the other side deny, both place and time of cleansing after our death;
how can you avoid to declare manifestly, that either none at all enter into
heaven, or else that they who enter, do still remain with their spots of sin
a thing so expressly contrary to the word? Apoc. 12.


45. Invocation of Saints.
Why affirm ye against the Scripture, that the Saints in heaven hear not our
prayers, because forsooth that they are dead? seeing Christ himself says, that
God is not the God of the dead, Mat. 22.
but of the living? And how can the Saints in heaven rejoice at our repentance
if they know not the same? Luc. 15.


46. Images.
If all that have errected Images in the Temple of God be I dolaters, how can
ye deliver Moses of that spot? or yet defend, Exodus 25. and 37. Number. 7.
that God himself was not the author of I dolatrie, seeing he commanded Images
to be made for that effect?

47. Renewing old heresies:
Why have ye renewed so many old heresies, condemned so many hundred years
since, by the universal church of God? Namely, the heresy of Simon Magus,
denying the freewill of man? Clem. l. 2 Recog.


48. Of the Pepusians.
Why have ye renewed the heresy of Pepusia^ns, affirming, Aug. de haer. haer.
27.
that distinction of order and degree, ought not to be observed in the church
of God?

49. Of the Nouatians. Cyp. l. 4. ep. 2.^

Why have ye renewed the heresy of the Nouatians denying that all sins are
forgiven by the Sacrament of Penance?

50. Of the Maniches.
Why have ye renewed the heresy of the Maniches, Aug. ad quod^ ult here is. 46.
denying the water of Baptism, to avail any thing to our salvation?

51. Of the Donatists.
Why have ye renewed the heresy of the Donatists, Optat. Mil. l. 2. ad Par.
de scis. Don.
teaching that the Church of God has perished thoroughout the whole world,
except in some obscure corners? As also, Aug. l. 2. cont Petil. c. 34.
that S. John's Baptism, was not different from the baptism of our Lord?

52. Of the Arrians.
Why have ye renewed the heresies of Arius, Aug. de here is. ad quod vult. Deum
here is 13.
teaching that it is not lawful to offer sacrifice for the dead? And that
there is no difference between a Bishop and a simple priest? nor that the
fasting days of the Chruch, ought to be kept, but that every man may fast,
according to his own will and pleasure?

53. Of the Eunomians.
Why have ye renewed the heresy of the Eunomians, Aug. ad quod wlt Deum
here is. 54.
that by faith only, man may obtain life everlasting?

54. Of the Pelagians
Why have ye renewed the heresy of the Pelagians, Aug. ad quod vult here is. 11.
teaching that infa^ts may be saved without Baptism?

55. Of the Iouinians.
Why have ye renewed the heresies of Iouinianus, Aug. ad quod vult haer 81.
teaching marriage to be as acceptable to God, as virginity: and that it is
lawful for Monks and Nuns to marry?

56. Of the Vigilantians.
Why have ye renewed the heresies of Vigilantius, denying the invocation of
Saints, and the honoring of the relics of the Martyrs? Hier. con Vigil.


57. Of the Eustichians.
Why have ye renewed the heresy of the Eustachians affirming that it is not
lawful to go in Pilgrimage, unto holy places?

58. Of the Iconomachians.
Why have ye renewed the heresy of the Iconomachians, Council. Gang.
breaking down the Images of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of his Saints?

59. Of the Beringarians.
Why have ye renewed the heresy, of Beringarius, denying the body and blood
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to be reallie present in the Sacrament of the Altar?

60. Of many other heresies.
Why have ye reneued ma^y other heresies of the Albigenses, Waldenses,
Wickliffits, Hussits, of Abailhardus, of Almaricus, and of other more
detestable heretics condemned many years since by the church of God?

61. Following heretics only in some points.
Why have ye followed the aforsaid heretics in these pointso^ly in which they
have dissented from the whole church of God, and rejected the rest of their
doctrine?

62. Scottish Reformation.
Whether your Reformation, which ye have made in the realm of Scatland, in
pulling down of the Churches, be not rather like to the Reformatign of Turks
and Pagans, then to a Reformation made by Christians?

63. Churches made Stables.
Whither in making Stables of the Churches in Scotland (so that horses were
stabled on your Kings graves) and in diging up the bones of Christian men,
resemble ye rather to be Christians, or Infidels and Pagans?

64. Burning Relics.
What moved you to burn the holy Relics of Saints, who were Temples and
Tabernacles of the holy Ghost, when they lived: which among all Christians
since the Apostles days unto this present, have been holden in honor and
veneration?

65. Burning the Doct. writings.
Why burnt ye the writings of the Doctors and holy fathers, as of S. Ambrose,
S. Augustine, S. Hierome and others: and yet shame not to say, that ye
profess one faith with them?

66. Depossing magistrates.
Where is the verity and effect of your solemn protestations, promising that
your Reformation was not to disposses any magistrate: when ye have not only
raised vproares in the contrie, and expelled thence the chief magistrates, but
in your preachinges, would plainly thrall all kings, and kingdoms, and have
them subject to the election and punishment of the people, setting forth your
sundry books thereupon?

67. Liberty of Conscience.
Why in the beginning of your new gospel, preached ye liberty of conscience;
and now constrain all men to subscribe to your new doctrine: ye them whom
ye know to believe the contrary?

68. Profession of poverty.
Why preached ye, when ye first usurped authority to preach, that the
Ministers of the word, ought to profes and observe poverty as the Apostles
did: and presently none in the whole realm are so covetous as ye are, not
only to give money upon land, but also upon planie usury?

69. Churches patrimony.
Why pretend ye to have the benefices and patrimony of the Church, seeing ye
cannot show your selves to be lawful heirs and successors to them, who were
the true and right posessors thereof before you? And why have ye rejected as
Idolatry, all that which appertains to them whom ye call papists, excepting
only the patrimony and living of the Church? Or if there were no Churchin the
contry before your coming, why pretend ye as patrimony, any other thing the^
has already been given to your congregation by those of your own coat?

70. Building Churches.
Seeing one spirit could not move so many of our Kings to build so many
Churches, Colleges and Abbeys, and you to destroy the same: which of you two
may be justly esteemed, to be moved by the good spirit, and which by the evil?

71.
Finally, whether these your doings, tend not to the abolition of all memory
of our Lord Jesus Christ, yea or no? Seeing already some of you do dout, in
what time of the year he was borne, as whether in winter, or in summer: so
that apparently, your next dout will be, whether, he was borne or not; which
appears to be the end and conclusion of your new gospel.

THE TITLES OF THE DEMANDES Contained in this book of D. BRISTOVV,
1 COLLATIO Carthagine^sis page 6 2 Building of the Church 11 3 Going out 16 4
After-rising 18 5 VVondred at 20 6 Name of Catholics 22 7 Name of Heretics 26
8 Name of Protestants 27 9 Conversion of Heathen Nationss 31 10 Miracles 34 11
England 38 12 Visions 41 13 Ho^or of Crosses 42 14 Virtue of Cross 45 15 Honor
of Saints 46 16 Virtue of Saints 47 17 Casting out of Devils. 48 18
Destroying of Idolatry 52 19 Kings 54 20 In all persecutions 57 21 Churches 60
22 Service 63 23 Apish imitation 66 24 Priesthood 67 25 Monks 72 26 Fathers 73
27 Counsels 75 28 Sea Apostolic 77 29 Traditions Apostolic 78 30 Their own
Doctors 79 31 Universality 80 32 Antiquity 82 33 Consent 83 34 Authority 84 35
Unity 89 36 Keepers of the Scriptures 91 37 Storehouse of all Truth 92 38 Old
Heresies 95 39 Where grew their dostrine 96 40 They never before now 98 41
Studying of all Truth 99 42 Unsent 101 43 Succession 102 44 Apostolic Church
103 45 Changing 105 46 Our Ancestors saved 108 47 Communion of Saints 109 48
Where Christ works 112 49 All enemies 118 50 Sure to continue 119 51
Apostasy 119
THE TITLES OF THE DEMANDES Contained in this other book.
1 PReachers 131 2 Whence their doctrine 131 3 Whence their vocation 132 4 If
conform to predecessors? 132 5 Who their Doctors? 133 6 Their admission of
Tinkers 134 7 If the only written word be Judge? 135 8. S. Thomas Gospel. 136
9. Why Jews credited. 137 10. Churches authority. 137 11. Citing only the
written word. 138 12. If Scripture be easy? 139 13. Conference of places. 139
14. No means to be resolved. 140 15. Traditions. 141 16. Things unwritten,
ordered. 142 16. Church not invisible. 142 17. Their Church how long? 143 18.
The Sinagogue visible. 144 19. Time of decaying. 145 20. Sucession of theirs.
145 21. Condemning heresies. 146 22. Imitation of heretics. 146 23.
Sacraments, seals. 147 24. Faith assures not grace. 147 25. Value of
Sacraments. 148 26. Necessity of Baptism. 148 27. Preachetiue Baptism. 148
28. Baptism of Infidels infants. 149 29. Ceremonies of Baptism, 150 30.
Confirmation. 150 31. Real presence. 151 32. Receiving by faith. 151 33.
Lifting up to heaven. 152 34. In two places at once. 152 35. Penance. 153 36.
Order. 153 37. Extreme unction. 153 38. Matrimony. 154 39. Two wives at once.
155 40. Breaking of Vows. 155 41. Sins not imputed. 156 42. All good works
sins. 156 43. False assurance. 157 44. Absurdity by denying a third place.
157 45. Invocation of Saints. 158 46. Images. 158 47. Renewing old heresies.
159 48. Of the Pepusians. 159 49. Of the Nouatians. 159 50. Of the Maniches.
160 51. Of the Donatists. 160 52 Of the Arrians 160 53 Of the Eunomians 161 54
Of the Pelagians 161 55 Of the Iouinians 161 56 Of the Vigilantians 162 57 Of
the Eustacheans 162 58 Of the Iconomachians 162 59 Of the Beringarians 162 60
Of many other Heresies 163 61 Following heretics only in some points 163 62
Scottish Reformation 163 63 Churches made Stables 164 64 Burning relics 164
65 Burning the Doct. writings 164 66 Deposing Magistrates 165 67 Liberty of
conscience 165 68 Profession of Poverty 166 69 Churches patrimony 166 70
Building Churches 167 71 Abolission of al memory of Christ 168
THE CONTINVAL SVCcession of the Popes of Rome, as it is recorded in all
Cronicles and Ecclesiastical Histories (besides many other good writers) both
old and new, whereof I say with S, Augustine con. Epist. Manichaei, cap. 4. In
Catholicae Ecclesiae gremio iustissime tenet me, etc. Besides many other
things, this most worthily keeps me in the lap of the Catholic Church:
to wit, the Succession of Priests from S. Peter the Apostle him self (to whom
our Lord after his Resurrection Joan. 12. committed the feeding of his sheep)
even to the Bishop that now is.

The year of our lord. 33.34 1 PETER) 1. Pet 5. ver. 13.) and Paul. ( Act. 28)
Apostles, 57 2 Linus 68 3 Clement 77 4 Cletus 84 5 Anacletus 96 6 Euaristus 109
7 Alexander 117 8 Xistus 127 9 Telesphorus 138 10 Hyginus 142 11 Pius 153 12
Anicetus 163 13 Soter 171 14 Eleutherius So far S. Irenee li. 3. ca. 3.
against the Heresies of his time. 186 15 Victor 198 16 Zepherinus 218 17
Calistus 223 18 Vrbanus 231 19 Pontianus 236 20 Anterus 237 21 Fabianus 251 22
Cornelius 253 23 Lucius 255 24 Steven 257 25 Xistus ii 260 26 Dionysius 271 27
Felix 275 28 Eutychianus 283 29 Caius 296 30 Marcellinus 304 31 Marcellus 310
32 Eusebius 311 33 Miltiades So far, all were Martyrs 314 34 Siluester 336 35
Marcus 36 Julius 353 37 Liberius 366 38 Damasus So far S. Optatus lib. 2.
against the Donatistes of his time 384 39 Siricius 398 40 Anastasius So far
S. Augustine Epist. 165. against the Donatistes of his time 401 41 Innocentius
416 42 Zozimus 419 43 Bonifacius 423 44 Caelestinus 432 45 Xistus iii 440 46
Leo the Great 461 47 Hilarious 467 48 Simplicius 483 49 Felix ii 492 50 Gelasius
496 51 Anastasius ii 498 52 Symmachus. 514 53 Hormisda 523 54 Ihon 526 55 Felix
iii 530 56 Bonifacius ii 532 57 John ii 534 58 Agapetus 535 59 Siluerius 537 60
P Vigilius 556 61 Pelagius 561 62 John iii 575 63 Benedict 579 64 Pelagius ii
590 65 Gregory the Great 604 66 Sabinianus 605 67 Bonifacius iii 606 68
Bonifacius iiii 613 69 Deusdedit 617 70 Bonifacius v So far, all Saints but
one, as many also in them that follow. 627 71 Honorius 638 72 Seuerinus 638 73
S. John iiii 640 74 S. Theodore 647 75 S. Martin i 654 76 Eugenius 657 77
Vitalianus 672 78 S. Adeodatus 976 79 Domnus 679 80 Agatho 682 81 S. Leo ii 684
82 S. Benedict ii 685 83 John v 686 84 Cuno 687 85 S. Sergius 701 86 John vi
705 87 John vii 707 88 Sisinnius 708 89 Constantinus 716 90 Gregory ii 731 91
Gregory iii 741 92 Zachary 752 93 Steven ii 94 Steven iii 757 95 Paul 768 96
Steven iiii 772 97 Hadrian 796 98 Leo iii 816 99 Steven v 817 100 Paschalis 824
101 Eugenius ii 827 102 Valentine 828 103 Gregory iiii 844 104 Sergius ii 847
105 Leo iiii 855 106 Benedict iii 858 107 Nicolas 867 108 Hadrian ii 872 109
John viii 882 110 Marinus ii. 884 111 Hadrian iii 885 112 Steven vi 891 113
Formosus 895 114 Bonifacius vi 896 115 Steven vii 897 116 Roman 117 Theodore
ii 118 John ix 899 119 Benedict iiii 903 120 Leo v 121 Christophor 904 122
Sergius iii 911 123 Anastasius iii 913 124 Lando 914 125 John x 628 126 Leo vi
127 Steven viii 930 128 John xi 935 129 Leo vii 959 130 Steven ix 942 131
Marinus iii 946 132 Agapetus ii 956 133 John xii 963 134 Leo viii 965 135 John
xiii 972 136 Domnus ii 137 Benedict v 972 138 Bonefacius vii 975 139 Benedict
vi 984 140 John xiiii 985 141 John xv 995 142 John xvi 143 Gregory v 998 144
Siluester ii 1003 145 John xvii 146 John xviii 1009 147 Sergius iiii 1012 148
Benedict vii 1024 149 John xix 1032 150 Benedict viii 1045 151 Gregory vi 1047
152 Clement ii 1048 153 Damasus ii 1049 154 Leo ix 1055 155 Victor ii 1057 156
Steven ix 1059 157 Nicolas ii 1061 158 Alexander ii 1073 159 Gregory vii 1086
160 Victor iii 1088 161 Vrbanus ii 1099 162 Paschalis ii 1118 163 Gelasius ii
1119 164 Callistus ii 1124 165 Honorius ii 1130 166 Innocentius ii 1143 167
Caelestinus ii 1144 168 Lucius ii 1145 169 Eugenius iii 1153 170 Anastasius
iiii 1154 171 Hadrian iiii 1159 172 Alexander iii 1181 173 Lucius iii 1185 174
Vrbanus iii 1187 175 Gregory viii 1188 176 Clement iii 1191 177 Caelestinus
iii 1198 178 Innocentius iii 1216 179 Honorius iii 1227 180 Gregory ix 1241
181 Caelestinus iiii 1243 182 Innocentius iiii 1254 183 Alexander iiii 1261 184
Vrbanus iiii 1265 185 Clement iiii 1271 186 Gregory x 1276 187 Innocentius v
188 Hadrian v 189 John xx 1277 190 Nicholas iii 1281 191 Martin iiii 1285 192
Honorius iiii 1288 193 Nicolas iiii 2294 194 Caelestinus v 1295 195 Bonifacius
viiii 1303 196 Benedict ix 1305 197 Clement v 1316 198 John xxi 1334 199
Benedict x 1342 200 Clement vi 1352 201 Innocentius vi 1362 202 Vrbanus v 1371
203 Gregory xi 1378 204 Vrbanus vi 1389 205 Bonifacius ix 1404 206 Innocentius
vii 1406 207 Gregory xii 1409 208 Alexander v 1410 209 John xxii 1417 210
Martin v 1431 211 Eugenius iiii 1447 212 Nicolas v 1455 213 Callistus iii 1458
214 Pius ii 1464 215 Paul ii 1471 216 Xistus iiii 1484 217 Innocentius viii
1492 218 Alexander vi 1503 219 Pius iii 220 Julius ii 1513 221 Leo x 1517 under
them Luther rises 1522 222 Hadrian vi 1523 223 Clement vii 1534 224 Paul iii
1550 225 Julius iii 1555 226 Marcellus ii 227 Paul iiii 1560 228 Pius iiii 1566
229 Pius v 1572 230 Gregory xiii

Venite fratres si vultis, etc. Come brethren if ye will, that you may be
graffed in the vine, it is a grief to see you lie so cut of. Number the
priests even from the very See of Peter: and in that order of Fathers, se who
succeeded who^. That is the Rock, which the proud gates of hell do not
overcome. So said S. Augustine, a branch then cleuing to the vine, in the
Psalm that he made against the piece of Donate an Archeheretike of that time.
And even so say we that now likewise are of the wholle vine, to these pieces
of Luther and Calvin and others, that have in our time cut off them selves. Or
else, if we say not well, let them al lay their heads together, and show that
which they hitherto could never show: that Gregory the fiftenth who now is
Pope, and from whom it pleases them to dissent in so many Articles of Faith:
that either he (I say) is, or any other of the Popes, his Predecessors, was,
the first amongst the Popes, that brought or took into the Romans faith the
said Articles, or any one of the^. Sure it is, that they cannot so charge
neither this, nor no other Pope. And therefore plain it is, that the Romans
are still in S. Peter and S. Paul's faith, as they were when S. Paul wrote unto
the^ And therefore again with S. Augustine, Ipsa est Petra, This is the Rock
which the proud gates of hell do not overcome.

FINIS.

