THREE QVESTIONS ANSVVERED. I. QVESTION. What should our meaning be, when after
the reading of the fourth Commandment, we pray; Lord incline our hearts to
keep this law? II. QVESTION. How shall the fourth Commandment, being
delivered in such form of words, bind us to sanctify any day, but only the
seventh, the day wherein God rested, and which the Jews sanctified? III.
QVESTION. How shall it appear to be the Law of Nature to sanctify one day in
every week?


ACT. 20.20.26.27. I am pure from the blood of all men, for I have kept back
nothing that was profitable unto you, but have declared unto you all the
counsel of God.

printer's device of John Lichfield and James Short, featuring the arms of the
University of Oxford (McKerrow 336) SAPIET FELICI
AC: OX



AT OXFORD, Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD, and JAMES SHORT Printers to the famous
University. 1621.

To the Reader.
THERE is sarce any point of doctrine more controverted, then the doctrine of
the Sabbath, Two points of difference amongst us are: when the day begins,
and what work may be done therein.
as Dr Bound tells us: indeed, not only we Protestants among our selves, but
the Papists also among their selves, differ in opinion hereabout. Again, there
is (in England) judging one another, there is doing things doubtingly, and
there is doing things with offense: which were they tolerable in the Church of
Christ, Romans 14.
St Paul would not have spent a whole chapter about these matters. Moreover,
whereas the Papists praying in latin do pray without understanding; many
amongst us do pray with a sinful understanding: for as in words, so in
meaning, they desire God to incline their hearts to keep the 7th day for
Sabbath, and to do no work therein. Farthermore, It was printed last 1618.
some in their book often printed (to say nothing of other) have these and the
like passages: The 4th commandment is no more Ceremonial, then all the rest:
the observation of the 7th day is a moral and perpetual duty: we may not pick
up a few sticks on the Sabbath: there is as much difference between the Sabbath
and other days, as between Sacramental bread and common bread. etc.

The knowledge and consideration hereof (among other things) causes me greatly
to desire, that the doctrine of the Sabbath may once at length be thoroughly
discussed by men of sound judgment: and doubtless, what the Scriptures sentence
is in this matter, would soon be known, were it (as Dr Cranmer sometime
advised) well handled by the learned men of our Vniversityes: Act. and Monum.
no man amongst us should need any longer to halt between two opinions, as
(the more to be lamented) many of long time have done, and still do; yea, and
unless the better order be taken, no doubt will do even unto the end of the
world.

Now to provoke hereunto I have written this little book: and partly also, as
hoping it will conduce something to the finding out of the truth, when the time
comes, that it shall be more carefully sought after which time God hasten for
his sake which is the truth, Jesus Christ; unto the illumination of whose
Spirit I commend thee (gentle Reader) and so rest.

Thine in him as long as life lasts. TH. BROAD.

I. QVESTION.
AS when the 8. commandment is read, and we pray; Lord, incline our hearts to
keep this law: it is all one, as if we said; Lord, incline our hearts not to
steal. So, when the 4. commandment is read, and we pray; Lord, incline our
hearts to keep this Law: it is all one, as if we had said; Lord, incline our
hearts to sanctify the Sabbath, to keep the 7. day for Sabbath, and to do no
work therein: for this is that law. The Jews had asked this in words and
meaning both, suppose they had had the like manner of praying after this
commandment: and we must needs ask the same in words, as they should have
done. The question then is: Whether should we ask the same in meaning, as we
do in words; or what should our meaning be?

Answer of some in these days.
By the doctrine of some in these days, as in words, so in meaning, we should
desire God to incline our hearts to keep the 7. day for Sabbath, and to do no
work therein. They teach, that the observation of the 7. day is a moral and
perpetual duty: that we may not so much as pick up sticks in the same: and
(in a word) that the 4. commandment is no more Ceremonial, then all the rest.
Now, whereas there is one text principally against them, Col. 2.16, 17.
namely this; Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in
respect of an holy day, or of the New-moone, or of the Sabbaths: Which are a
shadow of things to come, etc: by Sabbaths here they will not have the weekly
Sabbaths meant. But what have they to say? It is Sabbaths in the plural
number: and does not the word Sabbaths in the plural number import the weekly
Sabbaths? See Mat. 28.1. Act. 13, 14. and 16, 13: with many other places. This
(in my knowledge) is all they have to say; which is so little, that it only
argues a will to say something: it is not so much as a shadow of sound proof.

Consider (1) that St Paul here uses another word, which does most properly
signify the Festival days, (...): and therefore it is very unlikely, that by
Sabbaths the same days should be meant, as they would have it: this had been
a needless repetition. (2) Unless by Sabbaths here are meant the weekly
Sabbaths: Christian people chose the first day, and made it their Sabbath,
says the book of Homilies. By the doctrine then of our Church, the
observation of the Lords day is an Eccles: ordinance, and not an Apostol:
precept. Sozom: lib: 5. cap. 8.
what warrant have we in the Scripture to work upon the Jews Sabbath? Will
they say, that the Apostles command to sanctify the Lords day in memory of
Christ's resurrection? Be this granted, which cannot be proved, and is something
discrepant from the doctrine of our Church: does it therefore follow, that we
need not keep the 7. day in memory of the worlds creation? Constantine
commanded, that the 6 day should be kept in memory of Christ's death on the
Cross: yet was the day of Christ's resurrection kept also. Sozomenus says,
that at Constantinople, and almost in all other places, lib. 7. cap. 19.
Sabbato and postridie Sabbati convenient: and in the Scripture we read of
meetings on both days. It is then a weak argument: The Apostles commanded to
keep the first day in memory of Christ's resurrection: therefore we need not
keep the 7 day in memory of the worlds creation. This I would have thee well
to consider; that St Paul (of the Apostles) is Christ's only Doctor about
days: he alone by way of doctrine handles this point, and he handles it
purposly in three several Epistles here; to the Romans, among whom he had
never been; Col. 2. Romans 14. Gal. 4. The controversy about the Sabbath would
soon be ended, did we acknowledge St Paul for a sufficient Doctor in this
matter; as it is great reason we should.
and to the Galathians, who turned from the Gospel he had preached unto them:
so that he had diverse times just occasion to show his mind fully in this
matter. Now then, who can believe, that we need not keep the Jews Sabbath (as
it is certain we need not, and themselves will acknowledge it) but St Paul
should give us to understand as much in one of these places, And unless in
this, in none: for in his Epistles to the Romans and Galathians he speaks
only in a general manner. True, that general sayings here are enough, as in
the matter of meats: the law forbad swines flesh, blood, and the like: yet we
eat these meats, and our warrant is. Let no man judge you in your meat or
drink, The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink; St Paul speaking twice of
days in a general manner, and once in a particular; would no doubt have
excepted the 7 day Sabbath, had it been to be excepted.
and such like general sayings. So general sayings are enough in the matter
of days: but if in this place, where we have a particular distributio^, and
the very word Sabbaths used we shall say that the weekly Sabbaths are not
meant; who will believe, in other places? The Sabbatharies, which heretofore
would have us Christians observe the Jews Sabbath, might with more color put
of any text, then this: either this text or none, is of force against them.
(.3.) Thus it is taken by many great Divines: and St Augustine terms the
Sabbath Sacramentum vmbratile, Spirit: and lit: cap: 14. Again, in the 15.
chapter of that book, he terms the 4 commandment preceptum figugatum:
Instit. in 4 precept.
and Calvin says, vmbratile veteres nuncupare solent: so that it seems, the
Fathers generally by Sabbaths here understood the weekly Sabbaths, and
therefore termed the 4 commandment vmbratile, shadowish.

I have mervailed, that in these days two or three (for I know no more in
print) should offer to dissent from so many great Divines about the
interpretation of this text; especially, having no more to say for their own
interpretation. But it seems, they think, if by Sabbaths here the weekly
Sabbaths be meant, then it cannot be avoided but that by ordinances in the
second verse before, Col. 2.14.
the precept of the Sabbath must also be meant, as well as the precepts of the
New moon and holy days joined with it: and thus St Paul should say as much of
the Sabbath and the precept thereof: as he does say or can be said of the
new mood and the precept thereof: for more cannot be said of the new moon, the^
that it is a shadow, nor of the precept thereof, then that it is an ordinance
blotted out. But shall I therefore offer to interpret a text wrongfully, because
I my self cannot answer an objection, which may be grounded on it being
rightly interpreted? How much better were it to acknowledge mine own weakness,
and to think, that other happily may unloose that knot which I am not able.

Besides this text there are other pregnant enough to prove that the Sabbath
was a shadow or Ceremony; and consequently, that the 4 commandment is more
Ceremonial, then the rest. As that text, Mat: 12.7: But if ye had known, what
this means, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, ye would not have
condemned the guiltless. God calls the Sab. a sign, Exodus: 31.13. Christ
likeneth it to the shewbread and sacrifices mat. 12.4.7. and Paul terms it a
shadow Col. 2.
Here likeneth the observation of the Sabbath to the offering of sacrifices: he
blames the Pharysees, because when God would have mercy before sacrifice, they
preferred sacrifice before mercy, that is the keeping of the Sabbath before the
feeding of their hungry brethren.

Again Hebr: 4. In this chapter ( as Marlorate also observes) mention is made
of three Rests or Sabbaths: one, the first seventh day, ver: 4. another, A day
may be termed Gods Rest or Sab. in 2 respects: first because he rested therein:
secondly, because it is consecrated to his service. In the former respect, only
the first 7 day is gods Sab.
the land of Canaan (where Zion was Gods Rest for ever Psalm: 132. verse. 8) a
third, the kingdom of heaven, verse. 9. Now indeed, it is not here said in
express terms, that the 7 day Sabbath, is a text of the heavenly Sabbath: but
consider (.1.) That the Apostle in this Epistle entreats much of types, and
and of that whereof they were types. (2.) If the land of Canaan (Gods local
rest in this world) were a type of the rest in heaven as all acknowledge: then
likewise the 7 day (Gods te^porall Rest in this world) as spoken of here both
together, and in the same manner. (.3.) The 7 day and the kingdom of heaven
have one common name, Gods Rests in this world were two: the one of the time,
the, 7th day the other, of place; the land of Canaan.
Rest or Sabbath: and the resemblance between them is as much, as between the
sacrifices of beasts in the time of the law, and that sacrifice of Christ on
the Cross. As God rested on the 7 day after his works in the 6 days: as the
Israelites rested on the 7 day after their works in the 6 days: so shall the
godly rest in heaven after their labors and miseryes in this world, Blessed
are the dead, which dye in the Lord, for they rest from their Labors. Reu. 14.


Some that acknowledge the 7 days Sabbath to be a type or shadow, will have it
such in respect of the strict rest, S. Paul would not have said that the holy
days, new-moone and Sab. were a shadow; if not these, but circumstances only
about them, had been a shadow. If it were a shadow because it was the last of
the week: then belike the new-moone was a shadow because it was the first of
the month.
and that it was the last of seven: but I doubt not the 7 day Sabbath was a
shadow of the Sabbath to come, inasmuch as it was a Sabbath that is a day of
Rest and refreshing. And so was the land of Canaan a type of the kingdom of
heaven, inasmuch as it was a place of Rest after the Egyptian-bondage, and
wearisome iourny through the wilderness. The like may be said of the new-moone
and Feasts joined with the Sabbath, Col. 2. they were all in likelihood a
shadow of the same thing to come, the kingdom of heaven; and in one and the
same respect, I mean, in being times of Resting, Feasting and rejoicing.
Again, some that acknowledge the seventh day Sabbath for a shadow, will not
have it such from the beginning: but when as all other types and shadows were
such from their first institution, The very foundation of the Jews Sab. was
typical: for God sanctified the 7 day because he had rested therein
who will believe them without manifest proof? And shall I demand of them,
when the 7 day Sabbath became a shadow, and which was the first Sabbath that
was such; I doubt not, we should all enter into the heavenly Sabbath before
they would agree upon an answer to this question. Observe, that the Apostle
Hebr: 4, 4, I say, if not in time: for in likelihood God did not sanct. the 7
day, before the first 7 day was ended. Note these words, Genesis 2.3. because in
it he had rested, not, would rest.
speaks of the 7 day, as rested upon by God; and not, as sanctified by him,
or enjoined to be sanctified of man: so that the 7 day then became a type, when
God rested therein. The 7 day in order (if not in time) before it was
sanctified, was Gods Rest, and consequently, a shadow of the rest remaining to
the people of God. But this, by way of disgression: to return.

Enough has been said to make it appear, that the 4 commandment is more
Ceremonial, then the (...); and therefore not (as the other) to be observed
^^^^ding to the letter: only I will add for a conclusion ^^^t saying of
Augustine; Quisquis illum diem (Sabbatu^) observat sicut litera sonat,
carnaliter sapit, that is, Spig. and lit. cap. 14.
Whosoever observes the Sabbath, as the letter sounds savoureth of the
flesh. Now they which keep the 7 day, and do no work therein, keep the
sabbath, as the letter of the precept sounds. Their Handwriting then should
have been blotted out, and not put in print, who teach, that the observation
of the 7 day is a moral and perpetual duty, and that we may not so much as
pick up sticks in the same.

Answer agreeable to the Doctrine of our Church.
When the 8 commandment is read, and we pray, So, for the rest of the comman.
Lord, incline our hearts to keep this Law, our words and meaning must agree;
as in words, so in meaning, we desire grace not to steal: but here, not so.
Though in words we desire God to incline our hearts to keep the 7 day for
Sabbath, and to do no work therein, yet not in meaning. It is said in the
book of Homylies, that whatsoever is found in the 4 commandment appertaining
to the law of nature, The 4 comman. bound the Israelites to do that, which they
were not bound to do by the law of nature: but not us Christians. This is the
common doctrine
ought to be observed of all good Christians: our meaning then after the
doctrine of our Church should be thus: Lord, incline our hearts to keep this
law, so far forth as it is the Law of nature. Or thus: Lord incline our hearts
to keep so much of this Law as appertains to the law of nature: which is the
same in effect.

Thus have I answered a very needful question in my opinion: what other will
judge of this matter, I know ^^^^t for mine own part I judge it so needful to
be known, Our Church has taken order for the nstruction of the ignorant in
this matter, I mean, by the book of Homilyes: but in these days sew parishes
have that book; in fewer it is read; and where ttis read, scarce one in an
hundred (I fear) learneth a right meaning by it.
that with St Paul I would gladly spend and be spent to bring my ignorant
brethren to a right meaning here^^^s it not a lamentable case, when a man
prays, Lord in ^^^e mine heart to keep the 7 day for Sabbath and to do no
work therein to mean according to his word; which is to observe a shadow; and
this, a kind of denial that Christ is come? The Papists pray without
understanding: but such pray with a sinful understanding. And if by some
trial I may make conjecture, thus do the greatest part of this kingdom:
neither is it any mervaile, if very many so do, when they are so taught by
some in these days. Again, I find by experience, that they will hardly be
brought to a right meaning here: it seems to them so strange, that in the
Public Service one thing should be spoken, and another mea^t; as that they
should hear, the 7 day is the Sabbath, when not the 7 day, but the first day
must be kept by them. And when to make them take more heed, I tell them, that
to keep the 7 day for Sabbath, and to do no work therein (as the words of
the commandment are) is to savor of the flesh, which is death in the judgment
of St Augustine and other learned Divines: Sapere secundum carnem mors est.
Spir. and lit. cap. 14.
this makes them even to stand amazed at the strangnes of the matter.
Moreover, as it is hard to bring them to, so no doubt will it be to keep them
in a right meaning; these words, the 7 day is the Sabbath, and, in it thou
shall do no work, still sounding in their ears. Which I write to this end,
that my brethren may be more careful often to ingeminate unto their
Parishioners the doctrine of our Church delivered in the book of Homilyes.
Truly, if ever, it had here need be, as the Prophet Esaie speaks; precept
upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line, line upon line, here a
little, Esai 28.10.
and there a little: or rather indeed here a great deal, and there a great
deal; and yet I fear me all to little, as would be found upon trial
afterward.

II. QVESTION.
IN the judgment of St Augustine we Christians are bound by the 4 commandment
to keep a figurative or spiritual Sabbath: Epist. 99. ad Ianuar.
Inter omnia illa december precepta etc. Among all those ten precepts, that alone,
which is there placed of the Sabbath, Tertul: adver: iud.
is commanded figuratively to be observed. Thus Tertullian terms Christ
(whom, as the beloved Son we must hear Mat. 17. Hebr. 1.) Sabbati
spiritualis cultorem: and Chrysostom saying, that Legis iustitia prima and
salutaris december habet mandata, sets down this for the 4, Cole Sabbatum
spirituale, Cited by Mus: loc. commun.
keep a spiritual Sabbath.

There is according to Augustine and other (as I observe in my little reading)
a twofold keeping of those commandments touching the Sabbath, circumcision,
There are two sorts of Sabbath, after Augustine and other: the one literal,
carnal, or temporal: the other figurative, spiritual, and eternal.
sacrifices, and the like the one, literal or carnal: the other, figurative
or spiritual. Now the Israelites were bound to keep these in a literal
manner, that is, to do no work on the 7 day, to circumcise on the 8 day, and
to offer lambs and such like in sacrifice to the Lord: We Christians are bound
to keep these in a figurative or spiritual manner, that is, to rest from the
works of our corrupt nature all the days of the work, to circumcise the
foreskins of our hearts, and to offer spiritual sacrafices of praise and
thanksgiving. These two kinds of binding (figurative and literal) I observe in
St Augustine, and some other: but by the common doctrine in these days there
is a third, of that commandment touching the Sabbath though not of the other;
namely, partly literal; for it binds us to sanctify one day of the week.

But there a question may well be demanded. How shall the 4 commandment being
delivered in such form of words, bind us to sanctify any day, but only the
seventh? Suppose, that Christ had said to his Disciples: Remember the day of
Resurrection to sanctify it: six days of the week ye shall labor, and do
all that ye have to do; but the first day is the day of Resurrection: in it
you shall do etc. How should this commandment bind us to sanctify any day,
but only the first, the day of Resurrection? So God saying: Remember the
sabbath (or, day of Rest) to sanctify it: 6 days shall thou labor, and do
all that thou have to do; but the 7 day is the Sabbath etc. How should this
commandment bind us to sanctify any day but only the seventh, the day
wherein God rested, and which the Jews sanctified?

I have thought good thus to unfold the 4 commandment for the better
understanding of that which follows.
Answer of a great Divine heretofore.
In the 4 commandment we have to observe (.1.) The commandment it self
briefly delivered, and is thus: Remember the Sabbath to sanctify it. (.2.)
Then follows an Explication in order, God showing first, which is the
Sabbath; the seventh day is the Sabbath to the Lord thy God: and after, how it
is sanctified; in it thou shall do no work (.3.) Lastly a reason is yielded,
why God requires this service: Redem: in 4 precept.
for in six days the Lord made etc. Thus Zanchius in effect; thus Virell
likewise in his Grounds of Religion: and this analisis of the 4 commandment is
so natural that every one of impartial judgment must needs approve it and I
could wish that such as undertake to handle the 4th commandment, would take
notice of it.

So then, this is (for substance) the whole 4 commandment; Remember the
Sabbath to sanctify it: as for that which follows, it is either an
explication, or a Reason. Here now the word Sabbath a great Divine would have
taken in a general sense: so that God saying; Remember the Sabbath to
sanctify it; That thou may the better conceive his meaning. Suppose, God had
said to the Israelites; Remember to honor your King, and Saul is your king:
When Saul was dead, and David come into his place; this commandment, Remember
to honor your king, had bound them still, as much to honor David now, as Saul
before. So, God saying; Remember the Sabbath to sanctify it, and the 7 day is
the Sabbath: when the 7 day ceased to be the Sabbath, and the first day came in
his place; this commandment, Remember the Sabbath to sanctify it, may bind
as well to sanctify the first day now, as it did the 7 day heretofore. Thus
teaches a great Divine: but I cannot easily subscribe hereunto. In my opinion
God saying, Remember the Sabbath to sanctify it; is all one, as if he had
said, Remember the 7 day to sanctify it. The Sabbath is the 7 day, and the 7
day is the Sabbath, in the scriptures: many reasons there are, which will not
suffer us to approve his doctrine.

(.1.) The days of the week may be named thus; the first day, the second day
etc. or thus, the day of creating light, the day of creating the firmament etc.
As now the first day, and the day of creating light, are the same: so likewise,
the seventh day, and the day of Rest. And this appears to be the judgment of
Augustine, Eusebius, So likewise it is taken in some Courts: a process citing to
appear dic Sabbati, is upon Saturday.
Tertullian etc. seeing in their books by the Sabbath is meant the 7 day, and
by the Lords day is meant the first: for otherwise they would have used the
names of Sabbath and Lords day for one and the same day of the week. (.2.) By
the word Sabbath in the end of the commandment must needs be meant the 7 day
only. For observe: and rested the 7 day; wherefore the Lord blessed the
Sabbath, and sanctified it. Here thou see, that Gods resting on the 7 day, is
the reason, wherefore he sanctified the Sabbath: and can it be a reason of
sanctifiing any other day besides the seventh; especially, when he labored on
all the other? The reason of the 7 days institution vanished as a shadow with
the shadow.
Suppose, we had the like speech in the New Testament, as thus: He rose again
upon the first day; wherefore he blessed the day of Resurrection, and
sanctified it: who would not take the day of Resurrection here for the first
day only? Add, that were not Sabbath and seventh day the same, it should
rather have been said; Wherefore the Lord blessed the 7th day, or this
Sabbath; then the Sabbath. Again, it is said, blessed the Sabath, the meaning
is, in the beginning: and now turn to Genesis 2. and there it is said, that God
blessed the 7 day, and sanctified it. These words then, Sabbath and seventh
day, are used promiscue in the Scripture (.3.) By this doctrine the 4
commandment should be of larger extent, then that commandment in the
beginning (suppose, it were a commandment as some will have it:) for there it
is said, God blessed the 7 day, not, the Sabbath. (.4.) Thus should the 4
commandment consist of a general commandment, and a particular the general,
Remember the Sabbath to sanctify it: the particular, The 7 day shall be the
Sabbath. (5) Had they who first appointed that order of reading the 4
commandment, and the people praying after, been of this judgment: they would
me thinks have put the first in place of the seventh, the first day, and not
the 7, being now the Sabbath to the Lord our God. Suppose, God had given this
commandment to the Israelites: Remember to honor your king, and Saul is your
king. This commandment being read in the Synagogues, and the people praying
after; Lord have mercy on us etc. when Saul was dead, and David king; would
they have still read the commandment in the same form of words, Remember to
honor your king, and Saul is your king? I cannot believe it. They then no
doubt, who first appointed this order in the Church, took the Sabbath and the
7 day for the same in the 4 commandment.

Answers of other in these days.
Sabbath and the 7 day are the same, is acknowledged by some other in these
days: but they would have the word seventh taken in a general sense; so that
(I conceive) they would have the 4 commandment read thus. Remember the Sabbath
to sanctify it etc. six days etc. but a seventh day is the Sabbath etc
Hereunto my answer is (.1. A seventh day, that is, one of seven; as I
understand them.
) That the word truly and properly translated, is the seventh for the particle
is there used: neither I believe, did any ever translate it otherwise (.2.)
Thus should the word be taken in one sense in the beginning of the
commandment; and in another, afterward. (...)
For after it is said; and rested on the 7 day: here by seventh day must needs
be meant one certain day. (.3.) If God sanctified a seventh day, then he made
man on a sixth day; and were not this to confound every days work? (.4) The
same word is used Genesis 2; and there it must be translated the seventh day: for
it were absurd to say, in it.
God blessed a 7 day, because he rested on the 7 day: if God blessed a seventh
day, then he rested upon a 7 day, Genesis 2. verse. 3. (.5.) Thus should not god
from Sinai appoint, what day of the week the Israelites should sanctifi; and
so indeed writes a reverend Divine; It was never commanded nor appointed, what
one certain day should be kept among seven, but that there should be
observed a seventh day. But should Paul have taught in the Jews Synagogues,
that God from Sinai did no more appoint their day to be sanctified, then ours;
and that Christians sanctified the Lords day, kept the 4 commandment according
to the letter, as much as they: I leave it to other to consider, what would have
followed thereupon.

Sabbath to the etc. but yet by their doctrine any day of the week may be
meant hereby, and with them the Lords day is the seventh. That the Lords day
is, and must be, the 7th day; begins to be something a common doctrine.
Thus a learned Preacher wrote unto me. The 7 day alone is sanctified, but the
Lord has not assigned any immutable Date of time, from which this 7 must be
reckoned: for he never says in any place, God sanctified the 7 from such or
such a Date. So the observing of that number is immutable, but the taking of
one only beginning, from which to begin the account is not immutable: had it
been, the Apostles, in whose time the chang of Dates began, would sure have
known it, and not suffered such chang without reproof. This I received from a
learned Preacher. Now, unto those his words; for he never says in any place,
God sanctified etc. my answer is, That he had no need so to say, unless there
had been more then six days before the first seventh, or that he had
blessed any other seventh day since. Neither of which being so, the Date must
needs be from the day, wherein God separated the light from the darkness: and
what more certain Date of time, from whence to begin the reckoning, then
from the beginning of the creation, before which there was no time at all?
Again, whereas he says, that the change of Dates began in the Apostles days:
I would know, where this does appear. Rather the contrary appears: Act: 20.
1. Cor. 16.
for by the first of the week (as themselves say) is meant the Lords day. See
then, the ancient Date of time is continued by the Apostles: for if the Lords
day were the first of the week, the Iwes Sabbath must needs be the 7th and
last of the week in the Apostles time, as it was in the beginning.

I have much mervailed, wherefore some must needs have the Lords day be the
7th, so contrary to the Scriptures, who term it the first of the week in two
places: and at the mouth of two witnesses we would think, this matter should
be established. But it seems, as Isaac said, Genesis 27.
Jacob have I blessed, and he shall be blessed: so they think; God blessed the
7th day, and it must be blessed: wherefore unless the Lords day come to be the
7th, it is not blessed and sanctified. But they should consider, that God did
not bless the day, The Lords day will come to be the 7 when Esau comes o be
Jacob.
because it was the 7th had he, then were it some reason, that the name and
blessing should still go together: but now, he blessed the day, because he had
rested therein; and if these two may be sundered, much more the other. What God
has put asunder, let not man join together, Genesis 2.3
Lords day and seventh day: it will not procure them a blessing to go about in
such sort to maintain the truth. If their doctrine can otherwise be
maintained, I desire them in Christ's name, that they would if their doctrine
cannot otherwise be maintained, I admonish them in the fear of God to teach
such doctrine, as may. Were it once received that we must sanctify the 7th
day; and they, neither by Scripture, reason, nor Fathers can prove, that the
day we do now sanctify, is the seventh: will it not come to pass, that we
shall fall back to the Jews day? The Scripture is against them: and that in
two places. Act. 20. 1. Cor. 16, Reason is against them: for if the Jews
Sabbath until the change were the 7, how should the next day be the seventh
also? the name seventh has reference to other days going before: shall one
and the same day be the seventh of one week, and the sixth of the next week?
Now, among the Fathers, Jerome is against them, for he terms Wednesday the
fourth of the week: Si dies observare non licet, and menses, and tempora, and
annos; nos quoque simile crimen incurrimus, quartam Sabbati observantes, and
Parasceven, and diem Dominicam etc. Com: in Ep: ad Gal: cap: 4.

Finally, by this answer, as by the former, the word seventh should be taken
in one sense in the beginning of the commandment, and in another afterward for
after it is said, and rested on the 7th day. Here by seventh day must needs be
meant one certain day: no man will say, that God rested on the day, we now
keep holy. Again, if by seventh day Ex. 20. any day be meant as well as
Saturday: by first day Act: 20. why shall not any day be meant, as well as
Sunday? But not to stand longer hereabout: this last answer cannot stand
without the overthrow of Gods week: that it may be received, God had need to
make the world again.

A likelier answer, then either of the former.
Chrysostom on Genesis 2. has these words. Iam hic ab initio doctrinam hanc
nobis insinuat Deus etc. Here from the beginning God does insinuate this
doctrine, that one day in the circle of the week should be severed for
spiritual work. Note the word insinuates. Dr Field has these words in his 5
book, and 29 chapter. Presupposing the knowledge of the creation, reason
convinces us, that one day of seven must be a day of rest. Reason convinces.
Some such thing I think must be said here: as that God by giving this
commandment to the Israelites, does insinuate, that Christians should
sanctify one day of the week. Or thus: Inasmuch as God, having chosen to
himself a Church commanding the^, after 6 days labor to sanctify the 7 day;
reason convinces, or this is an argument, that it is Gods will, we Christians
(now his Church) should do in some sort, as the Israelites by the 4th
commandment were bound to do heretofore. The 4th commandment binds us to
sanctify one day of the week: that is, It binds us to believe, that it is
Gods will, we should sanctify one day of the week; seeing (as thereby it
appears) he once appointed the Israelites after 6 days labor to sanctify
the seventh day, and the same reasons in part still continue.

To end this matter. Were it a law of this kingdom set forth long agone in
these words: Remember to fast upon Thursday; We in these times faring well upon
Thursday, and fasting upon friday; some man should say, that the forenamed law
bound us so to do; and unless we did fast upon Friday, we brake that Statute:
who hearing this, would not be much moved at the strangenes of the matter, and
presently demand; How shall this be, seeing the Statute speaks of Thursday?
How can such a Statute bind us to fast upon Friday? Now, how the like unto
this may be, I have showed with the best skill I have: and if any think my
skill herein defective, and say; Never any law of God or man did bind in such
manner, as you speak of. I must confess it, in my knowledge: but did ever any
other law of God or man appoint a thing to be done on one day of the week,
and bind to do it on another day; or appoint a thing to be done in one
place, and bind to do it in another place? Such a law (if there were ever any
such) did bind in such manner, as I speak of: or if any has more skill to
answer this question, I greatly desire him to show his skill. The question is
such, as we would think, every one of the meanest understanding would demand
it first of all: and it is made a needful question to be answered, by reason
of those strange interpretations of Gods word aforemencioned, I mean that the
Sabbath and seventh day are not the same in the fourth Commandment: again
that by seventh day in the fourth commandment any day of the week may be
signified. Should way be given to such interpretations of the Scripture, who
sees not what would follow thereupon? It does not a little move me, when in
Protestant writers I read such passages as this; It was never commanded nor
appointed, what one certain day should be kept among seven, etc. Consider
well of the matter, and thou will say, that I am not moved without cause.

III QVESTION.
HOW shall it appear to be the law of Nature to sanctify one day in every
week?

Answer.
Almighty God having in 6 days created the heaven and the earth, rested upon
the 7 day, Genesis 2.3.
and therefore sanctified it; as is said, Gen: 2. Hence now some would gather,
that it is the law of nature to sanctify one day in every week: but indeed it
will hence rather follow, that it is the law of nature to sanctify the precise
seventh day. Upon these premises: God made the world in six days, and resting
on the seventh day sanctified it; by the light of nature or reason this
inference should rather be made: therefore it is the law of nature to
sanctify the seventh day. Then do we most nearly follow Gods example, when
we work upon those very days, which he wrought upon; and sanctify that very
day, which he sanctified. God in the beginning sanctified the seventh day:
therefore it is the law of nature to sanctify the seventh day; is a nearer
inference than that other: therefore it is the law of nature to sanctify one
day of the seven or week. The like may be said touching the placing of the
fourth commandment among the moralls, if any would fetch an argument thence to
prove this matter.

In the 2 to the Romans Paul says, That the Gentiles did by nature the things
contained in the Law, Romans 2:14.
and were a law to themselves: From which text happily an argument might be
fetched to prove as much the law of nature, as M. Dod affirms, that is, to
have solemn times; for so the Gentiles had: but now the Gentiles sanctified
not one day in every week. It will rather follow from the practice of the
Gentiles, that it is the law of nature to have a place appointed, than one day
in every week appointed for public meetings: the Gentiles had Temples.

1. Cor. 11.14.
In the 1 Cor. 11. S. Paul has these words: Does not even nature it self teach
you, that if a man has long hair, it is a shame unto him? Now should I say in
like manner, does not even nature it self teach us to sanctify one day in
every week? For one that would affirm, many I think at first would deny,
that nature taught it them, they see no such thing by the light of nature, they
had never any natural inclination to sanctify one day of every seven. But
though at first every man will be ready thus to say, yet upon consideration
happily, it will seem the best order: and if we see by The light in us (whereof
Christ speaks Mat. 6. Though it be not by any express command from Christ or
his Apostles, but by an ordinance of the Church (as is the doctrine of many
great Divines, and of our church in the book of Homilies) that we sanctify
the Lords day, rather then another day in the week: yet can I maintain, that
it is the law of Nature to sanctify this very day; for it is The best order.
And this I think no man of judgment will once offer to deny; unless perhaps,
because some hold a superstitious conceit of the day.
) that it is the best order to sanctify one day in every week; then me thinks
it may be said, that nature does teach us so to do. Let all things (says
Paul) be done decently and in order, 1. Cor. 14. This command of Paul is the
very law of nature: does not even nature it self teach us as much? The best
order is the will of God, and the law of nature. This is it then which I say.
If reason, the light in us, or Nature (for these I take for the same) teaches
it to be the best order to sanctify one day in every week, then is it to be
held the law of nature so to do: but Reason, the light in us, What the
Philosophers term Reason; Christ terms The light in us; and Paul, Nature.
or Nature teaches it to be the best order to sanctify one day in every
week: therefore it is to be held the law of nature so to do. This is the only
argument to prove this matter.

But here are two things, which I think good to advertise thee of One is, that
we should not term it Moral to sanctify one day in the week, though it be
the law of nature so to do. Some would have the Moral law and the law of
Nature to be the same: but when they have better considered the matter, I doubt
not, they will be of another mind. The law of nature (to distinguish of it so
far forth as concerns the present purpose, The la^ ^ture is partly moral,
and partly circumstantial
(...) twofold. First, the law of nature binds us to perform Moral duties,
as to pray, give alms etc. every one by the light of nature knows, that he
must do good, virtuous, and godly actions to his power. Secondly (...) of
nature binds us to observe circumstances, ^^ time and place, about the
performance of moral duties; that good may then and there be done when and
where it is best to be done: and this again we all know by the light of
nature in us. Now then, inasmuch as the law of nature binds us to perform
moral duties, let it be ^^ed moral: it is a moral law of nature to pr^^^^ to
give alms, to relieve the oppressed etc. But inasmuch as the law of nature
binds us to observe circumstances, as time and place, about the performance
of moral virtues, it should in my understanding be termed circumstantiall.
Time, as place, is a Circumstance; and therefore I cannot like, that a
commandment, whereby the observation of any time is required, should be
termed moral: it properly belongs unto those commandments, whereby moral
virtues are enjoined. And this seems to be the judgment of our most
judicious Divine D. Field, who excepteth the fourth commandment out of the
number of the Moralls, book 5. chap. 22. S. Augustine has their words, in
Galat. cap. 3. Scine prius debet quis, etc. We ought first to know the (...)
^^kes of the law are twofold, for part belong unto S^ (...) and part unto
manners. Unto the Sacraments the (...) ^ircumcision of the flesh, Note that he
says the Temporal Sabath; and not only the litterall, or seventh day Sabath.
the temporal Sabbath t^ (...) ^he, sacrifices, and innumerable such like
obseruat^ (...) into mann^^ Thou shall not kill; (...) shall no^ ^^^^it
adultery; Thou shall not bear false (...) and (...) If now the temporal
Sabbath did (...) ^^nners: if a Jew sanctifying his Sabbath (...) ^me a moral
duty; then is it not moral (...) ^^^e day of the week: for the seventh day
to ^^e Jews was, as this law of nature it self, seeing they labored all the
six days going before. If the Temporal Sabbath belongs not to manners,
neither does ours: for ours is as well temporal, as the Jews, though not so
litterall or shadowish; ours is no more eternal, then theirs was.

The other thing, which I think good to advertise thee of, is; that though it
be the law of nature to sanctify one day of every week: yet not absolutely,
but after a sort. After a sort; for it is most commonly the best order: not
absolutely; for it is not always the best order. One and the same order cannot
be best at all times and in all places: circumstances alter matters of
circumstance; so that, what Nature teaches us to do at one time, it may
forbid us to do at another time. This which is a circumstantiall law of nature
one year, may not be such the next year.
To instance: the last year of King Edward the sixth, Nature taught the godly
(it was the best order) to meet at appointed times in public Temples, there
to pray, receive the Sacraments etc. but the next year following, being the
first of Queen Mary, Nature or Reason forbad them so to do, and taught them
to meet, when with safety they might, in private houses, fields, or woods, as
they did in the Primitive Church during the times of persecution: this was then
the best order. Again, the absolute Laws of Nature may not be broken in case
of necessity: a man may not forswear him self, lie, or steal, to save his
life: but to save the lives of his cattle a man may labor all the week and
make every day working day. The Sabbath (...) said before) was to the
Israelites, as this law of Nature: nay, it was more; Col. 2.
for the Sabbath was a shadow of things to come: yet in case of necessity the
Israelites might break and profane the Sabbath, as in the time of the
Macchabees some intended to do. 1. Mac. 2.
The Sabbath (as Christ says) was made for (the good of) man, and not man for
(the observation of) the Sabbath: Mar. 2. That he must be pinched with hunger,
that he must loose his Ox fallen into a pit, and the like.
so that whenever it fell out, as often it did, that man's good must be
impaired, or the Sabbath must be violated; the Sabbath ought rather to be
violated, as being inferior to the good of man, for which it was made and
ordained.

Such as will have it the absolute Law of Nature to sanctify one day in every
week, of three things must affirm one. (.1.) Either they must say, that in
case of necessity a man may not labor all the week: but this no man does say,
in my knowledge. (2) Or else they must say, that a man laboring all the week,
does sanctify one of the days: and this some seem ready to affirm. But if
to sanctify a day be to forbear our own work, and to spend it in the
service of God: how do I sanctify that day, which I spend about mine own
business. If he that labors all day, may sanctify a Sabbath or Rest: then he
that feasteth all day may sanctify a Fast also. Moreover, I would demand:
When I labor hard every day of the week about the same needful business
(suppose, repairing of the Sea banks, defending a city from the enemy,
seeking cattle covered with snow etc.) which of the days do I sanctify? If
I sanctify one, I may as well sanctify all: and then it seems I ought so to
do, as being the better (.3.) Or thirdly, they must say; that an absolute law
of Nature may be broken in case of necessity: but this again I know none,
that will say; though some affirm, that a law of Nature may be broken by
special commandment from God thus the Israelites killed the Canaanites, and
brake that law, Thou shall not kill. But to speak properly, the Israelites did
not kill the Canaanites, but God killed them by the Israelites hands: ipse non
occidit, qui ministerium debet iubenti, says Augustine: it is the Judge, and
not the Executioner, Aug: de Civitat.
that puts a thief to death. In like sort, to speak properly the
Israelites did not rob the Canaanites, nor the Egyptians: for god whose the
earth is, gave unto the Israelites the goods of them both. D. Field says
touching all the commandments excepting the fourth; In the.5. book: chap: 22.
It is resolved that God cannot permit a man to do the things forbidden by
them. Indeed, how should God permit a man to do against nature, as it was in
his perfection? Whenever a law of nature is broken, Gods image, after which
we were created, is defaced in some measure and God cannot permit, that his
Image in us should be defaced.

Now of this judgment (among other great Divines) M. Calvin was, I make no
question: thou may perceive by his manner of writing, that as he would not
have it moral, so neither would he have it the absolute Law of Nature, to
sanctify one day in every week. Thus he writes.

Institut: lib: 2. in 4 praecept. Ita evanescunt nugae Pseudoprophetatum, qui
Iudaica opinione populum superioribus seculis imbuerunt, nihil aliud afferentes
nisi abrogatum esse quod cerimoniale erat in hoc mandato (id vocant sua lingua
diei septimae taxationem) remanere autem quod morale est, nempe vnius diei
observationem in hebdomade. Calvin will not have it moral to sanctify one day
of every week; which yet is the common doctrine in these days.
Atqui id nihil aliud est, quam in Iudaeorum contumeliam diem mutare, diei
sanctitatem animo eandem retinere: Again, he will not have the Lords day holy,
as the Sabbath was, that is, Sacramentally holy: but in these days some have
published, that there is as much difference between the Lords day and other
days of the week, as between Sacramental bread, and common bread.
siquidem manet nobis etiamnum par mysterij in diebus significatio, quae apud
Iudaeos locum habebat. Et sane videmus, quid tali doctrina profecerint: qui
enim eorum constitutionibus haerent, crassa carnalique Sabbathismi
superstitione Iudaeos ter superant.

Chrysostom in a Sermon against obseruers of Newmoones. (...) etc.

A DIALOGVE BETVVEENE A JEW and a CHRISTIAN of the common Opinion.
Christian. I Keep the Sabbath, otherwise called by the name of Lords day. 1.
Part. Here is showed the difference between Jews and Christians about keeping
the Sabbath.



Jew. I keep the Sabbath, as for your otherwise called, I find it not in our
Scriptures: will you christen the Sabbath with this new name? think you thereby
to make it more and less Jewish?


Chr. I keep the Sabbath in obedience to the fourth commandment in the
Decalogue.


Jew. And I keep the Sabbath in obedience to the same Commandment.


Chr. I keep not the Sabbath as a shadow of things to come.


Jew. Neither do I so keep it: Moses and the Prophets teach us no such thing,
at leastwise in our understanding; as you may perceive by those many thousands
of our nation, Act. 21.
who believing in Christ, yet were zealous of the Law, which they would not
have been, had they known, that the Sabbath, New moon etc. were shadows of
things to come, and the body was of Christ, as since your Apostle Paul makes
you believe.


Chr. I keep the Sabbath on the first day.


Jew. I keep the Sabbath on the seventh day: and in so doing I fulfill the
fourth commandment as well as you by your own doctrine; and better in my
understanding.


Chr. I forbear all weeke-daie work, and spend the Sabbath in the service of
God, both in public and in private


Jew. And I do likewise.


Chr. I dress my dinner, and do such like works on the Sabbath.


Jew. I dare do no work, for so has God charged, Exo. 20. and I find, Genesis
2.
that he himself did none heretofore; he rested from all his work on the
seventh day. You Christians indeed are bold to do some work: but take heed;
for we know that a man for gathering sticks (not cutting down wood) was stoned
to death.


Chr. We are as certain, that we may do such works, as we are sure Christ
came into the world, and was crucified by you. You were often angry with him
for his doings on the Sabbath; and judged him not of God, Ioh: 9.
because he kept not the Sabbath, and when opportunity served, you nailed him
to the cross; thinking happily that he being taken out of the way, the Sabbath
should be better kept in this respect. But when you nailed him to the Cross,
Col. 2.
he nailed the handwriting of ordinances to the Cross also, and took it out
of the way: since which time the Sabbath is not to be kept as before. You will
one day repent your crucifying of Christ: for you did not only shed innocent
blood; but also made the observation of many things in your law sin unto you.
You bid us take heed about our keeping the Sabbath, but look to your selves,
you were best.


Jew. Wherefore? Part. 2. It is said that the Jews Sabbath was Ceremonial in
regard it was the seventh day and here thou have some light, what to judge of
this doctrine.



Chr. You keep the Sabbath on the seventh day.


Jew. Is it not said in the fourth commandment, the seventh day is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God? Shall God have two Sabbaths in one week? For the
seventh day must needs be still his Sabbath, the day wherein he rested. And
suppose, that the fourth Commandment (as you teach) binds to sanctify one
day in the week, does it not bind to sanctify the seventh day, as much as
any other? Can you blame us herein, even by your own doctrine?


Chr. We cannot blame you absolutely for keeping the seventh day: but you
keep it in obedience to the ceremonial part of the 4th commandment.


Jew. I do not well understand this: I pray explain it.


Chr. J will the best I can: but I had rather you should go to some other, who
can do it better. The fourth Commandment is partly moral, and partly
Ceremonial or shadowish: the moral part binds to sanctify one day of the
week: the Ceremonial or shadowish part binds to sanctify the seventh day
only. Now to sanctify the seventh day in obedience to the moral part, is
tolerable: but you keep it in obedience to the shadowish part, for you take
your selves bound to sanctify the seventh day alone: and so you keeping the
seventh day, observe a shadow; whereas did we keep the same day, we should
not; for we would keep it in obedience to the moral part: and then we might
sanctify the seventh day, as well as any other; unless happily, for some
other considerations.


Jew. This doctrine is strange to me: you speak much of Shadow, and shadowish:
take heed this doctrine be not rather shadowish then substantial. Had your
Apostles taught such doctrine in the Synagogues, I believe our Rabbis would
have smiled at it, neither would so many of our Nation have followed them. To
keep the Sabbath on the seventh day, as not bound by the 4th Commandment to
keep it on that only day, is tolerable: but to keep the Sabbath on the
seventh day, as bound by the fourth Commandment to keep it on that only day,
is to observe a shadow. This is very nice doctrine: Well, have you any thing
else to say, wherein we are to blame?


Chr. 3. Part. It is said, that the strict rest was Ceremonial: and here thou
have some light, what to judge of this doctrine also. Numb. 15.
Yes. You forbear to dress meat, and to do such like works on the Sabbath:
for which (were there nothing else) Christ at his coming to judgment would
cast you into hell.


Jew. Did not your Christ give out, that he was the son of God?


Chr. Yes, and so he is: what of that?


Jew. God put a man to death in this world, because he did gather sticks on
the Sabbath: and will the son of God cast us into hell, because we do not
gather sticks, kindle a fire, and dress meat therein?


Chr. That he will: for this strict rest was shadowish also. It has been an
old saying, that the Ceremonies ought to have some time to be honestly buried:
but now it is too long to keep them above ground; they stink by this time.
And least you should marvel, that I say, Christ will condemn you for your
manner of keeping the Sabbath; know, that to observe a shadow, is to deny
after a sort, that he came into the world. It is too much by word to deny the
son of Mary the Virgin to be the Christ; but you deny it by your deeds also,
as long as you observe a shadow. A Father of our Church, Augustine by name
(whom we esteem as much as you do any of your Rabbis) speaking of the
Sabbath, does say, Whosoever keeps that day, as the letter sounds, sauoreth
of the flesh; and such are ye.


Jew. Though we keep the Sabbath according to the letter (as by your leave
some Christians also do in their understanding) yet we keep it not as a
shadow, as I said before.


Chr. That Is nothing in my opinion: you keep it in obedience to the shadowish
part of the fourth commandment. You keep not circumcision neither as a
shadow: and put case beside, that you did not observe precisely the eight day,
and more, that you did not cut off all the foreskinne: yet this would not
excuse you from observing a shadow. As neither shall it excuse those amongst us
(for some such I fear there are) who though they keep not the Feast of
Whitsuntide as a Ceremony, neither at the same time, nor altogether in the same
manner, as you do; yet through ignorance keep it in obedience to that your
law, Leuit. 23. For this is even all in all, to observe any day, time, meat,
etc. in obedience to a shadowish Commandment: which I desire you, and those of
my brethren, whom it may concern, to consider well off; and so, Fare ye well.


Jew. Nay, I pray, be not so hasty. I may become a Christian, and then some
doubt may trouble my mind.


Chr. What is that?


Jew. You say, that the strict rest is shadowish: and by your doctrine he which
rests too strictly, observes a shadow; for he does it in obedience to the
ceremonial part of the fourth commandment, mistaking it for the moral. I
would now demand of you, whether he does not rest too strictly, who forbeareth
that work on the Sabbath, which is not forbidden by the moral part of the
fourth commandment?


Chr. Yes; for that work is forbidden by the ceremonial part. All work is
forbidden by the fourth commandment: now the greater works are forbidden by
the moral part; and the lesser, by the ceremonial part: and where the moral
part cease to forbid, there the ceremonial part begins to forbid; as I
conceive by this our common distinction.


Jew. Me thinks you Christians are here between Scylla and Charibdis: you can
hardly choose, but either break the moral part, or fulfill the ceremonial
part of the fourth commandment. I pray show me, how I may rightly discern
the partition; for there must needs be very little difference between some
works forbidden by the moral part, and other forbidden by the ceremonial.
Again, whereas I perceive by your words erwhile, that to forbear dressing of
meat, is to rest too strictly, and to fulfill the ceremonial part: I would
learn of you, whether about dressing of meat, I need not fear breaking the
moral part?


Chr. Yes, you may labor as hard about dressing meat, as at plow; or you may
bestow too much time thereabout; and thus break the moral part. Again, I
must tell you, that you may dress meat, and yet fulfill the ceremonial part:
for you may sees an Egg, and refuse to sees Flesh; and so rest two strictly.


Jew. It is needful then, that you define precisely, what meat may be dressed,
in what manner, how long I may be about it, how hard I may labor thereabout,
whether until I sweat or not: so, for serving cattle; whether I may carry
burdens of fodder into the field, how big burdens I may carry, how far I
may carry them etc. and so, for many other matters.


Chr. I marvel that our learned men, who have written so largely upon the
fourth commandment, have not better canvased this matter; to say nothing, that
they do not agree among themselves. But I can stay no longer with you: only I
say, when you become a Christian, if you come to me, you shall have my best
advise.


FINIS
A note touching the Lords day.
I Know not any learned and godly Divine, but will acknowledge, that the Lords
day is of great antiquity, and had his beginning from some of the Apostles:
but if any man would have us believe, that Christ did institute it, and that
from the time of his resurrection, it has been generally observed of the
faithful; he must bring better proof, then hitherto I have seen any.

The Church of Christ co^sisted of Jews and Gentiles: and as touching the
believing Jews at Jerusalem, it is out of question, that for many years they
observed the same day as before: for they were zealous of the Law, one part
whereof was the observation of the seventh day. Act. 21.20.
If Baptism would not serve them instead of Circumcision: who can believe,
that the Lords day would serve them instead of the Sabbath? Nether is it to
be marvelled, that they were zealous of the Law, when as James and the Elders
did not so much as teach them, that the law of commandments contained in
ordinances, was abolished; as is manifest in that they desired St Paul to make
it appear by his practice, Act 21.24.
that the report of him was nothing, and that he himself also walked orderly,
and kept the Law. But were they zealous of the Sabbath, or not: seeing the
unbelieving Jews were so angry with Christ before time for the carriage of a
bed on the Sabbath, Ioh 5.
and at this time with S. Paul for his profanation of the Temple, Act. 21.28.
as they supposed; it cannot be, that they would suffer their Sabbath, and
other holidaies to be profaned by Christians, as long as their commonweal
stood. The Church then at Jerusalem a long time observed the Sabbath or
seventh day: and now that besides the Sabbath, and other holidaies inioined
by the law, they sanctified the Lords day, and so rested from work two days
in every week; I cannot believe without some proof, and hitherto I have seen
none at all.

As touching the Churches of the Gentiles: it seems by the Scriptures, that
some of them for a time came together rather on the Jews Sabbath, then on any
other day: indeed S. Paul, as he yielded less to the Jews then other, so
happily in the Churches by himself established, he began sooner then other
to appoint their meetings on the first day of the week; which day growing
more and more in request, before the year 96, obtained the name of Lords day:
which name had it been given, when S. Paul wrote his first Epistle to the
Corinthians, S. Luke the Acts, it is likely, that one of them would have used
it; and yet it is not unlikely, that this name (Lords day) was given, as soon
as the day began to be in any great account.

Now, about this Lords Day, the first day of the week (commonly called Sunday)
there are in these times three opinions something differing the one from the
other.

1 Opinion.
It is the will and command of God, that Christians should sanctify one day
of every week: and as he bound the Israelites heretofore to sanctify the
Sabbath or seventh day; so in this time of the Gospel he binds us
Christians to sanctify the Lords day, or first day of the week.

2 Opinion.
It is the will and command of God, that Christians should sanctify one day of
every week: but whereas he bound the Israelites heretofore to sanctify the
seventh day alone; he left it to the Christian Church to choose their day, and
it has chosen the Lords day.

3 Opinion. Redemp. in 4 praecep.

It is the will and command of God to sanctify some time, aliquam temporis
partem, as Zanchius speaks: when this time shall be, God left to the
Christian Church to appoint, and it has appointed the Lords day.

Of the former opinion, I scarce know any Divines of note, unless of late
years: between the two latter opinions there is in respect of us little or no
difference at all, for by both the Lords day is the command of God mediatly;
God mediatly, and by the Magistrate binds us Christians to sanctify the
Lords day.

Object.
Then the Governors of the Church may alter the day; yea, they may appoint the
first of one week, the third of the next, the fifth of the next etc.

Answ.
It does not follow: for the best order is the will of God, and law of Nature.
The Governors then cannot set down what order they will, neither touching the
time and place of Gods worship, neither touching other things belonging
thereunto: but what in their understanding is the best order, they are bound to
set down.

Object.
If God mediatly, and by the Magistrate binds us Christians to sanctify the
Lords day: certainly, this bond is so weak, that very many will easily break
it.

Answ.
This bond is strong enough to hold him, that is not very unruly. In the fifth
of Mark we read of one, that being often bound with fetters and chains, brake
them in pieces; no Man could bind him strong enough: but when Christ had cast
out the evil Spirit, they see him (says the text) sitting, Mar. 5.15.
clothed, and in his right mind. In like sort, deliver these unruly fellows
from the evil Spirit, be a means to bring them into their right mind, and
afterward (J doubt not) the Governors of the Church shall bind them well
enough. They will sit still, be quiet, and be content to be ruled by reason:
they will see by the light of nature, that as there are feet, so there must be
an head, of the body; and that the feet cannot say to the head, We have no need
of thee; without the help of the head they cannot choose the best way: they will
remember by whom kings reign, that all power is from above; and that as God
has set the members every one in the body, as it pleased him; so has he set
some in the Church, 1. Cor. 12.18.28.
first Apostles secondarily Prophets, thirdly teachers, etc. This and much more
will they call to mind, when they are brought into their right mind, and very
willing shall we have them to be ordered.

What think we? Had such unruly fellows lived under the law (and, Note, that
even in the time of the law some things were left to be ordered by the
Magistrate.
lex a ligando) had they been bound strong enough? Nay verily: for though God
appointed the precise day, and commanded to have an holy Convocation: yet, no
time of the day for this Convocation, not two Convocations, not Synagogues.
When they had been called, This command of Paul, or law of Nature, is the
general, comprehending the fourth commondement in the Decalogue, and all other
Commandments touching the time and place of Gods worship and other things
belonging thereunto.
they would have answered with Dathan and Abiram, We will not come: for God
himself has not bidden us come to such a place, nor at such time of the day.

Let the law of Nature be no more, then all acknowledge, to sanctify some
time, as the Gentiles did: suppose, no other command but that of Paul, Let all
things be done to edifying, decently, and in order. If there come a command
from authority to sanctify any day of the week, yea besides the Lords day;
this is enough to bind him, that is in his right mind: if any wilfully break
this bond, Iud. ver. 8.
it is by the coming of another Spirit upon him then came upon Sampson
heretofore. It were good to beware, least any of us be found such as Jude
speaks of, Despising government, and speaking evil of dignities: for it is
too much to despise Governors; but more, to despise government it self.
Certainly if any man be so unruly, that Gods Ministers and Officers here be
not able to bind him; God has other officers and servants elsewhere, which
are able; And the King said to the servants, Take him and bind him hand and
foot, and cast him into utter darkness.

To make an end. They which say least, say enough to cause all those, who have
the fear of God before their eyes, to sanctify the Lords day: and they which
say most, do not say enough to cause those, who fear not God, to forbear
driving pack-horses therein, frequenting the Tavern, and the like. Would to
God, no man might once say more nor less than the truth; for doubtless were
the truth alone preached, the greatest good would follow thereupon: and this is
one matter more, which causes me, and should cause thee (Gentle Reader) often
and earnestly to pray in this manner, or to this effect; Lord have mercy upon
us, and incline our Governors hearts to take such order, that once at length
we may be all brought to the right understanding of the fourth Commandment.
Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 1. line 8. strike out, had p. 3. l. 4. strike out your. p. 5. l. 4. for
here likeneth, read here he likeneth. p. 5. l. 16. text read type. p. 6. in
marg. If the Sabbath were a shadow, etc. p. 9. l. work r. week. p. 10. l. 16.
after Remember the Sabbath to sanctify it, read this should be a more general
commandment, then if he had said, Remember the seventh day to sanctify it.
p. 12. l. 3. us r. me. p. 18. l. 3. commanding, r. commanded. p. 26. The saying
of Chrysostom should be placed last of all, after the note touching the Lords
day. p. 27. l. 7. to make it more Christian and less Jewish. Other faults
escaped in printing the Reader may amend.


