A Letter to a Friend, touching Mardochai his age;

Which helps much to hold the truth, for that chief Prophecy of our
salvation in Gabriels Seuenties: which show, that most exactly 490, years
after the Angels speech, Christ the most Holy should be killed, to give life.
Dan. 9.23.

1. Cor. 1.25. The foolishness of God is wiser then men.

Imprinted at London by Will. White, in Cow-lane. 1612.

The Printer to the READER.
THAT the Letter following might better be understood, I requested the Author,
that one special Text might be set before it, as he had translated it.
Daniel, 9.24. I heard him affirm, that none, for skill in Hebrew, would blame
that Translation: and though many differ, it was not for ignorance of the
tongue; but by their conceit touching the matter, drawing the words as they
judged of the whole cause. Thus he translated that point, which was Gabriels
speech; who came to Daniel, praying at the time of the Evening offering, or
three of the clock, or ninth hour by Scripture phrase: ( For so he writes in
the letter.
at which hour 490. years after most exactly, our Lord gave up the Ghost, and
told, that at the beginning of his So the author taught. that even the faythles
Jew Aben Ezra upon Dan. 9. begins the time from the word that came forth at
Daniels prayer, and ends it when Christ is sealed. And that the Jew though he
could not cast the times particularly, nor knew Christ to be the most Holy, yet
durst not depart from the propriety of plain words, to pervert the speech of
the living God; and be wished others that circumspection. Such as begin and end
to that effect, may not make here a certain number, for an uncertain.
Prayer, came forth the word (or answer from God) which he came to show, and
says thus. Seauentie seauens (of years) are cut out, for thy people, and for
thy holy City; to consume wickedness, and to abolish sins, and to make
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring righteousness everlasting, and to
seal Vision and Prophet, and to show Christ, the Holy of Holy. Know and mark;
from the out-going of the Word, to return and to build Jerusalem, unto Christ
the Governor, shall be seven seauens (of years,) and sixty and two seauens:
(in the other) it shall be restored and built, Street and Wall; and troublous
shall these times be. In that after the sixty and two seauens, Christ shall be
killed; and not for him self: thereupon the City and Holy place shall he
destroy, the Governors own people to come, and their end shall be with a Flood:
and at the end of War, it shall have a final judgment to desolation. But
he shall confirm the Testament for many the last Seven; when in Half that
Seven, he shall end the Sacrifice and Oblation. Afterward, by an Army
abominable, he shall make a desolation, even till utter destruction, and
final judgment flow upon the desolate.

And thus much for the Readers preparation, to understand the Epistle following.

To his good friend A. T. of Mardochai his age: a light to Gabriels Seauenties.
YOU desire to know of me, in what age Mardochai lived; because you hold his
times, to help much the truth of Chronicle, whereby sundry Books of the holy
Prophets may better be understood. Your request is reasonable; because you
rightly judge of the profit arysing by that knowledge: For whereas the chief
Prophecy in all the old Testament, touching the time of salvation, is
obscured, that of Dan. 9.24. and also Dan. 11. Ester, Ezra, Nehemiah, Aggi,
Zachary, by reason that men attribute near 100. years more then common
likelihood can suffer, or some writers old and late, will grant to these men
after Babel was taken; I mean to Cyrus, Cambyses, Darius Histaspis, and
Xerxes. They who hold Assuerus to be Xerxes, (who be the chiefest Patrons of
that excessive time) if it can be showed that Mardochai was in Captivity 63.
years, must needs grant that from Cyrus Some give Cirus but three years,
and that under Cambyses 7. to Darius Hystaspis 12. y. as Sedcrolam, and Xerxes
bu^ 10. alnoe: some more, as in Clem. Alex. Cyrus has y. 30. Cambyses 19.
Darius Hystaspis 46. Xerxes 26. Their times before the surprising of Babylon,
and viceroigne, might well have so much as other abridge from this: but from
Babylons fall 30 year must be their most.
surprysing of Babel, to Assuerus end, when yet Mardochai was somewhat active:
30. years agrees more with the common course of life, then 12^. And that
being settled, touching years thence to Tiberius 18. year: Some old Greek
account will very well agree with us for Daniels Seauens, to make up 490.
years. Wherefore your judgment, careful to know his times, must be allowed:
and endeavor to satisfy your request, must be used.

The Scripture whereupon disputation of late grows, is this. Ester 2.5. In
the City of Shushan, there was a certain Jew whose name was Mordochai, the
son of Iair, the son of Shimei, the son of Kish, a man of Jemini, The
question hereupon arises, whether Mardochai or Kish was of the Captivity.
which had been carried away from Jerusalem with the Captivity that was carried
away with Iechoniah king of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezar king of Babel had carried
away; and nourished Hadassa, that is Ester, his Uncles daughter: for she had
neither father nor mother; and the Maid was fair and beautiful to look on:
and after the death of her father and her mother, Mardochai took her for his
own Daughter. To this text I think good to join immediately, another touching
them, who were captiued with Iechoniah, to show that not only valient Men, but
also Women and Babes, were then carried captive: of which Babes, Mardochai might
be one. Thus it is written, 2. King. 24.14. And he carried away all Jerusalem,
and all the Princes, and all the strong men of War, even ten thousand into
captivity, and all the Workmen and cunning men: so none remained, saving the
poor people of the land. Now if none were left but the Poor of the earth,
Noble-women and Children must needs be in the reckoning of the Captivity. But
let us return to the first text Ester 2.5. upon which Scripture, we must weigh
what has bin thought, Of old time it has bin holde^, that Mar^^^^^^ was of
(...) ^as cap^^^^.
and may be. I hold it doubtless, that Mardochai by this text, was in the
Captivity. The same held also the most ancient; that it may appear, this
opinion not to be new, but holden constantly of long time, the Father of TRVETH.

The Greek additions to Ester, plainly show, that in ancient time, Mardochai
was holden to be of Iechonias captivity for thus it is written Ester 11.2.
Mardocheus the son of Iairus, the son of Semei, the son of Kish, of the
tribe of Benjamin, had a Dream; a Jew dwelling in the city of Susis, a Neble
man, that bare office in the kings Court, He was also one of the Captivity
which Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon brought from Jerusalem with Iechonias.
That those Greek additions be very old, it appears by Ios. Ben-gorion, whom
Drusius thinks to be Flanius Josephus: For Ben-gorion in his Hebrew story
follows them; and the Greek Church stiffly enough held them. Wherefore, if
that age were now alive, and called to an after reckoning for the Persian
continuance, I judge by Mardochais age, they would willingly cut off about a
hundred years, for their ouerreaching Chronicle; and rejoice not a little, to
have Daniels times brought to plainnes. They did not only of ancient days
allow of the Greek additions for Mardochais times; The ancient Greeks by
their own grant, would shorten much their account for the Persians years.
but in their own writings do the like. Josephus says, that Mardochai had
been at Babylon. Clemens says, that he was in the Captivity. So does
Athanasius in Synopsi in Hester. Codrenus places Assuerus in the beginning of
Darius, and Cy. Monarchy. Zonarus much follows Josephus. Pagnins careful
translation is void of doubt, that by it, Mardochai is of Iechonias captivity.
These men's testimonies against their own negligent account, should seem to
be void of partiality.

The like I may speak of the Latins. Pagnin his skill in Hebrew, gives place
to none Italian, former nor later. In his translation of Ester, out of doubt
Mardochai is a man of Benjamin, which was carried captive with Iechonias. The
French glory of Vatablus, and his judgment, by our learned Fathers, who put
before the Bible his brief sum touching it, has been greatly esteemed.
Vatablus agrees With Pagnin, and further speaks of Kish: Whom he holds him
to be.
Vatablus remoueth the doubt further, shows that Kish there is named, to show
Mardochai to come of the Kings seed. Now where some doubt why obscure Kish
father to Saul, rather the^ Saul, should be recorded: for them a certain
Hebrew yields a reason that satisfies me. As Mardochai taught Ester to hide
her kindred: so the other Jews endeavored to do, Why Kish rather then Saul is
named.
and kept the memory of Mardochais nobility rather by Kish, famous amongst
them, and obscure to strangers, then by Saul, who^ Haman of Ameleck might have
heard of. If any despises the Hebrews reason, let him bring a better. With
Pagnin and Vatablus agrees Arias Montanus: Arius Montanus, and Tremebus
translatio^s.
whose like if Spain had bred many, the Pope should have been closely bitten
to the heart. Though he follow the common Chronicle, yet he made conscience of
wresting holy Scripture. Tremelius likewise, whose translation gives place to
none (whom I could wish for many special points, not to be altered by
following the Heathen) he translateth the Hebrew so, The common judgment of
Italy, France, Spain, and Germany.
as speaking, that Mardochai was of Iechonias captivity. This Italy, Fraune,
Spain, and Germany held.

And least any should take advantage by the relative (Which,) to refer it to
Kish, and not to Mardochai, they translate the last antecedent before it; Vir,
not Viri.
that is, (MAN of Benjamin) in a case joined to Mardochai, and disceauored from
Kish. Two reasons moved them to that, (as I think): one, because in the
Hebrew upon the word Kish, lies a stay of a King-accent, in force and form
like a Comma in Latin. Tipheha the King-accent, usually distinguishes.
An other was, because a Sentence is joined on a Copulative; which cannot be
removed from Mardochai, who was carried captive, and nourished Ester. Also it
seemed to them senseless, to admit in the midst, a long Narration touching
Kish, where the speech began of Mardochai, and afterward to make a sudden
step again to Mardochai: and so would I think. These who commend upon
Ester, follow the same Lyra. Brentius, Bullinger, and Lauaterus upon Ester.
Lyra, Brentius, Bullinger, Lauaterus. The argument in the Bible translated at
Goneuah, before the Book of Ester, draws in the same yoke. And on the Latin
Ioh. Benedictus. So the French does, and many more. And whereas expressly
Mardochai is named Ezra among them who gave their names to return (if occasion
best served so) in the 1. of Cyrus.
Mardochai is named amongst them who did, or might return from Babylon in the
first of Cyrus. I see no reason why the many of them who affirm even that
Mardochai there, to be Esters cosen, should be rejected. I will not soon
believe, that the providence of God would in Scripture so place names, that
thousands of the painfullest and the wisest, should be deceived, as holding
them the same men, when they are other. As Nehemias Ezra 2.2. is holden of the
most, to be R. Symeony there upon Neh. 12.3. The author of Ezra 4. was
watchful to follow the common opinion to make Ezra to be of the captivity, as
immediate son to Saraia^ killed at the third captivity. 52 y. before the.
70. ended. Or Nehemias and Ezra, several treatises are purposed.
the same who is Artaxast his Cup Bearer. And Ezra Nehe. 12. coming home in
Cyrus first, is holden of the Hebrews, to be the same who wrote the Book
named so; and lived to the last times of the Persians; and by 4 Ezra 3. may
very well be. So no more will I admit two Mardochaies, then I will here two
Nehemiahs and two Ezras, seeing I see no reason why obscure men should be
chief in catalogue of personages, and famous men be left vnreckoned, who in
open dealing have the next glory to Zorobabel and Joshua. But of the other two,
Nehemias and Ezra, I may take some other time of a longer Discourse. I will
return to Mardochai. They who hold of the Pope, notwithstanding their error
in giving the Persians too long a continuance, yet would not in the particular
deal here against their conscience: for their table in Apparatu Bibliorum
holds Mardochai Esters kinsman, to be of the captivity of Iechonias, and
also to be the same that is mentioned Ezra. 2.2. So Schubertus, and Lyra,
rather hold Mardochai much above. 100. year, then with Burgensis deny him to
be of Iechonias captivity. And John Benedictus notes (from Philo) that he
lived 198. years. Likewise some of our own country, who have by authority
written in notes simply enough, gathered from Codomanus, place Mardochai so,
that well he might be of the captivity of Iechoniah. Codomon and his translater
simply ouerseene.
Notwithstanding that some who have trauayled more in this kind, would soon
conclude that thereupon they must cut near 100. years from their own
account. The testimony of any against them selves, should have some force.
Bucholcherus brings it as a most common opinion, that he lived in the days
of Euilmerodach and Balsasar.

The Hebrews are not least regarded for commenting as touching the Story,
contained in proper speeches of the Prophets. Of them I have seen twelve
several Writers touching Ester: By which all, it may be learned, that the
Jews held Mardochai to be of Iechonias Captivity; as the Talmud in Megillath
Ester, two Chaldy Paraphastes. Aben-Ezra, Solomoh-Iarchi: which are joined in
Bonbergius Bibles; seven Commentaries printed in little Books alone. Add
Midras Rabbah, who passing it over, as touchng plain words, in the whole
Discourse shows what the Author thought. And seeing the Jews ever since
Mardochais time, yearly in the month Adar, celebrate a Feast for the
deliverance by him. It would be too rash to affirm so many thousands, now
2000. years, not to understand his story: but in a Whether Kish or Mardochai
should be of the captivity.
trick of Grammar, all to be ouerreached. Moreover, closely they give a bitter
frumpe to some Christians in Sepher Iuchasim in the word Ezra, when they said
Mardochoi to live 400. years teaching their children thereby, how unskillful
many of our side are in the story of Scripture: The Jews floute Christians
ignorant of Mardochaies times.
for if this be true, that no Male were carried with Iechonias but fit then
for war, and under the terms of, All Jerusalem, 2. Kin, 24. Women and Babes
be not contained: If also from Zedekias captivity the seauentie years must
begin, and Mardochai live in the end of the Persians: and if Eusebius times,
and Ieromes hold: then by our assertions must Mardochai be holden toward
400. year old. But justly is Eusebius blamed of Johannes Benidictus, and
Marianus Soctus. And Jerome may not be cited for them that would have Mardochai
borne in the fourth age after the captivity. For Scaliger, and such as lean
upon him, hold that Darius (who buylt the Temple So S. Jerome thinks, as do
some Hebrews and G^yn. upon Ag.
17. year after Cyrus first) was after Mardochai: So that he will of force have
Mardochai near Cyrus times. And Eusebius may be confuted by himself, citing
Hellanicus out of Celemens, who writes thus: Atossa the Queen of the Persians
first invented Epistles. Hillanie us of Atossa.
Though Epistles were used of old, as in Judah and Israel: Jl. zeta in Bellero
phontes.
also in Homer II. yet when Heathen skant used written records, the letters
sent by Hester Adossa to 127. Provinces, might well be the most ancient for
famous and fresh memory in Helianicus days, whom Thucidides names as his
former. And herein the antiquity, Thucidides dyed in the times of Peloponnesas
wars.
who had followed the games of Olympia, to teach of man's redeemer against
express word in Daniels ninth, control themselves, and call times to as short
a reckoning, as truth hereafter much by Heathen account will require. An Hebrew
disputes learnedly, An Hebrews reason of Esters times.
to teach us that Esters stories fell out soon after the captivity: because
many of rare godliness must needs then be amongst them, that God should in
sundry places, give them so great glory. It is not commonly seen, that the age
vnafflicted, should be of more godliness, then they who before, had felt Gods
hand. Ioshuahs elders and their posterity teach us so to think: likewise
David's age, and Robeames. Moreover, the Apostle gives that company a singular
testimony, Hebr. 11.24. who by faith avoided the edge of the sword. I doubt
not, but that of them it is spoken there. Over and besides, the prophecy of
Jeremy touching the good Figs, may very well have accomplishment in
Mardochai. And Lyra would think, that in Mardochaies story, mention is made of
Iechonias captivity, Lyra upon Ier. 24.
to show, namely in some, that favor of God performed, which in the good
Figs was showed. Here I may for the help of the Reader, abridge Ieremies
words, from Ier. 24. To him God showed Two basket of Figs: one of good
Figs, the other of naughty Figs. After Iechonias, the Nobles and
Artificers of Judah were carried daptiues: As the good Figs, would God know
those captives, and bring them home: and as the naughty Figs, would God give
Zedekias and his Princes, for a terrible plague.

Lastly, this I think, and hold, that none ever denied Mardochai to be of
Iechonias captivity, but such as Either of themselves, or led by others.
follow the reckoning of Olympia Games. All this considered, I judge it will
not soon take place, that some would teach this opinion to be new, or untrue,
that Mardochai is said to be of the Captivity of Iechonias. And this of
Mardochai being granted, my sharpest combaters (I trust) will not deny, but
that Daniel might well understand his own words: and the Seauenties, from the
hour of their vtteraunce, and first year of Darius and Cyrus, in propriety of
speech, draw us unto the year wherein our Lord by death, brought light and
life to the world. Thus I thought good, though as fast as my Pen could run, to
write my mind touching Mardochai: that you might be better confirmed to hold
the truth of Daniels seauens: the plainnes and propriety whereof, many
Christians strive more to make uncertain, then did the Jews; whom your self
heard at Franckfurt and Worms.

To this I will join a particular reckonig, agreeable to Daniels Seauens: even
from such as for the whole, agree not wholly with that, which I steadfastly
hold to be the truth.

Cyrus 3. year: Schubert. Well may he have reigned 27. year before.

Cambyses Artaxast. 7. years: Herodot. But be reigned in his fathers life 2.
years of them, at the least: as appears by conferring Ezra 4. with Dan. 10.

Assuerus holden most commonly to be Darius Hystaspis, By arguments drawn from
Ester al through compared with Heathen, it may well be proved that Assuerus is
Darius Histaspis, and by Hester 3.7. compared with cha. 10.^. we may well think
that he reigned nothing near 36. years Monarch, as some Heathen think.
12. years in Seder Olam.

Xerxes, of whose sole government Ezra makes no mention: only Dan. 11. He is
said to be the rich King, that should stir all against Grecia. Some hold him
to be Assuerus in Hester. Upon their assertion I desputed in Mardochai:
Schubertus grants him 10. years of sole government: but Tremelius joins
them to his fathers raigue, and makes him but viceroy: and all 20.

And these be the chief Kings whose account troubles Commenters upon Daniel,
Hester, Ezra, Nehemias, Aggai, and Zachary, against the plain simplicity:
which those books process do require. Of them I purpose to write other
several Mreatises, to confirm this account in effect The shortness of the time
from Cyrus. to Neh. government is seen by the age of these men, Seraia,
Jeremy, Esdras, Amaris, Hattus, Shecaniah, Malluc, Rehum, Meremoth Abiah,
Miamin, Bilga, Sema^ai: which came with Zerobabel, Neh. 12. and after the
Anylding of Jerusalem helped Nehemiah Neh.
which others Jews and Gentiles hold, and to overthrow that excessive
reckoning, which the Games of Olympia cause to more harm for Jews, then the
Idol Iouis Olimpij was loathsome in their Temple in old time. Now mark other
Kings hence from Clemens 1. Strom.

Artaxerxes 41. His 20. year finisheth seven seauens to the buylding of
Jerusalem, and full finishyng of the Temple, as writes Aben Ezra, Tremelius,
Beroaldus, Wolphius: and the French notes before Ezra touch it. The Greeks
Josephus, Clemens, Eusebius, Cedrenus, ending the Temple in that time, had
relation to the seven seauens Dan. 9. though the Olympiades carry them
somewhat aside; but by a friendly censure, one might cite them to that textes
meaning, whereupon they stayed; specially seeing otherwise they are little
constant, or worthy credit, but when many confirm the matter with them. (...)
^^^^allis (...) resister, ly^^g to Alexanders days shows that it was but a
short time afterward betwixt both.


Darius 8. years.

Artaxerxes 42. years. In this Kings days, Xenophon and Ctesias lived, and
wrote of him, Plutarch wrote also, and many Grecians more. The more impudent be
the wicked Jews, which leave him out, to shorten the time, and disanull by all
other extreamitie, Daniels Seauens.

Ochus 3. years. Darius 6. years.
Their years in all, are 130.

The Greeks.
Alexander 6. Herein I somewhat mende Clemens from all other Grecians. Ptolomy
Lagi 40. years. Pto. Philadelphus 27. y. rather. 37. Pto. Euergetus 25.
years. Pto. Philopater 17. years. Pto. Epiphanes 24. years. Pto. Philometor
35. years.
Clemens copy omitteth ten years, in some one; by like in Philad. to finish
the sum of 294. years: which sum, in two places he has. Pto. Phiscon 29.
years. Pto. Lathurus 36. years. Strabo would place Lathurus before Physcon.
Pto. Dionysius 29. years. Cleopatra 22. years.
The whole sum is 300, years.

From Cleopatras overthrow by Augustus, to 18. of Tiberius 60. years, Form
Augustus 15. who is ^^^gned 56. to 18. further. 60. y.
by accounts of the old and the later.

And this I have laid down, that you might better know, where the Jews help
the Gentiles to hold the truth, for what times the Scriptures fully help us
and where the Jews may easily be confuted, and the Gentiles agree commonly.
This being well weighed, you may see that in Mardochai, Antiquirie and Novelty
must both agree, to cast Daniels Seauens: as I showed in the Consent of
Scripture, which I wrote.

This one Treatise of Mardochas well considered, will make men more capable of
truth, in sundry arguments, for manifesting of Daniel.

FINIS.
HVGH BROVGHTON.


