Declaration of general corruption of Religion, Scripture and all learning;
wrought by D. Bilson.

While he breeds a new opinion, that our Lord went from Paradise to Gehenna,
to triumph ever the Devils.

To the most reverend Father in God Ionn W^. Doct. in Divinity, and
Metropolitan of England.

By HVGH BROVGHTON*



1603.

DECLARATION OF General corruption, of Religion, Scripture, and all learning;
wrought by D. Bilson. etc.
DOCTOR Bilson, inventing a new opinion that our Lord descended from Paradise
to Gehenna, to triumph over the devils, troubled all Religion and learned
writers. In religion thus he missed. We believe that Devils are yet in
Religion troubled.
this world; and the scriptures assure us of that, Wherefore it where most
ridiculous to feign a journey to Devils thither, where they were not. If some
were, as carriers of souls, yet not as tormented, and dwellers there before
the time.

Again, Gehenna were an holy place, if the altar which sanctifies all that it
touches went thither. But none may so think. And Devils in this world knew
Christ to be the holy one of God, and tremble. And no need know we why he
should go to Gehenna for them, and God tells all that we may know. Besides,
souls in Hades holy and contrary know all the others case, as men here that
have but a great ditch betwixt them: and they are much deceaved who think Hell
to be in this world, low in the earth. Before Gods throne the wicked are
tormented for ever and ever. So both sides know one the others case: that
without coming to them, they see what is done. And our Lord would not have
taught us, (Luc. 16.) that none can pass from one sort to the other, if he had
been to take that journey. The Bible taught no such dream. Therefore it is but
a dream. And thus religion is disturbed. Scriptures D. Bilson brings three, as
having no more; Scriptures marred, Psa. ^6. in the right meaning by all Jews.
the 16. Psalm. Which is thus: Thou will not leave my vital soul to death,
and, by a consequent, neither my body in air, or grave: nor my soul among
souls till the body see corruption.

So the general consent of Ebrews sake the words. Yet he would thus
translate all: Thou will not forsake my soul in Hell. 4. Faults most gross
in D. Bilson in 4. words
The nipper of others, as arrogant in Ebrewe studies, shall be told that he
has missed four times in four words. Hebrews shall judge; and for the 70.
all Greeks, the rare Fathers.

The second scripture that he durst adventure upon, is this: Him God raised up
losing the sores of death. Saint Peter spoke to Sadduces, Act. a perverted to
blasphemy.
that would not hear of soul, spirit, and Hell. And that the sores that made
the soul leave the body were by Gods power disannulled, and it received the
soul and life: And therein Christ brake for us the bands of death. D. Bilson
would have death the second death, and that our Lords soul had the second
death. You know full well that his soul shall have the second death for ever
and ever, unless he revoke this blasphemy. It is great pity that D. Bilson
consulted not with others before such words fled through the hedge of his
teeth. Higher blasphemies never were uttered. The third and last text of all
that he durst trust, is clean The third and last text most bright.
contrary to his purpose, showing the plain effect of the Gospel. Say not in
thy heart who can go up to heaven, to bring Christ down? Or who can go to the
Deep to bring Christ from the dead? But if thou believe that Jesus is Lord,
and that God raised him from death, thou salt be saved.

The incarnation and resurrection, both made plain, are by. St. Paul the heads
of doubt among Jews. But D. Bilson dreameth of A monstrous dream.
a Hell here. Chrysostom and Oecumenius would have taught him better. And
these most Holy scriptures, the joy of our souls, has he most grievously
corrupted.

Endless be the faults in this marring of scripture, and no time Moses made
imperfect.
would serve to write them. Moses now by him, has not all Religion. For he
could not father upon him this doctrine of going from Paradise to Hell. So
neither all the Prophets volumes.

And David once only (and in a sense never known, till Doctor Danger feigned by
D. Bilson after triumph.
Bilsons days) teaches that our Lord going a victour, and triumpher over the
powers of darkness from Paradise, as unto greater danger by millions of degrees
then before, does praise God that he did not forsake his soul in Hell, but
losed the sores of the second death before him: and to that deep our minds
must descend, by D. Bilson, if we will be saved.

Thus vile for wisdom he makes the rock of salvation. By D. Bilson our Lord
having passed his danger here, where he prayed unto him that could save him
from danger, and being made perfect and gone through the veyle of his flesh
into heaven, after all this was in greater danger then before, which needed a
miracle of the God head to lose before him the sorrows of Hell. Otherwise the
Humanity had not by it self gone through all, but had perished in the world
invisible, saving that God did not forsake his soul in Hell.

And of this danger David must speak to the profane world, Most strange
miracles told by D. Bilson o^ m^n that refused even plainest matters
before they believed the resurrection and scante the creation of visible
things, and of spirits had heard little: and of souls immortality and
Paradise; and never heard where out of this world devils keep. All these
things being stepped over, a danger, after all was performed, must be holden
from David by words never so before understood; to make the Scripture a nose of
wax and all the old Testament imperfect: But for one place drawn beyond all
wit. Also the Gospel must be imperfect, omitting part of belief. And all
Saint Paul's fourteen Epistles, but for one term Abyssus taken in the Devils
sense, not in Heathen or 70. sense. All Ebrews rejected for their own tongue.
The strict propriety of Psalm. 16.
So all fall. The general consent of Ebrewes in Baba Bathra was cited that
they make this sense, Psalm. 16. He dies not of whom that is so spoken in
strict propriety, and Peter adds but this, to die he was, but not to tarry
in death to corruption.

All Ebrewes Doctor Bilson rejects for their grammar sense of Sheol. None
ever rejected all Latins for Latin, or French for the French: yet D. Bilson
dares reject all Hebrews for Hebrew: such an Hebrician is he. By the same
doctrine he might teach Bilsons reiection of all Hebrews would be ruin to all
stay of Religion.
never to hope for sound knowledge in any part of the law: no not for one
letter: whether it has the form that God wrought in the two tables or a later
invented. And for the very form as Tau in Ezechiel mistaken, and Rempham, much
coil is kept. And in our daily Hebrew Bibles, words 848. come in the margin
by Gods authority, and yet check not the text: and the French of Late
translating the margin, Esai. 9. troubled some greatly, gathering a
contradiction betwixt the old, and new translation. For all this no D. without
Rabbis help can tell what words make the Bible.

A certain helper of D. Bilson who can assiste him to mar all learning and
Religion, (one whom you leave though he be your Chapleyne to answer for
himself) he, as his learning and skill, will at once show it self, makes the
eldest Rabbines 300. years later then the Apostles. Error of 800. years for
Rabbis age.


So the Massorites, observers of the Letters and short writtings, and little
particles innumerable, often in one line, with millions of millions of notes,
all they were nothing worth.

For we seek how the Bible stood in Ezraes age not how 800. years after and
all the Jews hold that the Massorites began with Ezra. Neither could we
otherwise say we had the Bible. Without Without Massorites no Bible can ever be
truly printed.
help and knowledge of the Massorites, no printer can ever print the right
Bible.

Rob. Steph. in Ester tenth putting the margin in the text, for Xerxes,
committed a great fault: and Plantins heirs will now print after the
Massoreth, missing often hitherto. As in Daniel 8. all miss though the
Massoreth els-where warned of that place: Bombergiana the less mention in the
margin a right reading: but not yet printed in the text.

By the Massoreth all words be past corruption: who if they had not been of
Ezraes time, Bibles had infinitely disagreed: now they be sure, though copiers
miss now and then. So 800. years in Rabbis age are missed to disgrace all
certainty of Scripture. But whereas Of oth^^ Rabbis age.
in the New Testament the Apostles still tell of Jews matters, and all their
speeches be in the Talmud (as men of one common weal must agree in the same
chief heads:) this would never be by Jews 300. years tossed from their own
tongue and state, that Ierusalemy Talmud should be parcelled, by later men then
the tongue 300. years: and that poor base men void of wealth, leisure and
liberty, should search all the law most curiously. Who would think so? They
say, that from age to age their Fathers left works: Rabbis continued
throughout all ages.
the chief sayings of all which the Ierusalemy Talmud and the Babylonian and
Midras Rabba and such like record in the same words.

And Onkelos by all graunts is near the Apostles time: and Vziel of their
time, but a compiler of far elder: and Targum Ierusalemy in Cyrillis age
famous as ancient, called of him Samariticon, upon Genes. 4. And seeing many
thousand Levites had learning in their charge and all Israel (saving
hand-laborers) frequented divinity schools to hear and speak twice a week;
how should they omit to write observations, such as we have now, full of
unspeakable labor and long study? All that is in the new Testament is handled
here and there in the Talmud; and much largely: where, in known things our
Lord would be short. So D. Bilson missed much for Rabbis, to the ruin of all
Religion, and to augment Satan's blindness.

An other matter of singular use suffers disgrace by D. Bilson. The Sadduces
noted that Moses never named life eternal, nor resurrection, That the Scribes
knew no term in Moses for Hell.
nor place of joy or tormente: nor any Prophets, but in visions. The Scribes
grant this; yet bring matter from Moses for all this, and show that the
scoffing world was to be taught as beasts by the belly openly, and closely to
life. But when Prophets ceased and open prophesying, and iron-legged Macedones
turned Judah much to be Sadduces, and schools were but of few: then they
enacted terms of better hope, as world of souls, Judgment day, Paradise,
Gehenna, Resurrection, Feasting in heaven: and such. And this the new
Testament allows.

By D. Bilson all this were vain, or he himself. He can find in the law a
proper name for Hell. And how would he have vexed the Sadduces if he had been
in their days; All the Scribes had been nothing to him.

Now after Ebrews let us search Greek affairs. God advanced Greek with daily
increase, first when Judah went to Babell, then Pisistratus tyra^t of Athens
brought Homer into high use and glory. Of Greeks in all sorts.


And many Poets for sentences, comedies, and tragedies, flourish daily. So
Physicians, Philosophers, Orators and Historiques for two hundred years pains,
that the Greek tongue came to an unspeakable perfection of elegancie.

And the Jews (taught by Daniel that soon Grecia should reign) before hand
studied Greek. And God showed the use of their labor. For when the iron
legged Macedonians began to reign, they required, and had the Ebrew holy
books all turned into Greek, wherein the translaters showed wit in applying
most divinely heathen greek to divinity. And they showed excellent skill in
all Greek kinds. The Sepruagint:


And when the Macedonians by 300 years government, had carried Greek from the
West over all, and Jews with Greek Bible: then our Lord comes and his
Apostles to show Greeks in their The Apostles have all the Jewels of greek
elegancy.
own language and meaning all the mysteries of salvation: and gather all brave
terms from heathen plainly to divine use, 4000. several words into one
little book, that the most part of words are used but once, which is not so
in the old Testament. The 70. did the like, who to one Ebrew word gave eleven
Greek now and The greek fathers compared heathen most narowly with Apostolic
greeks.
then, to show Heathen all eloquence in their kind.

To apply heathen Greeks to the Prophets and Apostles, the Greek Fathers
labored another 300. years, to show how they had the same speeches still,
though in matter not well carried. Iustine Martyr to heathen is much herein,
and Clemens Alexandrinus has contrived all heathen hither, being a store like
Alexandrian Library.

Eusebius also is not a little in this sort, and infinite others specially for
the maine, the eternal state in Hades; for good, as Abraham Luke 16. and
Joseph Genesis 37. and for wicked as Dives, Luke 16. And as heathen 3000. years
made Haden the lodge of all souls and the Philosophers held it an happy
thing to go soon thither. So in the Creed heathen would say that by to
katelthein eis hadou, we meant a most happy passage from this world to God.
And so all the Fathers place the happy Fathers in Hades, and meant no worse
lodge. To dash all four, thus arises Bilson.

Bilson leaves heathen to their alleagers, and says for Iosephes Hades, that
the Greek Fathers that placed his soul there as in Paradise, understood not
the 70. and that St. Luke. 16. teaches D. Bilson teaches greek to all greeks.
to understand Haden for Hell, because the rich man is in it: as though
Abraham were not there also. And to conclude for heathen greek, the 70. the
Apostles, the Fathers, he disanulleth all common agreement for their Greek, as
though he had made a vow to root out all learning, with Religion. Wit also
comes in question. Our subscribing to Zuricke says: Per inferos intelligimus
paradisum, etc. most faithfully and learnedlie. Yet Doct. Bilson being told
that Hades to the good is Paradise would needs prove that Christ went to Hell
because he went to Hades. Yet when all Greek Doctors place all the Fathers in
Hades (and they place Christ no lower) he will not have them in Hell. And thus
with strange dealing, he has by preaching, and great sale of his errors,
sought the destruction of Religion, of Scripture, of Ebrew tongue and learning,
of all kinds of Greek elegancie, and all proceeding in disputing; by taking
that for all his argument, that is truly affirmed to be clean contrary.

To your G by order complaint was to be made, that you should with all your
learning and might bring D. B. into the right way. It is a pitiful thing that
Bishops should be found infinitely fulle^ of error for the grounds of faith, and
learned studies, then any other in all the Kingdom.

A mind that loved the truth and heard that the Greek in the Creed for 3000.
years use, in our Lords souls passage, is no more then to go hence to God,
would make no more stir, but wisely confess that by Heathen Greek the
Creed penned for Heathen must be expounded. And that clear plainness
beseems a public arbridgme^t of faith, such as to all the simple folk ought
to be expounded. Your heart and confession by Master King at Franck furt
knows who has cleared the truth. And how can you suffer D. Bilson to
deceive the people?

And D. Bilson being in high place should seem flexible unto the truth: as
his blame for stubburnes in heresy would be notorious. And if he would plainly
and absolutely confess that he has been deceaved, and that the Greek in the
Creed teaches most certainly that our Lords soul ascended unto Paradise
from the cross, and never descended into Hell, this humility would be his
high commendation, and cut of an infinite company of his errors.

As you are holy Fathers and partakers of the heavenly calling, kick nor
against the spur. But say: let him be Anathema Maran Atha, that loves not
the truth of Redemption. It is a most high injury against God and the King,
that the Church is led amiss by Bishops errors.

God give all us understanding in all things, and guard our hearts and minds
in the knowledge and love of our Lord and Savior: that in all parts of holy
doctrine we may nourish peace and truth.


