The holy Genealogy of Jesus Christ, both his natural Line of Fathers, which
S. Luke follows, chap. 3. And his Kingly line, which S. Matthew follows,
chap. 1. with fit notation of their Names. By H. Br.
To the Christian Reader.
THE holy Genealogy of Jesus Christ (may not be reckoned in the number of
those profane ones, which S. Paul condemns in 1. Tim. 1.4. for it) does not
consist in a vain repetition of Names, (as many do think) neither is the
knowledge thereof superfluous, (as some do affirm;) But verily (if it be
rightly understood) it is of exceeding great use and consequence; not only to
prove Christ to be the promised Seed, (which is a weighty point;) But also
it serves as a special guide, to direct us in the true understanding of all
the Holy Story: For the native judgment of all men teaches, that Histories
cannot be learned rightly, without knowledge of the Persons upon whom the
Narrations go. That being so, all that look for Salvation by Scripture,
which calls us unto our Savior, should have a special care to know our Lords
Line: for upon it, all the Stories go principally; either in open phrase of
words, or else with some close relation: as he that will take but a serious
view of our Lords line of Fathers, shall soon see, how all the Holy story
depends upon it, and from it, as from a Fountain, does branch it self into
a most pleasant variety of all Gods holy proceedinges, in the wonderful
preservation of his Church, and in the fearful overthrow of all the enemies
thereof.

The Ebrew has kept a perfect Register of all their Names unto David; but
after that David had the promise of the Celestial Throne, (2. Sam. 7. Then our
Lords kindred was kept in private Records, all saving four: As Nathan for the
first, and three others of him, that inherited Salomons right: And yet
notwithstanding the God of Wisdom, has not suffered those Names (which the
Ebrew has omitted in the old Test.) to perish in oblivion; But the Holy Ghost
has been exceeding careful, to set down (in Greek) a perfect Register of
them all, in the very forefront, (even like a most stately Vlam or Porch,)
before the Temple of the New Testament.

And yet, it is a most lamentable thing to consider, how many men do pervert
and obscure this glorious entrance of the blessed Gospel, to the great hurt of
all Christianity, and to the great hardoning of the poor blind Jews in their
obstinate resisting of all our Gospel: For say they, If so many gross errors
(as many Christians have broched for current truth) be set in the very
forefrunt of all the N. Testament; then Christ is not come in the flesh,
neither is our N.T. from God. Which assertion cannot be denied, if it be true,
as many do affirm: First, That Salomons house did end in Achazias. Secondly,
That King Ioas in Mat. 1. and Simeon in Luke 3. are all one man. Thirdly, That
Ioachaz a younger Brother, was made Father to Ioakim two years his elder.
Fourthly, That Salathiel was the natural Son of Iechonias, notwithstanding
Gods Oath, that he should die childlesse. Ier. 22.

But to clear the holy Genealogy of Jesus Christ from these, and many other
gross errors, it will not be amiss, first to lay down a brief Table, to
reconsile S. Matthew and S. Luke: which shall begin no higher then David;
because the maine errors, are chiefly found in his posterity. And after this,
shall follow a more large Table of all our Lords Fathers, with brief
observations upon their Names; which shall be laid down in their true
distinctions, and with notations agreeable to the Ebrew, and to occasions,
holden fit to give them names at their birth times: And herein we may
consider the wonderful providence of God, closely disposing their Names, to
that which in Story should be most famous: For it is evident, that the Names
of our Lords line, were sagely given by the guidance of Gods spirit, and in
more wise sort, then ever any fieigner could think upon; as the discreet
Reader may easily discern, by the correspondance of their Names, which abridge
the Holy Story. The Syriaque or Chaldy, Arabique and Ethiopian, are as Ebrew.

H. Broughton.

A BRIEF TABLE, RECONCILING S. Matthew and S. Luke: with Notes to clear them
from the errors of some, aforenamed.
DAVID.
Math. 1.
SOLOMON. Roboam. Abia. Asa. Iosaphat. Ioram. They are greatly deceived, that
end Salomons house in Achaziah, and bring above 600. errors into ye
Genealogy: Besides, they derive our Lord from most wicked folk; though he
honored all his true Fathers with ye gift of faith, being the root of
goodness, whom we are to follow in the honoring of our Parents, and can not go
before him.
Achaziah, These badde 3. and worse Iehoiakim, which were killed for evil ruling,
S. Matthew omitteth. Ioaz. It is a great error of many, that make this Joaz
and Simeon in Luke 3. to be all one person: for Simeon there, is the son of
Judah, and Ioaz here, is the natural son of Achaziah, (for Salomons house did
not end in Achaziah:) as we are taught by six plain testimonies of scripture,
2. king. 11, 2.13, 1.14, 13. 1. Chro. 3.1^. 2. Chro 22.11.23.3.
These badde 3. and worse Iehoiakim, which were killed for evil ruling, S.
Matthew omitteth. Amaziah. These badde 3. and worse Iehoiakim, which were killed
for evil ruling, S. Matthew omitteth. Ozias. Ioatham. Achas. Ezechias.
Manasses. Amon. Whereas Josias begets Iechonias and his breathren, Math. 1.
understand by breathren, cousins: That Josias the Grandfather, begat uncles to
Iechonias, as Tzedechias is called his brother. 2. chro. 36.10. but he was
properly his uncle, and brother to his father. 1. chro. 3.15. 2. king. 24.17.
and he is also his son for succession. 1. chro. 3.16.
Josias. It is a wonderful thing that any man of learning, should be so much
deceived as to make Iehoiakim an elder brother (and the natural son of
Josiah) to be the natural son of Ioachaz, who was two years his younger: as
the text it self does planely show. 2. ki^k. 23.30. 2 chro. 36^
Iakim, or Iehoiakim. Iehoiachin, or Ie-chonias. He ended Salomons race: for
God swore, that he should leave no Child behind him, Ier. 22.24. Wherefore it is
flat atheism to prate, that he naturally became father to Salathiel. Although
S. Luke had never left us Salathiels family up to Nathan, yet Gods oath, Jer.
22. should make us believe it. And when Zorobabel of Salathiel is chose^ for
Gods signet (in the place of Jec^onias) Aggi, 2.24. then Zachary taught chap.
12.10. that they were of the family of Nathan. And yet it is true also, that
Jechonias begat Salathiel (to wit) as a successor to the Kingdom; and so S.
Matthew does mean: for any Learned know, that he beginning with the term^ of
begetting, might not depart from it, where the custom of speech suffers the
catachresis: But yet the Jews in Sanedrin foll. 38. say, That Jechonias by
repentance called back Gods oath: and still they teach, that Christ must come
of Jechonias. That error sends millions daily to Abaddon.
Luke 3.
NATHAN. Mattatha. Mainan. Melea. Eliakim. Ionan. Joseph. Judah. Simeon. Leui.
Matthat. Iorim. Eliezer. Iose. Er Elmodam. Cosam. Addi. Melchi. Neri.
Salathiel. Pedaiah. Zorobabel.

ZOROBABEL.
Mat. 1.
*Abiud. He was also called Mosollam, 1. Chr. 3. That is, He shall be settled
in Salem^ (and so Naaslon named Salmon, in this sense.) The Crown belonged
unto him, and to the rest: and although Heathen kept them from it, yet they
were settled in the Salem of a better kingdom, forever and ever. Dan. 7.18.
Eliakim. Azor. Sadoc. Achim. Eliud. Eliazar. Matthan Jacob. Joseph. He should
have been King, if Tirants would have given all men their right: and so our
Lord (his son by Laws esteem) had been King of the Jews: But would have it
in no other right, that his heavenly Kingdom might be known.
Luke 3.
Rhefa. He is also called Ananias, 1. Chro. 3. A remembrance of Annanias the
noble martyr; the glory of men, that quenched the fire: he was fitly termed
so, a father to Christ; that quenches Hell fire, from burning his servants.
Ioanna. Judah. Joseph. Semei. Mattathias. Maath. Nagge. Essi. Naum. Amos.
Mattathias. Joseph. Ianna. Melchi. Leui. Matthat. Eli. Mary. JESUS CHRIST.

In this empty place (seeing we are in reconciling of the beginning of S. Luke
and S. Matthew together) it will not be amiss, to speak a little in
particular of their several beginnings.

Of S. Matthewes beginning.
S. Matthew begins the story of our Lords Fathers, no higher then Abraham:
First, because the Land of Canaan, where the Kingdom should arise, was first
promised to Abraham. Secondly, Christ was first promised to him in open
distinct plain words. Thirdly, he is made Father of all the Heathen, which
should follow his belief: and the Heathen were to offer first fruits at
Jerusalem; as Maimony notes, Bechor. per. 4. and so for Jews and Gentiles,
the beginning from him, is very fit.

Of S. Lukes beginning.
S. Luke, (before he comes to lay down the whole Natural line of Christ) he
does in the first place* join the end of the Old Testament, to the beginning
of the New: A most heavenly work. And here note the very names. Zacharj and
Malachj, end the speech of God in the old Testament: and Zacharj and Malachj
(that is, John Baptist) are the first speech of the Angel Gabriel in the New.
So sweetly both Testaments do kiss one another: that it is not fit for the
hid Apocrhipha to come between, to hide and obscure their glorious conjunction.

The holy Genealogy of JESUS CHRIST: Both his natural line of Fathers which
S. Luke follows, chap. 3. And his Kingly line, which S. Matthew follows,
chap. 1. With fit notation of their names.
ADAM, Earthy. In my Observations upon these first 10. Fathers, their notation
is more largly opened. Seth, Set. Called so properly by foresight, that his
house only should continue. Enosh, Sorrowful. So called, for Idolatry then
arising. Kenan, Lamentable. So called, for Idolatry then arising. Mahalaleel,
Praising God. As in sorrows, that is all our comfort. Iared, Descending.
Called so, because the world went from evil to worse. Enoch, Dedicated. Meant
to God: as he walked with him. Methushelah. A weapon against death. Because
during his life, he kept off the flood* Lamech, Smitten. For not til his days,
the Fathers die; and then al sorrows come to ripe heart smiting. NOAH. 10.
Comfort. His notatio^ is manifest Genesis 5. Shem, A name. His notation is opened
in a treatise of Melchisedek. Arpachsad, A healer of very ruins. S. Luke
joins Cainan to Arpachsad; which the 70. first feigned, to delude Heathen:
whom S. Luke* follovveth as a reporter, but not as a judge. Shelah, A Branch
or Twigge. Eber, Passing: In and out, as the branches of a tree do. Peleg, A
division. In his time Tongues were divided, and man's age halfed by the building
of Babel. Rue, His like. Both lived just equal years. 239. Serug, A
principal ^ine. Nahor, Heated. As continuing the strength of the Vine. Terah,
A scent. It should have bin as that in Cant. 1.2. but it fell out contrary.
ABRAM, A father high. A name too stately for a man, and therefore better changed
Abraham, A father of a great multitude. A name too stately for a man, and
therefore better changed Isaak, Laughter, or Gladness. Jacob, A supplanter.
Called also, Israel, Mighty with God. Here begins the distinction of Jews
from Gentiles. Judah, Praise of God. Phares, A breach maker. By occasion at his
birth. Hezron, The middle of joy. He was borne in the middle, betwixt the
Promise and the Lamb. Aram, High. Though borne in baseness, in Egypt.
Aminadab, A noble people. Though base in Egiptian eyne: all good are Aminadab,
in Cant. where the Latin keeps the term Aminadab. Nahashon, Experimenter.
He had experience of the Promise from Egypt. Salmon, Set at rest. (In the
land.) Booz, In him shall be strength. That appeared, when old Booz begat Obed
Obed, A servant. A stay to his old kindred. Ishai, Substanciall. Though base in
Saul's eyes; yet he is honorably mentioned a Father of Christ: The root of
Iessai.
The Kingly line by Solomon: which S. Matthew follows. chap. 1.
DAVID, Beloved. (Now for the Natural line, look to Nathan. -- Bathseba, The
daughter of oath. Kimchi thinks that David swore that her Son should reign,
when her name was but Bath-shuange ( a noble daughter) and was changed
thereupon into Bath-shebange. Solomon, Peaceable. Roboam, The enlargement of ye
people. Though it fell out otherwise. Abia, My Father is Iah, God. Asa,
Healing. Syriaque: It fell out fit, in his seeking to Phisique. Iosaphat, The
Lord is Judge. His name is used appellatiuely in Joel. for Gods judgment.
Ioram, God is high. Achaziah, God catches. As he did him indeed, Ioas,
Desperate. And so he had bin, but for Iehoiadah, that saved him from Athaliah.
Amaz-iah, Strong in God. He was so in his own conceit, as Ioas king of
Israel tells him: But Ioas his father in Barachias days, gave him a name,
that might have kept him from Edoms Gods, to cleave unto God, that made him
conquer Edom. Vziah, or Azariah, Iah- God is my strength. Io-tham, Jehovah is
ye perfect. Achas, (God) catches. Ezekias, My strength is Iah-God. And so he
was against Zaneherib: but when he began to boast in his wealth, as his
strength, then he is told, that his posterity shall serve in Babels court.
Esa. 3.9. Manasseh, A causer to forget: The former ruins of Judah; but he
caused more. Amon, A Nurse. But he nourished Idolatry. Josias, My fiery
(zeal) is Iah-God. So named when Ieroboa^ fell to Idolatry. Iehoiakim, God
will stablish: The seat of Judah, though Babel captive it. Iehoiachin. God will
settle. The Infidel Iehoiakim gave him that name in disgrace of Jeremy,
telling of the Captivity: But God revenged it; for in him, Salomons race
ended, the Crown subverted, and the Diadem was cast away: Then his race
failing, they were to seek an Heir of the next of kin; And that was *
Salathiel the natural Son of Neri, of the line of Nathan, the brother of
Salomo^, (for from him by right, was to spring the successors of Iudahs
Kingdom:) So that Salathiel the natural son of Neri, in succession of
place, is called the Son of Ieconiah, 1. Chro. 3.17. who had indeed* no son
by natural propagation, but dyed childlesse, Ier. ^2.30. And yet in right of
the Kingdom, Salathiel succeeded him as Heir. And in that sense S. Matthew
does say, Iechonias or Iehoiakim begat Salathiel. Math. 1.12.

Mark the wonderful providence of God in this Family, that all this while,
nor after for the Kings line, they never named two by one name; because it
would much have troubled men's memory: as the nigh names Iakim and Iachin, have
troubled Greeks and Latins exceedingly, taking one for the other.


The natural line by Nathan, which S. Luke follows chap. 3.
The line of DAVID by Nathan, is called the Holy seed. Esa. 6.13.
NATHAN, is Salomons brother of Bathsheba. 1. Chro. 3. In these, regard stories
and sentences of faith, from the Patriarchs: as Joseph 4. times. Simeon once
(Semei also is of the same notation) Leui twice, Eleazar twice, Judah twice. The
often repetition of like names, shows that the line was not He^^e to the
c^owne, wilst they named them otherwise then they did in the crown line.
Given (God) has given. The Prophet Nathan told David of this special Son:
and after the Prophets name he was to name the Child of whom Christ should
come. Again, Nathans son In these, regard stories and sentences of faith,
from the Patriarchs: as Joseph 4. times. Simeon once (Semei also is of the same
notation) Leui twice, Eleazar twice, Judah twice. The often repetition of like
names, shows that the line was not He^^e to the c^owne, wilst they named them
otherwise then they did in the crown line.
Mattatha, has a name of the same force, to cause better marking: as twice
also Matthat, and twice Mattathia. All call to ma^ke Nathans name and case. A
principal matter. In these, regard stories and sentences of faith, from the
Patriarchs: as Joseph 4. times. Simeon once (Semei also is of the same
notation) Leui twice, Eleazar twice, Judah twice. The often repetition of like
names, shows that the line was not He^^e to the c^owne, wilst they named them
otherwise then they did in the crown line.
Mattatha, A Gift: As every Child is for the Parents. Mai-nan, Waters of
breeding. Be like the mother bore many other children, or the family was
populous. Melea, Full. That seems to be given by like occasion. Eliacim, God
can settle. Ionan, It is all one with John In the Greek. 1. Chro. 3. or after
the tongue of Ismael, much near Isaaks. So it is in the Arabique translation
(in the secund Ioanna.) Joseph, God will add. They name not their children by
any younger Patriarch then Judah, except by the worthy Joseph. The only named
after the Patriarchs. In Genesis their notation lies. Judah, 2. Praise of God.
They name not their children by any younger Patriarch then Judah, except by the
worthy Joseph. The only named after the Patriarchs. In Genesis their notation
lies. Symeon, Hearing. They name not their children by any younger Patriarch
then Judah, except by the worthy Joseph. The only named after the Patriarchs.
In Genesis their notation lies. Leui, Coupled. They name not their children by
any younger Patriarch then Judah, except by the worthy Joseph. The only named
after the Patriarchs. In Genesis their notation lies. Matthat, A Gift. As
Mattatha, and Nathan. Iorim, God will make high. As Ioram. Eliazer, My God has
the strength. Iose, Salvation. As the Aethiopia^ translation follovveth the
Ebrevv term with the letter Ain in the end: which later Greeks omit, and the
Ierusalemie, and the other Talmud Er, God is vigilant. Elmodam, God measures.
A memory of Ioctans family. Cosam, Foretells: Or all one with Chusan. A
memory of the Aramite Chusan, for some high cause; as that Manasse or Amon
were new Chusans. Addi, My Ornament: As any good child is to his parents.
Melchi, The King is mine. Neri, The Candle is mine. As David is called Ner
(Light of Israel. 2. Sam. 21.17.) they knevv by Sop. 1.8 that Salomons race
should fail, In these, regard stories and sentences of faith, from the
Patriarchs: as Joseph 4. times. Simeon once (Semei also is of the same
notation) Leui twice, Eleazar twice, Judah twice. The often repetition of like
names, shows that the line was not He^^e to the c^owne, wilst they named them
otherwise then they did in the crown line.
-- and theirs be heirs to David's Throne.

*Salathiel, Asked of God. Samuel and he, are of one notation. Pedaiah, God
redeemeth (from Babel.) Zorobabel, A fanner of Babel. This name glaunceth at
Babel the Golden head beaten to dust. He was in Babel (as Mercerus well
gathers upon Aggi) Shaeshbazar, cheerful in sorrow (of Babel.) A name not
dangerous, as the other was in Babylon. Ezra. 1.

Z^robabel had sons, Abiud and Rhesa: S Luke prosecuteth the line of Rhesa
unto Eli the father of Mary. And S. Natthew folloveth the line by the other
brother Abiud, unto Joseph the husband of Mary: So that Joseph and Mary came
both of the seed of David by the line of Nathan. There is no disagreement
therefore found betvveene S. Matthew and S* Luke, but either of them have
desc^ibed aright the true Genealogy of Christ. S. Matthew the Kings line, S.
Luke* the Fathers.

Abiud * ^ooke to these marks on the other side. Rhesa. ^ooke to these marks on
the other side. Zorobabel. S. Luke follows this line by Rhesa, being the
Fathers line, and Saints of the high Trini^ie. Dan* 7.18. Rhesa, The head.
Though his brother Abiu^ was the father glory, as heir. Ioanna, The grace of
God. A memory of the famous John, Iehoi^^ah, or Barachias. Judah, Praise of
God. Joseph, God will add. Semei, Hearing. All one with Simeon. Mattathias, A
gift of God. Ma-hath, Broken. Nagge, Light. Essi, My praise or glory. As all
good children are to their Parents, of Chashal a Chaldie term; as now Judah
spoke ^haldy. chapter or ceth* is commonly omitted of the Greek^s. Naum, Comort.
Amos, Strong. So was Esayes father called: or as Nahum, so Amos may be after
the name of Amos the Prophet. Mattathias, A gift of God. Joseph, God will add.
Ioanna, The grace of God. Melchi, The King is mine. Leui, Coupled. Matthat, A
gift. Eli, Ascending. As in his daughter and her son, the degree was highest.
Mary, High, or from bitterness of the sea. A memory of Moses sister. JESUS, A
Savior: Being son of Mary, of Eli, of Adam, of GOD: and so both God and Man.
S. Matthew follows this line by Abiud, being the Kings line. The most of
these names are of notation, arguing comfort against the Persians and Greeks:
And they are called in Daniel, The Saints of the high Trinity, who shall
possess a Kingdom for ever and ever. Dan. 7 18.
^biud --
Abiud, My father owes the glory, (Not the Persians.) Eliacim, God will
stablish. These names are taken from Psalm. 89. which handles the state of
Christ his Kingdom: as these men felt it not earthly, but spiritually. Azor,
Strength. These names are taken from Psalm. 89. which handles the state of
Christ his Kingdom: as these men felt it not earthly, but spiritually. Sadoc,
Justice. These names are taken from Psalm. 89. which handles the state of
Christ his Kingdom: as these men felt it not earthly, but spiritually. Achin,
I will settle. That word is in Psa. 89. verse. 5. in the Ebrew text, Eliud, My
God has the glory. Eliazer, My God has the strength. Matthan, A gift. Now
when Judah cast off the Greeks, the names are of other matter. Jacob, A
supplanter. Remembrances of old comfort in Egypt, and the first of the Kings
line, that are named after their Fathers. They now end Isreal's line with two
the most famous names. Joseph, God will add. Remembrances of old comfort in
Egypt, and the first of the Kings line, that are named after their Fathers.
They now end Isreal's line with two the most famous names.

Who was the Husband of Mary the Mother of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, who being
to be holden Joseph's son, by all Law was borne King of the Jews. That he
acknowledged, Pilate granted; and the Jews could name none but Caesar, to
hinder his right. Also, the Star declared thus much; and Herod sought one
borne a King. And after that he had confirmed the covenant for many, Dan. 9.
then he is made Heir of a^^; over all powers in this world and in that
which is to come. Amen.


At London printed by W. White, dwelling in Cow-lane.


