THE HOUSE OF GOD. The sure Foundation, the Stones, the Workmen and Order of
the Building.

The incomparable strength of that House, and the vain assaults and batteries
of Satan and all his power.

In a Sermon preached at Paul's Cross, December 24. 1626.

By MATTHEW BROOKS.

ISA. 33.13. Hear ye, that are far off, what I have done, and ye that are
near, acknowledge my might.

LONDON, Printed by G. P. for Richard Cartwright, and are to be sold in
Ducke-lane, near Smithfield. 1627.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL and truly Religious, HENRY WALLOPE, Knight; the fat
of Earth, and the dew of Heaven.
Right Worshipful:
Seneca will not have it denied, that a good Pylot is skillful, albeit it be on
dry land; his reason is, because being endowed both with contemplative and
practicke knowledge, so much as may be thought necessary both to make him
positiuely, and comparatively sufficient for that Art he is only destitute of
opportunity to bewray his judgment, and ability. My case is just so: I must
sincerely confess my due respect ever since I was first known unto you, and
have wanted nothing with the good Pylot, but occasion to show it; let me this
way call the world to witness that I honor you.

That which put me upon this Text, was the request of some of my friends made
unto me, for some reasons best known unto them and me. How I have answered
their expectation, I know not; whatsoever this poor discourse seems to be, I
shall desire you to accept it with the same affection that I bestow it on you;
the gift is too light, if it be waighed against your favors: but I hope you
will respect the mind and ability of the giver, imitating Augustus, who with
as ready a hand received those few verses presented unto him by a poor Greek,
as that great Arabian Courser given him by Titinius.

If I have not meddled with any controuersed points (as the words of the Text
seem to promise, and as I presume it was expected) conceive in charity that I
aimed chiefly at the present profit of my hearers: besides, it had been
somewhat too presumptuous, considering the worth of all those who have both
disputed and written of these things. Howsoever, let me say this place of
Scripture to be like unto that leaf which bears both the Antidote and the
Aconiton: for certainly our adversaries possessed with the spirit of slumber,
do most vilely abuse this Text, and are therefore baned in the same place were
others are preserved.

There remains nothing, but that I commend you and all yours to God in my
prayers, which I will never cease to do, and remain ever,

Yours humbly at command, M. B.

The House of God.
MATTHEW. 16.18. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church, and
the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.


THe material Temple or House which Solomon built for the Lord, Act. 7.47.
was by the special providence of God situated upon the Mount Moriah; (it was
an hard stony or rocky hill, Eastward in Jerusalem, every way, save toward the
rising of the Sun inaccessible, on which place Abraham being about to offer
up Isaak his only son, Genesis 22.13, 14.
because that God provided a Ram, which he took and offered up for a burnt
offering in stead of his Son, he called the name of that place Iehouah-ijreh,
as it is said to this day, In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen: there
was also the threshing floor of Araunah the Iebusite, 2 Samuel 24.18.
in which the Prophet Gad commanded King David to rear an Altar unto the Lord,
for the appeasing of his wrath in the time of that great pestilence, Joseph.
antiq. lib. 1. cap. 14. and lib. 7. cap. 10.
which he plagued the people withal, because that David had numbered them) in
that place did King Solomon found that magnificent Temple.

By this a further matter was fitly typed: Henricus Bunting itinerario
Scripturae. 1 Cor. 10 4
for that great Rock or sure Foundation was a type of Christ: and as Paul
says of that Rock, which gave drink to the people of Israel in the Desert,
that that Rock was Christ, that is to say, a figure of Christ, Calvin. Com. in
1 Cor. cap. 10. v. 4. Isa. 28.16.
because it signified Christ, that stone, that tried stone, that precious
corner stone, that sure Foundation which the Lord God laid in Sion. Upon him
if we offer up our prayers to God, they shall surely be accepted, as Abraham's
and David's sacrifice.

Further the Temple founded on that Rock, was a figure of the Church built on
Christ, for he is that sure Foundation upon which it stands, like that house
whereon the rain descended, and the floods came, Mat. 7.24.
and the winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell not, for it was
founded upon a Rock.

This great mystery was little perceived by the Jews, whom four specious
titles caused to fwell with pride. The first was (...) the people: for they
supposed themselves to be the peculiar people of God; holy by propagation from
Abraham, to whom God had so bound himself, that he could not ( ex pacto and
iustitia, by virtue of his covenant and Justice) forsake them, and therefore
they boasted, John 8.39.
saying, Abraham is our father. The second was (...) the Law, for they
attributed so much to the Law, especially to the Rites and Ceremonies thereof,
that they boasted themselves to be made righteous by them, (for that they duly
observed them) and no less the friends of God then Abraham was. It was reputed
as a capital crime in Stephen, that he spoke of the dissoluing of that Temple,
and the abolishing of those Mosaicall ceremonies: Act. 6.13.
This man cease not to speak blasphemous words against this holy place and
the Law. The third was (...), the Temple: for they vainly dreamed that God was
therewith so highly pleased, that he would never admit any other place of
worship: therefore when the Prophets threatened evils upon them for their sins,
they would oppose their Temple against all inconveniences: Hic^. 7.4.
The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord. The
fourth was (...), the place: their whole Land, (as they supposed) God had
elected so, to place his Name there, that he would accept no service in any
other place: carnally did they understand those words of the Prophet, In Judah
is God known; Psalm. 76.1.
his Name is great in Israel: as if God were neither known, nor to be known
in any place else. But God denied to be so bound unto them, where he threatened
not to spare them for the place sake. Hier. 7.14.


How much these men deceived themselves, and became vain in their own
imaginations, may be seen by Christ his reply to an answer made by the Apostle
Peter, to a question proposed by our Savior. For when as Christ, in the third
year of his Ministry, which was the 33. year of his age, An. Osiand. Harm.
Euang. lib. 2. cap. 32.
went the second time unto the borders of the Gentiles, and upon the confines
of Caesarea Philippi, propounded unto his Disciples this question; Whom do men
say that I the son of man am? and when as he had received their answer,
reporting the opinions or diverse conceits which the people had of him; Mar.
6.14, 15. Luc. 9.7, 8.
some giving out that he was John the Baptist, some Elias, some Hieremias, or
one of the Prophets: Our Savior, who was not ignorant of this, (having for
this purpose asked the question) does from thence take occasion to come nearer
to their consciences, that so he might see what good use they had made of that
heavenly doctrine which he had taught them, and those divine Miracles which he
had wrought before them; and to demand further, saying, Whom say ye that I am?
To which proposition when Peter readily replied, saying, Thou art Christ, the
Son of the living God, he has then that he looked for, and takes occasion
from thence to clear the whole matter, and to make it appear who are his
chosen people: by what laws he will govern them: what that building of his
might be, which the Temple figured, and that elected place, which he would
never leave nor forsake.

First he assures Peter, that the answer which he had given him, was not nati
ex carne and sanguine, the sensual wisdom of a man borne of flesh and blood:
but renati ex spiritu sancto, the heavenly wisdom of a man borne again of the
holy Ghost. Flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which
is in heaven. Secondly, he lets Peter to understand, what prerogative he had
obtained, by laying up in his heart that good lesson taught him by the Spirit
of God: (viz.) he is made a member of that spiritual building which Christ
would to be built upon himself, as the foundation; the fruit and effect
whereof is, that he should never fall away from Christ to his destruction: And
I say unto thee, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Churh, and
the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Lastly, he does amplify this
prerogative, by declaration of that privilege which he received by his
Ministerial function, and the fruit and effect of the same: And I will give
unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; and whatsoever thou shall bind
on earth, shall be bound in Heaven; whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall
be loofed in Heaven.

That which I will set before you, is the prerogative which Peter obtained by
the faith which he had received; the fruit and effect whereof was his good
confession: and herein confider three things: First, his personal benefit,
Thou art Peter: Secondly, whereunto that personal benefit has relation, viz.
the building: this is described, and the dignity and worthiness of it
expressed by a double exposition; the first is, (...), for it is not only a
Church, but the Church of Christ: my Church. Secondly, (...), and hence you
have the definition of that Church, as if he should say, My Church is that
building which I will build upon this Rock which thou have confessed: and
therein you have two propositions: First, The Church is builded by Christ: I
will build my Church. Secondly, Christ his Church is builded upon a Rock; and
that not every Rock, but upon this Rock: Upon this Rock I will build my
Church. Lastly, the inference or conclusion, because it is the Church of
Christ, because he builds it, because he builds it upon that Rock, therefore
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Herein consider two things:
First, what those gates of hell are: secondly, how they prevail not against
that My Church, the Church of Christ. I shall show you, that the Jews were not
only the Church of Christ: the Mount Moriah not properly the foundation: or
the stones of the Jews Temple, the stones of that building: I will show you,
that the Church is the company of Gods Elect and chosen; that Peter was not the
head of it, but a stone of the building; that Christ is the sure foundation,
and that whosoever is builded on him, shall never be broken down, no not by
the gates of hell. Let me beg your attention in the name of Christ.

Of Peter's prerogative, and therein first of the personal benefit which he
received: which is the first thing.
THou art Peter.] The word (...) in the Original, does signify a stone: the
prerogative therefore which Peter had, is this, he is made a stone, non
conuersione naturae, not by conversion of his nature into stone, sed done
gratiae, but he is made a stone by the gift of grace. And he is made a stone
two manner of ways; by his faith, and by his function. Here is our Savior as
good as his word; and performs that promise which he made unto him, Ioh. 1.42.
when his brother Andrew first brought him unto Christ. Thou art Simon, the
son of Iona, thou shall be called Cephas, which is by interpretation, a
stone. And our Lord did reserve the confirmation of his promise, till Peter had
made this good confession.

The Church of God, which is the company of those whom God has elected to
life eternal, is often in the Scriptures resembled to a material Temple, and
in particular to the Temple of Jerusalem; so that as that was called a house,
Mat. 21.13.
the house of prayer; so is this called a house, 1 Pet. 5.2.
a spiritual house, for distinctions sake. The material house was built of
stones laid one upon another; the spiritual house is likewise said to be
builded, 1 Cor. 12.26. 1. Pet. 2.5.
builded of stones, not natural stones, but living stones. The natural stones
of the material Temple, were joined and cimented one to another, that so the
building might rise up to perfection; and the spiritual stones are fitly
framed together, Ephesians. 2.21.
that the building may grow unto an holy Temple of the Lord.

Now, to make the similitude more plain, the material Temple had a strong
foundation, a Rock, next to which were stones of great strength, to support
the whole fabric of the building, which stones might not improperly be called
the foundation, being indeed a second foundation, most necessary for so great
a pile, and afterward it was raised with costly and curious stones, 1 King.
6.7.
such as Solomon made ready and brought thither; or such as those stones which
the Disciples did marvel at in the Temple, Mar. 13.1.
for the fairness and the greatness of them: Antiq. lib. 15. cap. 14.
which stones, as says Josephus, were 25. cubits long, 8. cubits high, and 12.
cubits broad. In like manner, this spiritual building is built on Christ, a
most strong and sure foundation; (that is the first foundation:) Isa. 28.16.
Ephesians. 2.20.
the foundations are the Prophets and Apostles; (they are the second
foundation:) and upon these the members of the Church, as stones, are builded,
according to that of the Apostle to the Ephesians, Verse. 22.
You are also builded together, for an habitation of God, through the Spirit.

Of this spiritual building S. Peter was a lively stone. It is a name which no
man knows, but he that has it; he does eat of the Tree of life, and of the
hidden Manna; he is a Citizen of Heaven, a fellow-Citizen of the Saints, and of
the Family of God: and to be laid in any place of this Temple, is an honor
far greater, then to be exalted in the Palaces of Kings. The Queen of
Sheba, when she heard the wisdom of Solomon, she said thus; ^ King. 10.8.
Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants, which stand continually
before thee, and that hear thy wisdom. Were these happy for hearing Solomon's
wisdom? Were these happy for standing before him? How much more happy are
those that stand builded in this spiritual House, in which the Lord does
dwell, who hear his wisdom, who are made wise unto salvation, who receive the
secrets of the Gospel, who are made the sons of God, hearers and
understanders of his wisdom; and because builded upon that strong and sure
foundation, which Christ is, therefore never to be thrown down? This
happiness is common to Peter, with every true believer; let us therefore examine
the matter further, that we may see what prerogative he might have in this
building, above other stones.

I said before, that he was made a stone by his faith, and by his function; by
his faith he was made an Elect and precious stone; by his function he was made
a great stone, and a necessary foundation stone: by his faith he was laid into
the building; by his function he was was laid into the foundation of the
building: By the first, he had fellowship with the Saints; by the second, he
had equality with the Apostles: upon both these respects, dicimus lapidem
electum, pretiosum, necessarium, fundamentalem. We say that he was a stone, a
choice stone, a stone of great worth, meet for the building, and a stone of the
Foundation.

By his faith: It is not every kind of faith that makes a stone, much less
such a stone, a living stone, or if you will so have it, a spiritual stone;
for then were it possible that all men might be stones of this building,
because it is not impossible that all men may have one kind of Faith or other.
There is a common faith which both the Elect and Reprobate have, and there is a
faith proper to the Elect of God, and this does properly deserve the name of
faith: for to speak Theologically, fides est electorum fides, faith is the
faith of Gods Elect: Tit^. 1.2.
so says Saint Paul, that he is an Apostle, according to the faith of Gods
Elect. The common faith is of three sorts, Acts 8.13.
Historical, whereby a man believes the letter or History of the Bible to be
true: Temporary, James 2.1^.
whereby a man does not only believe the Scripture, and in particular, the
Gospel: but for some short time does make profession, and perhaps does bring
forth some fruits, but he is not faithful unto death, and therefore has
nothing to do with the Crown of life. Reu. 2.10. Mat. 17.20. 1 Cor. 13.2.
Lastly, the faith of Miracles, whereby the mind is carried with a vehement
inspiration of the Spirit, to do signs and wonders in the Name of Christ.

Neither of these faiths do make a man a stone in this spiritual and eternal
building; and therefore though Simon had them all, they could not make him
Peter, they could not make him a stone. The Devils do believe the Scriptures
to be true; Iam. 2.19.
Demas the backslider, and Julian the reuolter, did for a time make profession
of them; 2 Timothy 4.10.
and false prophets prophecy and cast out Devils, yea, and do many wonderful
works in the Name of Christ. Mat. 7.22.
It is therefore worthy to be enquired what kind of faith St. Peter's was: and
because we said, that properly faith is the faith of the Elect, so we will call
it; it was the justifying or saving faith, Romans 3.28.
which did lay hold on Christ the Son of the living God, who came to break
the Serpents head, Genesis 3.15.
and to deliver us from the Jaws of death; for Peter caught him in the arms
of faith, when he confessed, saying, Thou art Christ the Son of the living
God.

Let a man have never so much knowledge, let him make never so great
profession, let him be able to remove mountains, if he have not this faith, he
is as sounding brass, or as a tinckling Cymball. This is the faith that makes
every one that has it a stone in the building; I will not say a stone so
precious, so bright-shining-glorious as Peter was (for even among the
foundation stones themselves, there seems to me to be some difference of gifts
and graces in this life, and of glory in the life to come. The first foundation
was Jasper, Reu. 21.19.
the second Saphyr, the third Calcedony, etc. but a stone at least, a true
member of the Church of Christ, the benefit whereof is, Ephesians. 2.3.
that first he is washed from his natural filthiness, and of a child of wrath
is made the child of grace. Secondly, he is reconciled, Romans 5.1.
and is at peace with God through Christ. Thirdly, he is the child of God, Romans
8.17.
and an inheritor of the kingdom of Heaven. Lastly, he attaineth all good
gifts to bring him thereto; as saving knowledge, religious zeal, constant
obedience, perseverance in grace, and what else you can think or speak of;
nay more then can come within the imagination of a natural man's heart: for he
dwells in God, and God dwells in him, yea, God has given him his Spirit
whereby he knows it.

Let the proud and ambitious men of this world seek after wealth and honor;
let them Haman-like account the Kings favor above all good things; let them
have sumptuous Palaces, heaps of gold and silver, and all pleasures, as
Solomon had; let them enjoy these things with health, peace, and liberty: let
them have all the good things of the mind, body, and fortune, which any
natural man (be he as acute as Aristotle, or Plato) is able to wish for: this
one gift of saving faith, possessed in the depth of poverty, and worldly
contempt, in the diseased body, and vlcerous skin of Lazarus, and at the best,
wandering up and down in Sheeps-shinnes, and Goats-skinnes, lodging in dens
and caves of the earth, with the servants of the Lord, shall preserve the
possessors of it, in that great and terrible day of the Lords wrath, when the
wicked shall vanish as smoke, and consume away as the fat of Lambs. Let us
not therefore Midas-like ouer-value the things of this world, but bestow our
chiefest care how to attain the saving faith: let us not study how to be
grounded in wealth, but how to be founded upon Christ the Rock: Let us not
emulate Semiramis in those Babels that we build, but rather devise how we our
selves may be builded in this spiritual House, of which Peter by saving faith
was made a stone, and every one that does partake with Peter in the same faith,
is likewise a stone, though not of so large a size, or so curiously carved; yet
such a stone as shall remain in the building for eternity, Psalm. 125.1.
like to Mount Sion that cannot be removed.

Now come we to his Function, the Office of his Apostleship, whereby he is made
a strong Foundation stone, upon whom other stones in the building are fitly
placed. Ephe. 4.21.
For Christ gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some Pastors and Teachers, 12.
for the perfecting of the Saints for the work of the Ministry, and for the
edifying of the Body of Christ. Therefore the Apostles, the Prophets, the
Evangelists, the Pastors and Teachers of the Church, are necessary stones for
the building, that it may be raised. But the greatest of all these are the
Apostles, who, because Apostles, are therefore Prophets, Evangelists, and
Teachers. Mar. 10.2. Osiand. Harmon Euang. lib. 2. cap. 1. Acts 1.26. Acts 9.15.
Yet no other can attain the dignity of the Apostleship, but the eleven first
chosen by our Savior Christ, in the second year of his Ministry, Matthias,
who succeeded in the place of Judas the Traitor and Paul, that chosen and elect
vessel, the Apostle of the Gentiles last called. In respect of the Church,
these are great Foundation stones, for they obtained commission to teach all
Nations, and to baptize them in the Name of the Father, of the Son, Mat. 28.19.
and of the Holy Ghost. Romans 10.18.
Which Commission of theirs they faithfully executed: for their sound went into
all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world. I need not tell you
with what gifts and graces they were enriched, for the performance of so great
a business; surely they so prevailed, that by their Ministry, Acts 2.47.
the Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved.

These great stones upon diverse respects are said to lie in the Foundation of
the building, for the supportation of other stones, less in graces, and less
in office. First, because they were called to that office, not by the Ministry
of man, but immediately by God, as Paul says that he is an Apostle, Gal 1.1.
not of men, neither by man. Secondly, because they first of all had commission
to preach Christ crucified unto the Gentlies, and to join both Jews and
Gentiles into one people, Isa. 11.10.
that so the root of Iesse might stand for an Ensign of the people, and the
Gentiles might seek unto it. Thirdly, because other great Officers of the
Church, as Bishops, Elders, and Deacons, were ordained by their Ministry, Acts
6.6.
and consecrated the hands of their Apostleship, but they themselves were not
so ordained, or ordered, but were chosen immediately by God, and received their
commission from Christ his mouth. Lastly, they ordained none to succeed them,
in the fullness of their office and charge, that is to say, to go into all
Nations, and to preach the Gospel unto every creature, Mar. 16.15.
which was their immediate commission Apostolical, but they ordained proper
Pastors unto particular Churches, to whose care they recommended the Flock of
Christ, in those places where they themselves had preached and prevailed,
reserving unto themselves Apostolic dignity, even to ouersee the Bishops and
Elders of the Church. And hence it is that St. Paul duiseth Timothy and Titus,
how to behave themselves in their function: and that St. Peter takes upon him
to instruct the Elders of the Church, and that Saint John counsels,
reprooueth, and commends the Angels or Bishops of the seven Churches of Asia.
These things being branches of the Apostolic authority, it was no small
matter that our Savior performed unto Peter upon his confession, saying, Thou
art Peter.

Note here what excellent Ministers God has raised up in his Church for the
saving of the souls of his Elect! By these the excellency of Christian
Religion is much commended: they are Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors
and Teachers. If the Indian Schools grew in estimation, because of the
Gymnosophists, and the Persian wisdom by the Soothsayers, and the Egyptian
learning by the Sorcerers, how much more shall our Religion be advanced, by
the worthiness of the Ministers, and their high calling in Christ Jesus? This
should also teach men, to have a reverend regard unto the Ministers of the
Word: for they are not only stones in the building, if they be faithful, but
necessary workmen, for the edifying of Gods Church, and in respect of their
Office closely laid upon the Apostles for the building of Christ his Body, and
therefore, Let a man so account of us, 1 Cor. 4.1.
as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God. Hitherto
we have spoken of Peter's personal benefit: now come we unto that thing
whereunto it has relation, and that is the Church, unto which it has
reference, as a stone to the building.

Upon this Rock will I build my Church.] Secondly, of the Church, and therein,
first, that it is a Church, and more then that, the Church of Christ, my Church.
The Elect and chosen of God, says the Text, are a Church, and more then that,
my Church, the Church of Christ.

The word (...) is derived from (...) which signifies to call out or summon:
so that when you talk of the Church, it is as if you should say a company of
men called out or summoned. The Athenians were wont to call the Company of
Citizens, called out or summoned by the voice of the Crier to hear the
sentence of the Senate Ecclesiam. And by the Etymology of this word, the
condition of Gods elect and chosen, is fitly expressed; for they are called out
of the generality of men, by the Word of God, to know God, and to worship and
serve him: and this their Calling, because they obey it, we call an effectual
Vocation. These so effectually called, are in the Scriptures set forth to be a
peculiar people, 1 Pet. 2.8. Ephesians. 2.19. Clem. Alexand. Strom. lib. 7. Ambros.
in Ephe. cap. 3. Bernar. in Cant. Str. 78.
the household of God, whom Clemens Alexandrinus calls the company of the
Elect. Ambrose, a people whom God has vouchsafed to adopt unto himself.
Bernard, the company of the elected, which company was predestined before the
world began. To speak expressly of this Church, it is gathered out of all
Sexes, Orders, Nations, and Times, and it is therefore called the Catholic or
Universal Church. Secondly, whereas some of the members of this Catholic
Church, are taken out of the vale of tears, and conueighed into Abraham's
bosom; in respect of them the Church is triumphant: and whereas some are left
in this Forest of Lebanon, to wrestle with the Devil, the World, and the
Flesh; in respect of them, the Church is Militant. Lastly, in respect of the
outward practice of Religion, the Church is Visible, and in respect of the
faith of the believers, it is invisible.

The condition therefore of the Church in general, and of every member in
particular, is to be called out: but they are not all called out at one age, at
one time, or upon one occasion. That great Master of the Vineyard, hired some
of his laborers very early in the morning, some at the third hour, some at
the sixth, some at the ninth, and some at the eleventh hour. John the Baptist
was sanctified from his mothers womb; Timothy was called in his youth: Paul a
young man; and the Thief upon the Cross at the last gasp. Again, it is not
one kind of means that does prevail to win all those that are called to the
faith, or (if you will have it so) not the same manner or method of preaching.
Augustine was ensnared by the eloquence of Ambrose: and the great disputer at
the Nicene Council, Aug. Confess. lib. 5. cap. 13. R^f. Eccl^^st. lib. 1. cap.
3.
was caught by the words of a plain man. GOD has sanctified the eloquent
tongue of the learned man to prevail on some; and the humble speech of the
unlearned to prevail on others: for he that does ordinarily call men by his
Word, is, if it please him, able to convert the^ without his Word. Let no man
cease to hope well of his brother, though for the present he see noe uident
tokens of his obedience: God has a time for him: serius ocius Sors exitura,
first or last it may fall to his lot: the Lord of the Harvest may, if it please
him, send him into the vineyard, though at the eleventh hour. O terque
quaterque beati, thrice happy all those whom the Lord does call effectually to
his service!

Again, let us not be absent when God does call; for if we hear not, how
shall we obey? Had the five wise Virgins been out of the way when the
Bridegroom did come, how had they been admitted into the wedding Chamber?
Mat. 25. Luc. 19.
Had Zachaeus not stood in the way, how had Christ called him from the tree?
Strange it is to see the practice of the world; we account him sottish, or
rather mad, who will absent himself when a worldly preferment may be gotten;
per ma^e, per saxa, per ignes, we ride and run, when we may be heard for our
profit: yet when the King of Heaven calls us by his Word and Sacraments, we
stick not to go about our worldly businesses, nay, our pleasures and
delights, as Plays, Tau^r^es, and worse things then these two! O mis^r^
qu^^ta^^^ in^ania, ciues? Shall we be so studious of these things, and shall we
not attend for our eternal profit? Lastly, let us not bring itching ears into
Gods House, but humble and obedient hearts; and because the Ministers of the
Word do summon us on Gods behalf, let not our own delights and pleasures,
let not the wicked worlds sins and vanities, retain our hearts in Sodom:
for Gods Family is Ecclesia, a company called out.

This Church so selected, Of the second exposition, and therein of the first
proposition, viz the Church is builded by Christ. I will build my Church. 1
Cor. 3.9. Exodus 36.1.
so called out, is builded, or rather called out that it may be builded; for it
is Gods building. When GOD would have his Tabernacle in the wilderness, he
sanctified Bezaleel and Aholiab for the work: and into many others he put
wisdom and understanding, to know how to work all manner of work, for the
service of the Sanctuary, according to all that the Lord had commanded. The
sumptuous Temple of Jerusalem, builded by Solomon, 1 King. 6.7.
was of stone made ready, before it was brought thither, so that there was
neither hammer, nor axe, nor any tool of iron heard in the House while it was
in building. A further preparation for the building of the spiritual House,
was hereby fitly shaddowed: viz. Christ, who is to build his Church, does
first prepare the stones: secondly, he sanctifies certain wise workmen to
lay them into the pile: thirdly, he directs them how to build: and lastly, by
this means the stones are placed. Conceive this to be the order of the
building.

First, the preparation of the stones is merely Gods work, who himself
sorteth and chooses out such as he will lay into the Temple, de diuinae
gratiae largitate, of the bounty of his divine grace, says Augustine. Aug.
Euchirid. cap. 98. Ephesians. 1.4.
For he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we
should be holy, and without blame before him in love. By this means we come to
be stones for the work, per misericordiam gratuitam, by the free mercy of
God; others being cast by, per iudicium debitum, by the righteous judgment of
God; that so in this respect we might attribute nothing to our selves, or
glory in any thing that we can do, but according to the Apostolical counsel,
He that glories, 1 Cor. 10.17.
let him glory in the Lord. Secondly, the Ministers of the Word do work upon
these choice stones, to lay them into the pile, and for this cause are called
builders. Saint Paul affirms himself to be a wise Master Builder. And they
are sanctified, separated, 1 Cor. 3.10.
or put apart from men, for this work: as the Apostle says that he is
separated unto the Gospel of God. Romans 1.1.
Like as in the building of that great Ephesian Temple, one of the worlds seven
wonders, erected by all Asia, in 220. years, as Pliny reports, Lib. 36.
Cap. 14.
the builders laid a sure foundation of Coals trodden and rammed hard
together, and fleeces of Wool superimposed, to keep it from sinking and from
earthquakes: so the builders whom God does call, and sanctify to that office,
do in this spiritual House use all good means to preserve their work, that
nothing may be able to demolish it. Thirdly, they have received rule and
direction: for GOD who will have his Church to be builded, does direct the
workmen how to do it: and therefore they work according as they have received
order from him. Now God directs the builders two manner of ways, ordinarily
or extraordinarily. Our ordinary direction is the written Word, which teaches
the true and right faith, according to which we must build. Romans 12.6.
Let us prophecy according to the proportion of faith. It is therefore
requisite, that the Workmen be learned in the Scriptures, to compare spiritual
things with spiritual things; to discern which is the faith, which is not the
faith; which thing is to be done by the Scriptures: for, Sacra scriptura
haereticoru^ frauds et furta conuincit: Tertullian.
the blessed Scripture reproves the sleights and thefts of Heretics: thence
therefore they must ordinarily fetch their directions, and be instructed how to
build; 2 Timothy 3.17.
for they will make the man of God absolute. Extraordinarily, the builders are
directed sometimes immediately by God himself, and by his holy Angels, as the
ancient Fathers from Adam to Moses: sometimes by visions and revelations, as
the Prophets from Moses to Christ: sometimes by the immediate inspiration of
the Holy Ghost, as the Apostles. Which extraordinary means being now most
rare, the direction on which the builders must look, is the written Word of
God, together with the inward assistance of the Holy Ghost. Will you know then
how to make experience whether any builder be inwardly guided by the Spirit of
God? Hear then how one of the learned Fathers concludes the point: Chrysostom.
de (...) and ado^and. Spirit.
There be many (says he) who do brag that they have the Holy Ghost: for
they that speak of their own, do falsely give out that they have him. For as
Christ did deny that he spoke of himself, when he spoke out of the Law and
the Prophets: even so now, if any thing save the Gospel be thrust upon us,
under the name of the Holy Ghost, we must not believe it. For as Christ is the
fulfilling of the Law, and of the Prophets, even so is the Holy Ghost the
fulfilling of the Gospel. Lastly, by these good means, this does come to
pass, that the stones are well placed in the Walls of this spiritual house:
for the laborers in Gods Harvest, Mat. 9.37.
whom he directs by his Word and Spirit, do strongly prove, and make appear
by the authority of the Word of GOD, that God so loved the world, Ioh. 3.16.
that he gave his only begotten Son; that whosoever believes in him, should
not perish, but have everlasting life. This labor of theirs, with the
assistance of the Holy Ghost, brings this to pass; that first their minds
are enlightened, to see their own misery in and by themselves. Secondly, their
wills are inflamed to seek reconciliation with God in Christ Jesus.

And it is admirable to see how God has blessed the labors of his servants,
to lay those living stones into the walls of this spiritual House, who are
well placed there by faith and baptism. Saint Peter having fully opened the
state of the question, and proved mightily Christ to be the Redeemer, Act. 2.41.
at one Sermon converted about 3000. souls, who were also baptized. How
graciously were these stones laid in and placed? Augustine confesses of
himself, Confess. lib. 5. cap. 14.
that he heard Ambrose but for his eloquence sake; et dum cor aperirem ad
decipiendum quam diserte diceret, pariter intrabat and quam vere diceret: By
this means the Lord caught him; for while he conceived how learnedly he
discoursed, he perceived also how truly he spoke: both conceits entered
together, as heat and light which cannot be separated. Admirably was this
stone laid in and placed. By Caecilius, a Minister of Christ, was Cyprian that
blessed Martyr converted to the faith: Nazian. laudib. Cyprian.
He was both rich and Noble, as Nazienzene reports of him: he was of great
note for his learning and eloquence, Lactant. instit. lib. 4. cap. 1. Ioh.
Trithem. de script. Cypr. Pont. Diacon. de vita Cypr.
as Hierom and Lactantius say. And therefore, considering his superstition, as
a rich and noble man, he might have scorned to have heard; and as a learned
and eloquent man, disdained to have been taught by so mean a Minister as
Caecilius was: but the LORD would have him to be laid into the building by his
Ministry, and therefore he was not only won to the faith, but even at the
first, to show that he would practice what he had learned, he sold all his
substance, and bestowed it upon the poor: whereby (as Pontius Diaconus well
concludes) paene ante coepit perfectus esse quam disceret: De vita Cypr.
he began to be a perfect man in his religion, almost before he had learned
the rules of it. Was not this a blessed stone, worke-man-like laid in and
placed?

Wonder here at the undeserved love of GOD toward his redeemed ones? Epiph. ad
Physiol. cap. 21.
Diuina opera incomprehensibilia sunt in hominibus, and mirabilia in excelsis,
and super mel and fanum, and super creata omnia dulciora. His works are
incomprehensible to men: for who can give a reason of the choice of these
living stones? His works are admirable in heaven; even the Angels themselves
have cause to admire the goodness of God toward his people. His works are
sweeter then the honey, the honey Comb, or any thing created: Behold how good
it is unto his people, not to be choice stones only, but to have their
Election made sure unto them, and by faith and baptism, through the ministry
of faithful workmen, directed by his Word and Spirit, to be laid into the
building. All this were yet nothing, if the house stood but upon sandy ground;
and therefore to take away all doubts, our Savior tells us whereupon his
Church is built: (...), upon this Rock.

Upon this Rock.] Secondly, of the second proposition, (viz.) the Church is
built upon Christ the Rock. Rainolds Conf. Heart. c. 2. diuis 1. Lex. Graec. ad
sacri appar. instruct. reg. b^^lior. Tom. 6. Thomas. voce petra. Illyr. voce
petra.
I will not much contend with our Adversaries concerning words: only this I
affirm, that (...) does always signify a stone, never a rock: (...) does
most usually signify a rock, grandem aliquam rupem, and viuum lapidem, though
sometimes it be likewise taken for a stone. In this place it cannot signify a
stone, but a rock; for our Savior is speaking of the foundation of his great
building, the Church; upon which foundation he would lay many Peter's, many
stones. This you shall see further, by the metaphorical acceptions of the
word; for sometimes petra is a firm place, by way of opposition to sandy or
mudground: Psalm. 40.2.
He brought me up also out of an horrible pit, out of the mirie clay, and set
my feet upon a rock, and stablished my goings. Sometimes it signifies a
place fortified and inexpugnable, like unto a Castle builded upon a high craggy
Rock, against which the power of the Enemy cannot prevail: Leave the Cities,
Hier. 48.28. Psalm. 18.2. Psalm. 31.2.
and dwell in the Rock.

Lastly, God is said to be our Rock, The Lord is my Rock, Be thou my strong
Rock, for an house of defense to save me. This is the metaphor used in this
place; for our Savior tells Peter, who is the Rock of his Church, that firm
place upon which his Church stands, that inexpugnable high Rock, upon which
it is situated; namely, himself whom Peter had confessed, when he said, Thou
art Christ the Son of the living God. In this meaning have the Fathers with
great judgment interpreted this place. August. de verb. dom. Ser. 13. Greg.
Nyssen. in testim. de Trinn. Cont. Iudaeos. Cyryl. de Trinit. lib. 4. Chrysostom.
in Mat. Hom. 55. Amb. in Epist. ad Ephesians. cap. 2. Hill^r de Trint. lib. 2. and
6. Bed. in 1 Cor: cap. 1.
This Rock which thou have confessed (says Augustine) upon this Rock which
thou have known, (saying, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God) will I
build my Church: I will build thee upon me, not me upon thee. For men intending
to build upon men, said, I hold of Paul, I of Apollos, I of Cephas, (that is,
Peter) and others who would not be builded upon Peter, but upon the Rock,
said, I hold of Christ. For the Rock was Christ, upon which foundation, Peter
himself was builded, since no man can lay any other foundation, beside that
which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. And in this same sense, have Gregory
Nyssen, Cyril, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Hillarie, Venerable Bede, and many other
ancient Fathers, and learned Divines, understood this place otherwise then the
Theologians of the Jesuitical Order, the pillars of the Church of Rome would
have it.

And Christ is the Rock of his Church, because he is the Redeemer of his
Church. For by Adams fall all mankind being in the loins of Adam, tanquam in
radice, as it were in the root of man's nature, as the Fathers speak) both
Adam and all his posterity were cast into the mire: but the Rock was promised,
when the promise of the woman's blessed seed, Genesis 3.15.
to break the Serpents head was made: which promise, when Adam apprehended by
faith, he was then built upon the Rock, and not all mankind which had fallen
in and by him, though it were then in his loins, but only the elected members
of the Church, who by the same faith should apprehend the same saving promise
which Adam did. The Rock of the Church therefore, is the Redeemer; for the
Church has no other Rock to be builded on. Hence it must necessarily follow,
that in what respect he is the Redeemer of the Church, in the same sense is he
the Rock on which it is builded: but he is the Redeemer of the Church, qua
(...); therefore as he is both God and Man, he is that Rock on which the
Church is built. And I say that he is the Rock, qua (...), because that both
natures are vndiuidedly necessary to the redemption of mankind. How should a
satisfaction be made proportionable to our debt, but by the divine Nature? How
should a cure be found to an infinite evil, but by an infinite good? how should
death be vanquished, the greatness of sin, and the infiniteness of the
divine Justice be sustained, but by the divine Nature? Again, who can give
satisfaction to the Justice of God according to the Law, by suffering
sufficiently, by obeying perfectly, but only man made under the Law? who could
suffer death, being made a curse, that so in all things he might be made like
unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful, and faithful high Priest, in
things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people,
Iseb. 2.17.
but only man? See the necessity of the humane Nature! thus it behooved the
Redeemer, the Rock, that redeeming Rock to be both God and man. Ludouic.
Gran. ducis peccat. lib. 1. part. 1. cap. 4.
Sum quidemsummo iure tibi obstrictus Domine mi, eo quod me liberasti ab
inferno, meque tibi reconciliasti: multa vero maiora tibi debeo propter modu^
ipsum quo me liberasti, quam propter ipsam libertatem, in quam me asseruisti.
Highly am I bound unto God, that he has vouchsafed to redeem me from Hell,
and to reconcile me to himself; but in afar greater band am I bound for the
manner of my Redemption, then for that liberty into which he has brought me.

Set before your eyes the great mystery of your Redemption, look upon the
manner after which it was done, and if it was not grievous to the Son of God,
to assume unto himself the humane Nature; nay, the sins of men; nay, the
penalty due by the Law to sinners, that he might be the Redeemer of his Church:
you that profess your selves to be members of that saved Family, let it not
be grievous unto you, to come forth of the Sodom of this worlds sins and
vices, with which Christ will have no peace, and a Christian will have no
agreement, ( viz. your pride, your lusts, your intemperances, and what things
else are forbidden by the Law of God,) that like as the Word of God does
acquaint you with the mystery of your Redemption, the Spirit of God may seal
unto your consciences, the day of your Redemption. Till this be sealed, though
you have the world at will, though you be planted as high as the Cedars of
Libanus, in wealth and honors, though you come into no misfortunes like other
men, though there be no leading into captivity, no complaining in your
streets, I will not therefore magnify your happiness. Why? your consciences
do tremble when you think of death, Sin reigns in your mortal bodies,
and the sentence of the Law threatens a fearful judgment. I note not here
how near such a one is to the desperation of Judas Iscariot: but what can he
hope for, who does willingly, either contemn or neglect so great salvation?
It is a great and a fearful sin to commit adultery or murder, it is a
greater sin to commit perjury or idolatry; most unclean are such persons, and
the doors of Heaven are close shut against them, both in this world, and in
the world to come, 1 Pet. 4.17.
without great and unfeigned repentance: but to disobey the Gospel of God, to
cast aside the Redeemer, that sure Rock, upon which, whosoever is not built,
shall surely be blown down; oh, how great is that sin? how wide does Hell
gape for such a one? Consider this, ye Gadarens, who prefer your Swine before
Christ, (for so does every one, who will not be a new creature in Jesus Christ,
for the love of any kind of sin) and if ye will not hearken and be wise, but
still go on to fashion your selves like unto this world; yet that you may not
be ignorant of your own miserable condition, behold the happiness of the
Church of Christ, and therefore the blessedness of every member of the same.
It is built, it is firmly builded, it is builded upon a Rock, a redeeming
Rock, the Rock Christ Jesus, and shall therefore never be overthrown by all
the adverse power.

The gates of Hell shall not preuale against it.] Of the conclusion, and first
what those gates of Hell are. Noua glossa in Mat. 16.18.
Upon this reason that the gates of Cities are most strongly fortified, and
most firmly barred and bolted, by gates you may understand, omne robur, and
omne munimentum, all power and all fortification; and by Hell, omnem vim
contrariam, and Satanicam, omnem host is impetum, the Devil himself, and all
his angels, all the power that they have, the wicked world, Illyric. voce porta.
all tyrants and seducers, which are the Devils instruments. For to make the
matter more plain in the words of a learned man, the state of the faithful
and chosen of God, in this present life, is as it were a Warfare, 2 Cor. 10.4.
whereof the Church is called Militant. The adversaries and enemies, whom we
must fight against, our Savior speaks of them as of a strong kingdom,
Ephesians. 6.11. (...). 2 Cor. 10.4.
which he calls Hell, because it warreth all for Hell, and the Devil is the
prince of it. The gates of Hell therefore do signify the holds, the
fortresses and munitions, wherewith the powers of Hell do fight against us,
and assault us, that is, even all whatsoever the Devil can do by force or
fraud; all the which is meant by the name of gates, because the gates of forts
are wont to have the best munition, Epiphan. lib. ^n^^^r. Aug. de S^mb. (...).
^^b. 1. cap. 6.
and to be fenced most strongly. So that the gates of Hell are not only
Heresies (though Heresies are of them, as Epiphanius and Austin note) but also
persecutions, and specially sins; in a word, all evils, sweet or sour, fair
or foul, Orig. in Mat. tract. 1. Chrysostom. cont. gent. quod Christus est Deus.
Greg. in 5. Psalm. poenitent. Theophil. in Mat. 16. Hier. and Raban. Com. in
Mat. 16. Raynold. Confer. cap. 7. diuis. 8. Cypr. ad Donat. Epist. 2.
that seek to subdue us to everlasting death, as Origin, Chrysostom, Gregory,
Theophilact, and others well observe.

Let me now say unto you, as Cyprian said to a friend of his: Suppose thy self
to be carried to the top of some high hill, view the world beneath thee, do
not touch the earth, look round about thee, and behold how tempestuous the
world is, iam saeculi and ipse misereberis, tuique admonitus, and plus in Deum
gratus, maio^e laetitia quod enaseris gratulaberis: certainly, thou will pity
the world, thou will be admonished of thine own condition, and being more
thankful unto God, wilt rejoice exceedingly, that thou have escaped such a
place. For shall I tell you? Ye shall see wonders in the world; and I will
report that unto you, which, if ye have the Spirit of God in you, shall prick
your consciences. In the Book of Judges, it is reported as an argument of
Samsons great strength, Judge. 16.3.
that he carried the gates of Gaza upon his shoulders: an act almost as great
as what the Poets can report of Atlas. But see, not the weak gates of Gaza,
but the strong gates of Hell, not upon the shoulders and backs of men and women
only, but (that which you may admire) set upon their heads, laid out by their
cheeks, worn upon their hand-wrests, hung at their ears. O tempora, o mores!
else what means this monstrous pride of apparel, of tyres, of bracelets, of
Jewels, ouerflowing our nation like a general deluge? You put the gates of
Hell into your purses, by taking of bribes, usury money, evil gettings: you
set them at your tables in the persons of Heretics and seducers: you lodge
them in your beds by unlawful lusts: you let them in at your ears, when you
listen to ungodliness: you look upon them with your eyes, when you see in your
houses that accursed thing which you ought to restore: you lay them up in your
hearts, when you devise vain things. Certainly, for many considerations, this
City may be called an holy City: for here the Word of GOD is most
plentifully preached: here are good Laws; and (for ought I know) good
Magistrates; and (I make no question) many thousands of honest and obedient
hearts. Yet the cause being the same, the complaint must needs be the same
also; Isai. 1.21.
How is the faithful City become an Harlot? The abuse of all good things
within this place is wonderful, and does ring Migremus hine, in the ears of
every good man, who might utterly faint and be discouraged, did he not hope
verily to see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the living. I say, the
wickedness of the place, might utterly dismay, deceive and overthrow the
children of GOD themselves, had not Christ so builded them upon himself, that
the gates of hell shall not prevail against them.

The words are, Secondly, how the gates of Hell prevail not against the Church
of Christ. Psalm. 139.1.
(...); He does not say, they shall not assail it, but they shall not
prevail against it. Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, may
Israel now say: Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth: yet they have
not prevailed against me. 2.
The plowers plowed upon my back, they made long forrowes. 3.
The Lord is righteous, he has out asunder the cords of the wicked. 4.
These gates of hell do assail the Church generally, and every particular
member of the same, both externally by slanders and persecutions, and
internally, by motions, temptations, and inward suggestions; so that to speak
properly; in all places, and at all times, the gates of hell come about them
like Bees: for the Devil, the Prince of Hell, our Adversary, 1 Pet. 5.8.
as a roaring Lion, walks about, seeking whom he may devour. They have
likewise prevailed thus far, that they have tempted them sometimes by great
and grievous losses, of their goods, names and bodies; but that which the Poets
feign of Sisyphus, we may truly affirm of them; their labor is lost, and
the mischieues which they have devised, have ever returned upon themselves.
They were never able to move the Church, or any true believer, from that
Rock. Shall I say more? The impious attempts of the gates of Hell, have been
as well to the public weal of the Church, Romans 8.28.
as to the private good of her particular members. For, all things work
together for good to them that love God, to them who are the called according
to his purpose.

Upon this resolution the people of God have constantly endured, courageously
contemning all the gates of hell, battering the Walls of the Church, like that
great Ram, with which the Roman Army did day and night beat the Walls of
Jerusalem. Troy was besieged ten years, in the end it was taken by policy.
Numantia was besieged fourteen years, and then conquered by famine. Tyrus, a
City walled with the Sea, in seven months was overcome by assault. But the
Church of GOD, straightly begirt, not by Agamemnon and Menelaus, not by Scipio
Africanus, or Alexander the Macedonian, not for ten or fourteen years, but
from the beginning of the world, and expecting to be so dealt withal unto the
worlds end, by the Devil and all his power, shall never, either by policy or
force, be ruined: Isa. 49.16.
for Christ is the Rock and Head of his Church, and has the walls of it ever
in his sight. This which is true of the Church in general, is as true of every
particular member: for all the true members thereof are elected to life
eternal, and builded upon Christ the Rock. And therefore the Church, Ambr. in
Luc. 2. lib. 3.
as Ambrose says, may rightly be defined to be Matter vinentium, quam
aedificauit Deus in ipso summo angulari lapide Christo: the mother of those
whom GOD has preordained to life eternal, which he has built upon Christ the
chief corner stone: they may therefore be assaulted, but never vanquished; and
if you will know how, hear a few examples.

Moses was fiercely assaulted by the gates of Hell, even the wealth and honors
of Egypt. I will not say what a strong temptation it is. When the Devil goes
about to win us by prosperity, he does then creep in at our mouths, that
he may possess our heart: like the Fish called Langa, who flattereth the
Whale, and creeps in at his belly, that he may eat his heart. He who had
experience of this temptation, did fore-warne and fore-arme the people of
Israel, Deuteronomy. 8.12.
saying, Lest when thou have eaten and art full, and have built goodly houses,
and dwelt therein; 13.
And when thy herds and thy flocks multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is
multiplied, 14.
and all that thou have is multiplied: Then thine heart be lifted up, and thou
forget the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, etc. For
man in prosperity is like unto the Mule, who having sucked his fill of his Dams
milk, casts up his heels, and kicketh unkindly. But the gates of Hell could
not prevail against him; Heb. 11.24.
He refused to be called the son of ^^^rao^s Daughter, choosing rather to
suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season: 25.
Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures in Egypt;
26.
for he had respect unto the recompense of the reward.

Job was strongly assaulted by the gates of Hell, he was bereaved of all his
substance; his children were slain with the fall of their eldest brothers
house; and his own body was smitten with sore biles, Job. 1, and 2.
from the sole of his foot unto the Crown of his head. Dear unto a man are
his goods and servants; dearer are his children, the fruit of his own body;
but most dear unto a man is his own flesh. Oh, how great was this temptation!
nevertheless it prevailed not, for he had set up his resolution, Though he
slay me, yet will I trust in him. Job. 13.15.


Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego were strongly besieged by the gates of Hell,
for they must either sall down and worship the golden Image that
Nebuchadnezzar the King had set up, or the same ho^^e be cast into the midst
of a burning fiery furnace. What will not a man give for his life? Many men
have been constant in Religion, they have lost their goods, their places,
their honors, yet when their lives have come in question, they have fallen
away like rotten corn out of the Reapers hand. And no marvel if those who
were not built upon the Rock, did fall away, ^^^eing that even the Apostles
themselves in time of persecution, when they thought their lives would come in
question, Mat. 26.56.
and our Savior was apprehended, forsook him and fled. But the gates of Hell
could not prevail against them, Dan. 3.17.
Our God whom we serve, is able to deliver us out of the fiery furnace, and he
will deliver us out of thy hand, O King.

Behold the good estate of every true member of the Church of Christ! It is
neither the prosperity of the wicked world, nor all the worldly miseries and
calamities which may be thought upon, no nor death it self that shall be able
to cast them from the Rock. I do not say that all true believers are equal
in graces to these that I have named; for neither does God suffer them all to
be tempted in equal measure; but I affirm all of them to have the same grace
to the same purpose, the saving of their souls. And hence it is that a
regenerate man's estate is perpetual, he shall neither finally, nor totally
fall from this Rock. The Devil, that old deceiuer, has his ways and means
to attempt his ruin, sometimes by fraud, sometimes by violence, now this way and
then that way, but to no success: for the house of God is builded upon Christ
the Rock, and every Peter of this building, is so strongly placed, that the
gates of Hell shall not prevail against him.

Thus far you see that the Text is an allegory, the continuation of diverse
Metaphors, which do adorn and beautify the place, but extend no further then
a Metaphorical construction. Here are diverse things compared; the Church of
God, to a material temple: the elected members, to choice stones: the
gathering of the people of GOD by the Gospel, preached with the inward
assistance of the Holy Ghost, to building or raising of stones; the Redeemer
Christ Jesus, both God and man, to a great Rock, whereupon you may suppose
such a Temple to be builded; the enemies of the Church, to the gates and
munitions of Hell; their assaults against the Church and her members, to
assaults and batteries against an invincible fort strongly builded upon a
Rock, and for the incomparable strength thereof, bidding defiance to all her
foes; the lost labor of those that attempt any thing against this strong
founded Castle, to vain and frivolous batteries. All this is either expressed
or necessarily included.

Now, for as much as Peter truly believed, he was therefore as it were a stone
of this strong building, and because he was chosen to the Apostleship, he was
therefore as it were a foundation stone, lying close upon the Rock, for the
supportation of other stones to be laid upon him. For by his Ministry many
should be converted to the faith, both Jews and Gentiles, and be also edified
in the same faith, by his doctrine: to the which doctrine even the Bishops and
Elders of the Church should refer themselves, and thereby confirm the truth,
confute errors, and conform themselves to the Catholic doctrine and manners.
Upon the first reason that he was a member of the Catholic Church, the gates
of Hell could not prevail against him: they might assault him, they might
cause him to recoile; for Satan winnowed him, and prevailed so far, that he
denied Christ: but they could not avail to throw him utterly from the Rock,
to his damnation, or to separate him wholly and for ever from the grace of God,
which is to life eternal. Now, what Christ said to Peter, he says to every
true believer, he is Peter, he is a stone of this building, and shall never
finally perish, because he has builded him upon himself: for he has said, I
will never leave thee. Heb. 13.5.
nor forsake thee.

Now all the furious winds of Aeolus, -- velut agmine facto
Qua data porta ruunt --
the Devil, and all the gates of Hell fight against the Church of Christ; and
hence those wars and rumors of wars, that fall upon Christendom like a
mighty storm, possessing the ears of men with the doleful tidings of Cog and
Magog, armed completely to fight against the Saints of God. Will you know the
event of all these wars, conspiracies, tumults, seditions, plagues? They
besiege an invincible sort, the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.

Mitylene, a magnificent City, was by the report of Vitrunius, Vitru. lib. 1.
rarely builded, but very badly situated. For when the South Wind blows, the
Inhabitants grow sick: when the West-wind, they cough: but when the North Wind
does blow, they are made well. The Church Militans is rarely builded, yet badly
situated, as it were in the unhealthy Marshes of Egypt; one while the
Southwind blows, and it is sick: this is when Heresies spring up with the
Gospel, as tares among Wheat. You remember how sick the Church was of no
less then 80 Heresies within the first 500 years after Christ: you remember
the growth, increase and power of the Arian and Papal heresies. Sometimes the
Church cougheth and does labor for life under the strength of a disease; this
is in time of tribulation, as in Egypt, in the Babylonish transportation; in
those ten bloody pursuites next following Christ's ascension: add here the
Arian and Papal persecutions. With this grievous disease the Church is sorely
smitten at this time, and labors for life, being not altogether free from
the languishing ill of Heresies. This is the cough of the Lungs, a grief very
dangerous to the Patient, the poor distressed Spouse of Christ: but God the
Physician will turn the wind, never doubt it, that it may be cured.

It was Athanasius resolution in those days of trouble, which Julian the
Apostata brought upon the Saints of God, and when the Church of Alexandria,
whereof he was Bishop, was compassed with a band of men: when the poor flock
of Christ stood about him their Pastor, with weeping tears, fearing on their
own behalf, yet more caring on his: Nolite (inquit) o filij, co^turbari,
Rufim. Eccl. hist. lib. 1. cap. 34.
quia nubecula est, and cito pertransit. My little children, says he, be not
afraid, it is a little cloud, the wind will dispell it even by and by. Some
cloud hangs over that City of God, the holy place of the Tabernacle of the
most highest, and does for the present let fall an unwholesome rain upon it,
but the wind will turn about to the North to cure it, and the enemies thereof
shall miss their mark, because the gates of Hell shall not prevail against
it. What can they do more then God permits them to do for the good of his
Church and Chosen people? He that said of that great Assyrian Tyrant, 2 Kings
19.28.
I will put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips, and I will turn
thee back by the way by which thou came; will also in good time put his
hook in their noses, and his bridle in their lips, and will turn them about
to their ruin; as the Tragedy of all persecutors in all ages shall witness
with me. But oh, Horrore quatior fata quo vergant timens,
Trepidumque gemino pectus euentu labat!


I see the bloody stripes of Confessors, their torments, and tortures; the
cruel deaths of Martyrs, their murders, but cheries; the subversion of
States, Commonweals, Kingdoms: Nation rising against Nation, and Kingdom
against Kingdom. What can these things portend, but the utter extirpation of
the Church of Christ? Answ. Collect hence three things; First, a purgation by a
fiery trial, of some particular places, where the glorious Gospel of our Lord
and Savior Christ has been profaned by Heresies, by Schisms, or by
licencious living. So fared it with Jerusalem, as you may read, 2 Chro. 36.
from 11. to 22 verse. And in this case, when I behold the bruised face of our
neighbor Churches, States and Kingdoms, being not able to give a reason of
the present misery, I am compelled to admire with the Apostle, saying, How
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out! Secondly, God
will make his Church fruitful by the blood of Martyrs and Confessors: For the
Church is the Paradise or Garden of God, his people are his pleasant plants;
that his Garden may be fruitful, he does water it with blood.

Sanguine fundata est Ecclesia, sanguine creuit,
Sanguine succreuit, sanguine finis erit.
Who knows not that the Church was founded in blood, the blood of the
righteous Abel? that it had her increase in blood, the blood of the Prophets?
that it had her fullness of strength in blood, the blood of the Redeemer? and
that it shall end in blood, the blood of the Martyrs? If therefore now at last
a vein be opened, and the Church does bleed, after so many bloody battles,
after so many grievous persecutions, shall we at length stand amazed? To what
end have the Apostles of our Lord prepared us upon a resolution, saying, that
all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3.12.
shall suffer persecutions, but that we should be ready always to lay down
our necks to the blows of tyrants, and so much the rather, for that it is to
the growth and increase of the Church of God? for Sanguis Martyrum est semen
Ecclesiae: the blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church. Lastly, God will
honor some of his servants before other, as a King does; and these shall wear
the precious Robes of bonds, stripes, imprisonment, and death it self: for
what greater honor to a Christian, then to suffer for that blessed Name by
which he is redeemed* It was joy to the Apostles, that they were accounted
worthy to suffer for the name of Christ.

Till therefore our Church come to be purged by that fyerie trial; or till our
blood be shed, to water the garden of our God; or till the Lord will honor us
with the Crown of Martyrdom: in the midst of these troublesome days, as
fellow-feeling members of that mystical Body, of which Christ our Savior is
the Head, we rest constant and confident upon that prophetical resolution:
Psalm. 46.1.
God is our hope, and strength, a very present help in trouble. Therefore will
we not fear, 2.
though the earth be remened, and though the Mountains be carried into the
midst of the Sea: 3.
Though the waters thereof roar and be troubled, though the mountains shake
with the swelling thereof. 4.
There is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the City of God; the
holy place of the Tabernacle of the most high. The City of God is his Church,
watered with the streams of the blood of the Redeemer, that Fountain opened to
the house of David, Zech. 13.1.
and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin, and for uncleanness. Seeing
therefore that he has taken us into his protection, built us on himself,
watered us with his blood, it is enough for us to commend our selves to his
providence, and to rest confident, that (because we have him for our Rock)
Quatiat licet
Orbem tumultus, terraque sedibus
Conuulsa, montium ruinis
Arctet aquas pelagi frementis;
The gates of Hell shall not prevail against us.


FINIS.

