A SERMON PREACHED AT WESTMINSTER MAY 26. 1608. AT THE FUNERAL SOLEMNITIES of
the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Dorset, late L. High Treasurer of ENGLAND.

By GEORGE ABBOT Doctor of Divinity and Deane of WINCHESTER, one of his
Lordships Chapleines.

Now published at the request of some honorable persons; very few things being
added, which were then cut off by the shortness of the time.

IOH. 9. 4. The night comes, when no man can work.

LONDON Printed by Melchisedech Bradwood for William Aspley. 1608.

TO THE RIHGT Honorable and most virtuous Lady, the La. Cicely Countess of
DORSET.
THere are sundry reasons (right Honorable) which have moved me to give my
consent that this Sermon might be published: One is to testify my dutiful and
grateful respect toward that noble personage now deceased, to whom when he was
living, I was so much bound for so many years together: Another is, to give
satisfaction to diverse of special quality and note, who have earnestly
entreated me, that I will not deny this duty to the dead, nor such a
kindness to them alive, but that they may read that again and again, which
they heard once with no coffeehouse: A third is, that the world may truly
take notice of many excellent virtues, wherewith God had endued this honorable
man: and that as well with resolved knowledge to compose and settle his soul
religiously toward heaven, as with rare wisdom and prudence otherwise, to
digest and dispatch, either public business touching his Sovereign and the
State, or his own private affairs. In the opening whereof, as it should be
vanity to add or amplify any thing, so it should be want of Christian duty
and regard, to conceal that which is true: especially since the relation may
satisfy such as doubt, and the example may provoke others to imitate those
good parts, which are not every where to be found. Now it being published, I
have as great reason to recommend it to your honorable patronage, since you
are the Suruiuer of that worthy couple, who for so long time were joined
together in the bands of Christian wedlock. And whom may it more concern, or
unto whom can it be more comfortable than to your Ladyship, that there should
be some memorial of his well-doing, whom you so deerly loved, and so
respectfully observed, in the time of your conversation together? Besides, the
reading of it, may peradventure be a Remembrancer unto you of your own
mortality, when you hear of his departure before you, who (as you supposed)
might have ouer-liued you many years. And lastly, the mention of that which
his Lordship has left touching your self, may incite you to go forward in
those virtuous and Christian courses, which hitherto you have so singularly
demonstrated, that (besides the experience which his Lordship had, and
testified to the full) the world (which observes few good things, unless they
be eminent) takes great notice of them: and therefore it nearly concerns
your Honor to persist therein: and to endeavor yet daily to increase those good
graces; that the end may counteruaile, yea exceed, both the progress and
beginning. I doubt not but God who has begun his admirable work in you, will
accomplish it and make it perfect, so blessing you all the days of your
pilgrimage here, that you may live to your children and childrens children an
honorable pattern of piety, religion and virtue; and depart from this earth
in a full age, unto the true and never ceasing joys of his everlasting
Kingdom. Which he will always pray for, who is and long has been

Your Honors very much bounden GEORGE ABBOT.

A SERMON PREAched at Westminster May 26. 1608.
AT THE FUNERAL SOLEMNITIES of the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Dorset,
late L. High Treasurer of ENGLAND.
ISAIAH 40. 6. A voice said, Cry. And he said, What shall I cry? All flesh is
grass, and all the grace thereof is as the flower of the field.

7. The grass withers, the flower fades, because the spirit of the Lord
blows upon it.


He that looks into this Chapter, shall see it to be a Prophecy of the
coming of Christ: of his appearing in the flesh, and his taking of our humane
nature upon him, so to bring grace and salvation to as many as should believe.
And this, touching the coming of Christ, is not nakedly laid down, but with
an intimation also of his forerunner John the Baptist, the very words being
used (to make it the more notorious) which are repeated in the third Chapter of
Saint Matthew, Matthew. 3. 3.
The voice of a crier in the wilderness, prepare the way of the Lord: make his
paths straight. But to fit men so much the more, to embrace that mercy which
should be offered by him, this sound reason is brought; that of our selves we
are mortal, corruptible and transitory, and that therefore it is good that we
should have something else to rest our souls upon. For we consist but of
flesh, and that is like unto the grass. And if we should imagine othermen to
be better then our selves, yet they are but as we are: for all flesh is grass,
and all the grace thereof is as the flower of the field: Therefore it is best
to trust to something else; and that must be the son of God, the Savior of
the world, the Redeemer of mankind, the mighty God of Jacob. I shall not at
this time speak any thing concerning the coming of Christ, but shall rather
insist upon the opening of the reason which leads us unto Christ Jesus. Which
that it may be the more strongly imprinted in us, it is not barely delivered,
but with a kind of Preface, or solemn introduction, A voice said, Cry: And he
said, What shall I cry? The whole may be divided into these two parts, A
preparation, and A proclamation. The proclamation is the maine, consisting of
the latter words, All flesh is grass, and all the grace thereof as the flower
of the field, etc. In the preparation, are two circumstances: A commandment,
what should be done: And the Prophets composing of himself to the performance
of it. Of all which in their order, as God shall give assistance.

A voice said, Cry. 2 We shall little need to inquire, what voice this is
which speaks to Esaias. For that, whereunto the Prophet would hearken, is only
the voice of God. That which spoke out of the mount, in the twentieth of
Exodus, when the law was given down to the people of Israel, Exodus 20. 1.
God spoke these words and said. That which called to 1. Sam. 3. 4.
Samuel, in the dead time of the night, and badde him go, and do a message to
old Eli. That whereof David could say, Psalm. 29. 4.
The voice of the Lord is mighty: the voice of the Lord is glorious. The
verity, the authority, the majesty of that which is uttered, does declare so
much. This bids the prophet Cry: not speak only; much less whisper; but
with an extention of his voice to deliver his message. This must not be as that
was when God passed by Elias, 1. Reg 19. 12.
in a soft and still voice: nor as that, where, to describe the mildness of
our Savior, it is said of him; Matthew. 12. 19.
He shall not stir, nor cry, neither shall any man hear his voice in the
streets: but it is rather like that of Jonas the prophet, who entering into
Niniue Jonah 3. 4.
cried and said, Yet forty days, and Niniue shall be destroyed. Or as that in
our prophet Esaias, Isa: 58. 1.
Cry aloud, and spare not: lift up thy voice like a trumpet. Here must be
such a noise, as would move a man that were musing, would whet him that were
dull, would rowse him that were slumbring, would awake him that were sleeping.
So careful is God, that we should hear this lesson, and lay it unto our
hearts.

3 Hence we may perceive the heaviness and dullness of our nature, when in a
matter so clear, we need such a noise to remember us of our mortality. For
set aside the word of God, Philosophy and experience may inform so much unto
us. The Churches and Churchyards through which we do pass, the tombs of other
men, the going before us of our parents and our kinsfolks, of our friends and
acquaintance, might proclaim this unto us. What should we need any crying? or
why should we lack any speaking? We may see this well enough^ So many men as
we meet, so many mortal creatures. X^rxes though but a heathen man, yet could
make this use of his sight: For when he beheld from the top of his high
tabernacle, the huge numbers in his army, as Herodot, in Polymma.
Herodotus writes, he broke forth into tears, and yielded this reason of it,
that of all that multitude (which was so great, that for ought we read, there
were never in the world so many soldiers at once compacted into one army)
within one hundred years there should not one person be remaining alive. And if
we would not see it, yet feel it we may. For as we read in S. Austen, the
aches of our bones, the heaviness of our bodies, the deafness of our ears,
the dimnesse of our sight, the baldness of our heads, the grainesse of our
hairs, are signs of a house that is ready to fall to the ground. August. de
12. abusionum gradibus. Tom. 9.
Dum oculicaligant, aures grauiter audiunt, capilli fluunt, etc. hac omnia
ruitur am iam iamque domum corporis cito praenunciant. He alludeth to an old
house, whereof when the walls do moulder and fitter away, the roof is
uncovered, the timber is disiointed, it is an evident argument, that it will
not be long before this house fall. Such tokens of the mortality of our
bodies, are those decaies and imperfections. But Satan does so deaf us, and
the world does so blind us, and our flesh makes us so senseless, that we
neither hear nor see, nor feel that which lies so hard upon us, And
therefore Gods voice must call unto us: A voice said, Cry.

What shall I cry? 4 The Herald is in readiness, to do as he is commanded.
And that is the highest part of his duty. What God enditeth, he writes: what
God will bid, he will perform. So Ezechiel was taught, Ezec. 3. 17.
Hear thou the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me. And again,
Ezec. 33. 7.
Thou shall hear the word at my mouth, and admonish them from me. In like
manner in the new Testament, our Savior taking his leave of his Disciples,
bids them, Matt. 28. 19.
Go, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and the
Son, and the holy Ghost, Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I
have commanded you. And S. Paul to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 11. 23.
I have received of the Lord that, which I also have delivered unto you. Thus
the Minister should depend upon the mouth of his Master. Saint Paul could say
to Timothy his scholar; 1. Tim. 6. 20.
O Timotheus keep that which is committed to thee. Whereupon Vincentius
Lyrinensis very elegantly does descant, What is it that thou must keep, Vin^.
contr. haeres. cap. 27.
That which is committed to thee, not that which is invented by thee: that
which thou have received, not that which thou have devised: a matter not of thy
wit, but rather of thy learning. If the Preacher of the Gospel do keep him
to this rule, he himself shall be safe; and as for the speeding of it, let him
leave the event to God. The Physicians of Egypt, as Diodor. Antiquit. lib. 2. 3.
Diodorus Siculus does report, had this rule prescribed to them, that they
should make their practice according to a book delivered unto them from
ancient Physicians, and approved writers. If any followed the rule and
prescript of his book, though his Patient did miscarie, yet he was not blamed
for it. But if any went besides his book, though his Patient did well, he lost
his life for his labor. We that are Physicians of the soul may make some use
thereof. We must teach by the book. The burden of our song must be with the
old prophets, Thus and thus says the Lord. If he command we must speak; what
he wills, we must cry. So much of the Preparation. And now to the
Proclamation.

All flesh is grass, etc. 5 Here the speech is so significant, that every
word has his weight. Flesh it self intends corruption. When it is likened
to the grass, it more notes our mortality. When the word All is added, it
designeth the generality of the doom which is given. When the grace and
beauty is named, it demonstrateth that there is no hope to the contrary. The
spirit of the Lord blowing on it, shows the reason of the whole. Of each of
these very briefly. When flesh is named here, and it is not said, a living
creature, or a spirit, nay not so much as that which is ordinary in the
Scripture, a man, it implies a dissolution. For our flesh is propagated from
Adam, and of him it was said, Genesis 3. 19.
From the earth thou wast taken, because thou art dust, and to dust shall thou
return. This continues on his successors, who derived their flesh from him.
It is written of Genesis 5. 8. 11. 14. 27.
Sheth and Enosh, and Kenan, and Methuselah, that they lived nine hundred
years; but it is added touching each of them, And he died, And he died. David
witnesses this for othermen, Psalm. 49. 10.
He sees that wisemen die, and so do the ignorant and foolish. Of all flesh,
that is true which Saint Bernard delivers, Bern. de gradib* humilitat.
Nascimur, morimur: We are borne, and then we die. And in another place, In
festo S. Martini.
In terra orimur, interra morimur, etc. In the earth we have our beginning, and
in the earth we have our ending, returning into that, from whence at first we
were taken. Thus God has decreed that there should be a succession of one man
after another. And as in the greatest shows, when one has had his turn, he
is to be gone, and to leave the place to them that follow, and if he should
desire to keep himself on the stage, and by no means to depart, he should be
very injurious unto those who are to succeed: so it is here in men's lives;
one has his turn before, another has his turn afterward, but the first
must yield to the latter, when his time is once accomplished; else he shall do
wrong to succession. Yet this going away and departure out of this world, God
has appointed to be the means to advance men unto heaven. Our corruption is
the way unto our incorruption. For God meaning for to crown with the garland
of immortality, those that have striuen lawfully, does not come down to them
to honor them upon earth, but calls them up to him, so to glorify them in
heaven. Which thing Saint Chrysostom well considered, when he spoke in this
manner: Chrysostom in Ep. ad Philip. Homil. 12.
He would have thee to strive below, but he crowns thee above: for the crown
is not in this place, where the striving is; but in a glorious place. Do you
not see here, that such champians and cha^et-driuers, whom they do most
honor, are not crowned below in the place of trying masteries, but the King
calling them up puts on their garlands there. God does take with his
children the very selfsame course. Their fight must be on earth, but their
reward in heaven. And thither they may not come, till they have put off this
body. Their flesh is as a veil which keeps them from beholding the purity of
that secret one. Exo. 26. 31.
In the tabernacle which Moses made, there was a veil which was hanged up
between the holy place, and the holy of holies. This was made of four
substances, that is, blue silk and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, which
as Ios. de bell. Iud. Lib. 6. 6.
Josephus tells us, and Saint Hier. Epist. 128.
Hierome after him, did represent the four elements, of whom our flesh
consists. Such a Matthew. 27. 51.
veil was afterward in the temple at Jerusalem, which at the death of our
blessed Savior did rent from the top unto the bottom, at which time a man
might have beheld the very Sanctum Sanctorum. So when our flesh, this veil,
which keeps us from beholding the inuisibilitie of that mighty one, shall be
rent and torn in pieces by dissolution and by death, we shall behold our
Creator, but never until that time. Chrysostom. Hom. ^. in 2. Cor.
The old house must to the ground, that so the tenant of it, may ascend unto
God by a kind of remove, till the building be new repaired.

6 In the next place, our flesh is compared to the grass. Grass, than which
nothing is more common; nothing more vile. Which grows, and in an instant is
cut down, and then withers, and is either devoured as fodder, or if it be of
a bigger size, Matt. 6. 30.
is burned in the oven, as Christ himself speaks. David uses the same
comparison: Psalm. 103. 15.
The days of man are as grass: as a flower of the field, so flourishes he.
Which is thus expressed by Gregory: Greg. in Psa. 5. Poenitent.
Man may be compared to the grass, quia per natiuitatem viret in carne, per
iuuent utem candescit in ^^ore, per mortem aret in puluere: Because by his
birth, he is green in his flesh, by his youth he is white in his blossom, by
his death he is dry and withered in the dust. Such is the shortness and
uncertainty of our life. Saint James does liken it to a Iac. 4. 14.
vapor, that appears for a little time, and afterward vanishes away. Saint
Peter compares it to a tent or 2. Pet. 1. 14.
tabernacle, which is soon up and soon down. The old Diod. Sie. Antiq. li.
2. 1.
Egyptians called our houses, by the name of Innes, where we lodge for a night,
and are gone in the morning. Tully termed our life a In Cat. Ma^or.
lodging, Ex vita ista discedo, tanquam ex hospitio: I depart out of this life,
as out of a lodging. Job calls it a Job. 14. 2.
shadow. And in another place, cap. 7. 6.
My days are swifter than the shuttle of a weauer. Saint Basil does liken our
life unto a Basil. in Hexam. Homil. 5.
dream, where a man sees glorious shows, and is wonderfully pleased with
them, but after a little while he awaketh, and all is nothing. Homer compares
men unto Homer. Iliad. 5.
leaves, which peep out of the tree, and then grow bigger and bigger; at last
they are at the greatest, fresh in show, and green in color; but then they
fade and decay, and are driven off with the wind. Some other say, that a man
is but like unto an apple, which if it be let alone will at length be ripe, and
of it self will fall unto the ground, but peradventure before that time, it is
shaken off by a blast, or cropped off by a violent hand. Lastly, other have
likened our being here in the world unto a game at chesse, where there be
degrees of men, Kings, and Knights and common Pawnes, amongst whom, one is
caught away, and by and by another: but howsoever on the board they differ in
their degree, yet when the game is ended, and they are swept all into the
bag, there is none better than other, the meanest lies above, and the
greatest is underneath. Thus both the spirit of God, and the judgment of wise
men, by significant similitudes would riuet it in into us, and fasten it as
with a nail into our cogitations, that our days are but vanity, our
continuance here but momentame, our abode on earth but uncertainty.

7 Now lest it should be said, that with some it may be thus, but with other
otherwise, it is farther added, that All flesh is grass. Men are all of the
same molde, and return to the same substance. The wise woman of Tecoah could
speak in general to David, 2. Sam. 14. 14.
We must needs die, and we are as water spilt on the ground, which cannot be
gathered up again. Here she ioineth herself with David, My Lord we needs
must die, you a man, and I a woman: you a Sovereign, I a subject. David
himself knew this, when lying in his deathbed, he spoke thus unto Solomon, 1.
Reg. 2. 2.
I go the way of all the earth. Death is the way of all flesh. So holy Job, Job
30. 23.
I know that thou will bring me to death, and to the house appointed for all
the living. So S. Paul to the Hebrews, Heb. 9. 27.
It is appointed unto men that they shall once die, and after that comes the
judgment. Where the indefinite proposition is equivalent to a general. Death,
says Seneca, is the Senec. Epist. 70. ad Lucilium.
haven, whither every ship must go: some come sooner, and some come later, but
there they all must ariue. Perhaps when a ship is entering into the mouth of the
haven, there comes a blast of wind, and drives it out again; but that will
not serve the turn, it must back to the same place. The speech is true of
all, Innoc. 3. de cont. mund. lib. 1.
Vitaperpetuo auolat, neque potest retincri: mors quotidie ingruit, neque
potest resisti. Life always flies away, and cannot be held back: and death
daily does grow on, and cannot be resisted. In this one point all conditions
are alike. The young may, and the old must. The difference is no more, but the
Sen. Ep. 26
one come unto death, and death comes to the other. Death, says Saint Bern.
de conuers. ad cleric. cap. 14.
Bernard, non miseratur inopiam, non diuitias reueretur, etc. pitieth not the
poverty of one, nor stands in awe of the riches of another, it spares not
the parentage of any man, nor his behavior, nor his age; for the old it
stands ready in the gates, for the young it licth in ambush. The Poet could
say of death, that it is that, Horat. Carm. Lib. 4. Ode 7.
Quo Pius Aeneas, quo Tulius dives and Ancus, whether Aeneas with his piety,
and Tullus with his riches, and Ancus with his valor did go. Puluis and vmbra
sumus: we are but dust and shadow. Nay it is a thing so assured, that in a sort
a man may say we are more certain to die, than that ever we were borne, since
there is but one way only to come into the world, but a thousand ways to go
out of it, as Greg. Naz. orat. 40.
Gregory Nazianzene observed, as, by fire, and by water, by the teeth of wild
beasts, by famine, or sword, or pestilence, and infinite means besides. And as
the rule is general for persons and for degrees, so also is it for places; no
one place being exempt or priuileged from death. Which Xenoph. in Apolog. pro
Socrat.
Socrates himself did rightly understand, when after his condemnation being
told by his friends, that if he would give liking thereunto, they would by
violence take him from the officers, or otherwise convey him away; he not only
gave no consent to that project of theirs, but also smiled at them, asking
whether they knew any place, without the territory of Athens, to the which
death might not approach. And as pretty a speech was that of Ammian: Mercellin.
hist Lib. 16. Sigon. de Occid. Imp. lib. 6.
Hormisda the Persian, who being by his king sent in embassage to Constantius
the Roman Emperor, was caused by Constantius to walk up and down, to view
the city Rome. There he beheld the glorious monuments of the place, the
Capitol, the Pantheon, the Temple of peace, the Forum of Traian, the
Amphitheater, and the Bathes, with many other matters of excellent
workmanship. But being asked by the Emperor what he thought of Rome, or what
was his judgment concerning it, he replied, that it was the most glorious
City, that was in the world; and that as he supposed, there was not such
another in all the earth: but this, says he, does please me, or as other
report it, this one thing does displease me, that I see men die at Rome, as
they do in other places. The speech was most true, and fitteth all other
cities. We all then may resolve, that wheresoever we be, or of what calling
soever, we must come to the gates of death. That we might not hope to avoid
this, the Patriarchs and the Prophets have gone that way before us: That we
may not dread the sharpness of it, the Son of God himself by sustaining
death in his flesh, has sanctified death unto us.

8 A man would have thought, that by this time sufficient had been said. But
yet farther to imprint all into our cogitation, the Prophet speaks on, All
the grace thereof is as the flower of the field. The grass withers, the
flower fades. As if he should have subioyned, that if in the life of man there
be any thing more fair, more amiable, more goodly, more specious, more
illustrious than the common quality, yet this is but like to the flower. The
flower is more sightly than the grass, more pleasing unto the eye, more
fragrant unto the smell: yet it endures the common quality of withering and
fading. Yea many times the fairer and the gayer the flower is, the sooner it is
gathered and cropped off by the hand. So it is with those things which this
world esteems most glorious. Authority, estimation, youth, beauty, pomp,
strength, all the delights of this earth are transitory and vain. David
sets men as high as possibly they may go, Psalm. 82. 6.
I have said, Ye are gods, and ye all are children of the most High: but he
brings them down as low, But ye shall die as a man: and ye Princes shall
fall like others. There be many things in this world of high esteem with men,
goodly houses, glorious clothes, dainty fare, curious gardens, music, baths,
plate and possessions: yet of these S. Austen said truly, Aug. de catechiz.
rudibus cap. 16.
Quamuis insana gaudia non sint gaudia: Although these mad and foolish joys
are in truth no joys, yet be they as they are, and let them delight as much
as possibly they can, aufert omnia ista vnafebricula, if there come but one fit
of an ague, the comfort of them is gone. To the same purpose Saint Basil: for
when he has described the glory and the ornaments of Princes and great
persons, he adds: Basil. in Hexam. homil. 5.
That if there come but one ill night, one little touch of a fever, some pain
of the side, or imperfection in the lungs, abijt illa vniuersa scena, all the
play is marred, the show is quite disgraced. Where we may note, that Saint
Basil does term our life but a play: And so also does Saint Chrysostom Con^. 2. de
L^zaro.
Chrysostom, likening men unto stage players, among whom one is a King, a
second stands for a Captain, a third serves for a Mariner, and other have
other parts; but this is only while they are upon the stage: for the show being
ended, they are then but themselves, all fellows, and all alike. Even so in
life there is difference, there be degrees of callings; but in rottenness and
the grave the best and worst are equal. There no difference may be found
between 2. Sam. 14. 25.
Absason with his beauty, and Luc. 16. 20.
Lazarus with his blaines. There it is true which Lucian. in Necromant.
Lucian causes one to report, that when he came amongst the dead, he could
there see no difference between Nireus the fair, and Thersites the foul:
between Irus the beggar, and Ulysses the Prince: between Pirrhias the cook,
and Agamemnon the king. Now if these things be so, why do men set their hearts
on the glory of this world? Nay, why do Christian men embrace it, and admire
it, and adore it, and dote upon it, since Heathen men have discovered the
vanity thereof, and done strange things about it? That A^n. Syl^. ^ Blond.
Decad. 2. 6. Platin. in Caelest. 3.
Saladine who was so great an enemy to the Christians, and wan from them the
Holy land, lying upon his deathbed, gave charge that his inner garment, his
shirt as it may be thought, or rather his shroud, being put on the end of a
spear, should be carried before his coarse now going to be buried, and that a
Herald should cry, that Saladine the great Lord and Governor of Asia carried
nothing away with him but that shirt or that shroud. Where if it should be
objected that he grew to this contemplation, when immediately he was to leave
the world, I may tell you of other persons, who in their strength and vigor
have had as good meditations. Dion. Histor. lib. 66.
Titus that Roman Emperor having set out shows and spectacles for a hundred
days together, to demonstrate the magnificence of that Empire, on the last day
of those sights, in the presence of all the people did break forth into
tears, upon a consideration, that all that pomp was vanished and dissolved
into nothing. It is said of Plutarch. in vit. Aemil.
Paulus Aemilius, that when he had his triumph for three whole days together,
he ioyed no way apparently; as neither on the other side, he gave testimony of
grief for the death of one of his sons, who died a very few days before the
time of his triumph; with which patience he also took the death of another of
them within a few days after. But albeit in all that, he did bear himself
with great constancy, yet in another case he had other cogitations. For Tit.
Liu. lib. 45.
having overthrown in battle Perseus the king of Macedonia, and having chased
him up and down, so that there was small hope to escape, Perseus writes
letters to him, that he would yield into his hands his kingdom and his person;
which when Aemilius had received, he could not stay from weeping, remembering
the inconstancy and mutabilitie of all states and conditions. So did that
noble Tit. Liu. lib. 25.
Marcellus in his entrance into that rich city Syracusae, when he had long
besieged it, and at last by composition it was surrendered unto him; the tears
trickled from his eyes, to see so worthy a place now brought into captivity.
Appian. de bellis Puni^is.
Scipio another Roman, when he saw the city Carthage raced down unto the
ground, though it had been enemy to his country, yet could not forbear to
weep, to think that empires and nations were so subject to ouerturning. Thus
did the grauest and wisest men that were among the old Romans, in the happiest
and most glorious things that ever did befall them while they were here
amongst men. Such meditations as these were, would well become Gods best
servants, to lay it unto their heart, that the height of earthly felicity being
taken in it self, is but store of the lightest vanity. Grass is no better
than grass, and flowers are no better than flowers: these fade, the other
withers.

9 The reason of the whole now follows: The spirit of the Lord blows upon
it. God dissolueth all at his pleasure; and mark with what facility this
matter is brought about; but as with a puff of the wind, or as with the blast
of the mouth. That breath which made the world, can mar a man in a moment.
The Lord says of himself, Deu. 32. 39.
I kill, and I give life: I wound, and I make whole: neither is there any that
can deliver out of mine hand. Hanna the mother of Samuel, in her song
remembers this; 1. Sam. 2. 6
The Lord kills, and makes alive: brings down to the grave, and raises
up. And my Prophet in the same Chapter whence my text is taken, Isa. 40. 23.
He (speaking of God) brings the Princes to nothing, and makes the Judges of
the earth as vanity. These things teach us the Lords power, and his sway over
men. He sets them in a standing place like sentinels in a watch, and when
he list he discharges them: When he calls for the greatest, there is no way
of avoiding, there is no means of withdrawing, there is no place for
absenting, there is no course of resisting. And so I end this Proclamation.

10 What I have spoken all this while touching the maine of my text, is
verified in that spectacle which is now before our eyes, which can not choose
but be unto us a memorial of mortality. For here we are to celebrate the
funeral solemnity of an honorable personage, a grave Counselor of Estate, a
great Officer of the Crown, a faithful servant unto his Majesty. Touching
whom, since you expect that something should be said, I shall draw the
beginning of that which I must deliver, from a witness beyond all exception;
and that is the late Queen of everlasting memory. Her Majesty not long
before her death being pleased, as (...) seems, with some special piece of
service which his Lordship had done unto her, grew at large to discourse
touching this Noble man, as an honorable person, and a Counselor of Estate, in
writing has advertised me. Her Highness was then pleased to decipher out his
life, by seven steps or degrees: The first was (where he took the degree of
Barrister) he gave tokens of such pregnancie, such studiousnesse and judgment,
that he was held no way inferior to any of his time or standing. And of this
there remain good The life of Tresilian in the Mirror of Magistr. Epist.
pr^fix. Aulic. Barth. Clerk.
tokens both in English and in Latin published unto the world. The second was
his travel, when being in France and Italy, he profited very much in the
languages, (whereof this Commonwealth, found great benefit in his Lordships
elder years, in the deepest consulations that belonged unto this kingdom.)
And being prisoner in Rome for the space of fourteen days, (which trouble
was brought upon him by some who hated him for his love to religion, and his
duty to his Sovereign) he so prudently bare himself, that by the blessing of
God, and his temperate kind of carriage, he was freed out of that danger. The
third his coming unto her Court, where on diverse occasions he bountifully
feasted her Highness and her Nobles; and so he did to foreign Ambassadors. At
that time he entertained Musicians the most curious, which any where he could
have, and therein his Lordship excelled unto his dying day. Then was his
discourse judicious, but yet witty and delightful. Thus he was in his yoonger
days, a scholar, and a traveler, and a Courtier of special estimation.

11 The fourth step of his life, noted by her most sacred Majesty, Holinshed
An. 13. Eliz.
The Chronicles at large relate the manner of it. Secondly, when afterward in a
service of tickle nature, he was employed into the Low Countries, where
notwithstanding the sharp sight which by some was carried over him, yet his
Lordship behaved himself so warily and discreetly, that no blame could be
fastened on him. The fifth time observed was, his temper and moderation after
his returns from thence, when her Majesty to give contentation to a great
personage, in those days of high imploiment, was pleased to command him unto
his own house, there privately to remain till her farther pleasure was
known. Where his Lordship did bear himself so dutifully and obsequiously
unto her Highness command, that in all the time of his restraint, for nine or
ten months space, he never would endure either openly or secretly, either by
day or by night to see either wife or child. A rare example of obedience, and
observance unto his Sovereign. The sixth degree which was that his Lordship was
Counselor, before that he was advanced to that high office, which afterward he
bare, in which time he daily showed great diligence and sound judgment, in her
weightiest affairs. The last of all was that space, wherein he held the in
which place she noted the continual and excessive pains, and care which his
Lordship did take in her business, his fidelity in his aduices, his dexterity
in adua^cing of her profit. Thus it seemed good to that Queen of blessed
memory, in particul^^ discourse touching her faithful servant. This was while
his Lordship lived: and since his death, his Majesty that now is, the most
religious, the most learned, the most judicious King, that this land ever
enioied, (as I have been advertised from persons of high quality) has been
pleased diverse times to give many excellent speeches before the Lords
concerning him, as his Highness had done formerly, while this noble man did
live. Here, may I not say with the Poet?

Horat. lib. 1. Epist. 17.
Principibus placuisse viris, non vltima laus est:
To please great Princes is not the least commendation.
Nay I may change the verse, and alter it in this fashion:

Principibus placuisseistis, ter maxima laus est.
To please such Princes as these, is a very great commendation.
And indeed, these were most gracious testimonies of two such Sovereigns to
their servant, who desired much to please them with loyalty and fidelity,
with vigilancie and care, with industry and diligence, incredible, but unto
those who did know it. And never was there any Noble man, who with more humble
agnising, with more feeling and affectionate gratefulness did entertain the
favors of his Sovereigns, than this honorable person did, as may fully
appear by many w^^ds in his last will, recommending to his posterity, a
special grace of his Majesty, in sending a Ring unto him, which he wishes
his to keep, as a jewel of highest value, thorowout all generations. The
words are worth the reading, but they are too long to rehearse in this place.

12 Now for other parts of moral virtues, how many rare things were in him?
Who more loving unto his wife, that Honorable Lady, the mirror of all true
virtue? It is a most worthy testimony, that he has given thereof, and has
left it to be The words which his Lordship in his last will uses of his Lady
are these: Inprimis, I give, will, and bequeath unto the Lady Cicely Countess
of Dorset, my most virtuous, faithful, and dearly beloved wife, not as any
recompense of her infinite merit toward me, who for her incomparable love,
zeal, and hearty affection ever showed unto me, and for those her so rare,
many, and reverent virtues, of chastity, modesty, fidelity, humility,
secrecy, wisdom, patience, and a mind^ repleat with all piety and goodness,
which evermore have and do abound in her, deserves to be honored, loved and
esteemed above all the transitory wealth and treasure of this world, and
therefore by no price of earthly riches can by me be valued, recompensed or
requi^ed: To her therefore my most vermous, faithful and entirely beloved
wife, Not, I say, as a recompense, but as a true token and testimony of my
unspeakable love, affection, and estimation, and reuerenc^ long since fixed and
settled in my heart toward her, I give, will and bequeath, etc.
recorded for those that shall come after. Who more kind unto his children, and
to his Grandchildren? Who more fast unto his friend? who more moderate to his
enemy, if truth were once found out, and staining imputations were wiped away
from the integrity of his Honor? Who more true of his word? It was a noble
testimony, which a most Honorable personage gave of his Lordship since his
death, in a right worthy assembly, that in much conversation and concurrence
in many causes, of great weight and importance, he never heard him speak, or
in earnest affirm that which he found to be otherwise. What noble man in our
time was more given to hospitalite, and keeping of a great house? Having lived,
seventy and two years (for so was his age accounted) and being married more
then fifty and three years, unto one and the self same Lady, he kept house
for forty and two years in an honorable proportion. For thirty years of
those, his family consisted of little less in one place or another, than two
hundred persons. But for more then twenty years, besides workmen and other
hired, his number at the least has been two hundred and twenty daily, as
appeared upon checke-rowle. A very rare example in this present age of ours,
when housekeeping is so decayed. Who more magnificent than than his Lordship
in solemn entertainments? as (besides other particulars) was manifested not
long since abundantly to the world, when his Majesty with the Queen and
Prince together with a great part of the Nobility, spent diverse days at
Oxford. Who was ever more desirous to do wrong unto none? His Lordship bought
no land, but he commonly paid more for it, than it was worth, yielding this
reason of it, that it would the better prosper and continue in his name and
posterity. In his Will how careful was he, that all debts should be paid? yea
though there were no specialty whereby it might be challenged, yet if it might
appear that ought was due unto any man, his charge is to his Executors that
they should give satisfaction. The like also for wrong done to any one
whatsoever ( whereof he protested before the eternal Majesty that he did not
remember any.) And if there should grow difference between his Executors and
any person demanding, his hearty prayer and desire is to the Deanes of
Windsore, Westminster, and Paul's (for so his Lordship does rank them) to
hear, order, and determine all controversies depending. Which if they refuse
to do, which he hops they will not, or if the party claiming shall not obey
their award, he leaves them to the ordinary course of law, but charge and
requires his Executors to answer them in all Courts of Justice immediately,
without all delays whatsoever. Unto those honorable parts, I may add a great
many more: As his good and charitable disposition toward his Tenants, of whom
ordinarily, he took less fines by a third part, than by other Lords is
usually accustomed; and his Farmers held his Farms, as is well known to the
world, but at reasonable rents: As his relief to the poor in pinching times
of dearth. From the 28. of May to the 15. of August, so much as cost 154. li.
14. s. 7. d.
In the year 1597. which was a time of the greatest scarcity that ever we did
know, his Lordship sent into Sussex of his free gift unto six parishes store of
Danske Rye bought at Billingsgate. Diverse other years, and namely this present
year 1608. his Lordship has caused weekly certain quarters of Wheat, to be
carried from his own Granary at Jews in Sussex, and to be sold in the market
to the poor, at a far After 26. s. 8. d. the quarter, when other men
ordinarily sold for 40. s. the quarter.
lower rate than the price which commonly men did take. And that this his
Lordships bounty might continue after his death, by his last Will and
Testament he has bequeathed a thousand pounds for the erecting of a Granarie
at the place which last I named, for the use and benefit of poor people in
those parts: And two thousand pounds as a stock for the storing of that house
against times of dearth and scarcity. Unto this he has also joined a thousand
pounds to be bestowed on the building of a Chapel (...)
where his ancestors do lie, and where his Lordship desired that his body
might be enterred. These are fruits of a lively faith, and so must be reputed.

13 But because a right belief and religion toward God is the highest point of
all, I may not here omit to say something touching that. There are arguments
most evident to demonstrate unto all men, that his faith was agreeable unto the
word of God, and according to the profession of the renowned Church of England.
In that famous University of Oxford, where his Lordship for more then sixteen
years was our Honorable Chancellor, it was his special care to substitute
such under him as were most sound for Religion, which the wiser sort did
observe, although common men did not mark it. As he kept down with the one
hand all novelties, and humors in opinions, which labored to set trouble in
the Church and Commonwealth, so with the other hand to the uttermost of his
power he depressed the Priests and Jesuits, which have used too much to that
place; not to the University, which God be praised is free from all such
imputation, but to some few of the City, who embrace their old superstitions.
In that place this I can witness, that his Lordship neither openly nor
secretly did ever give countenance unto any that was backward in religion. And
on the other side, that there was never any thing soberly and wisely proposed
which might forward true piety, which his Lordship did not further; as I could
by many particulars make plain to whomsoever. Touching the education of those
honorable plants his grandchildren, his Lordship was ever careful that they
should be trained up in the truth of religion, far from Popery and
idolatry. His charge was unto their Tutour (as I well knew in his life time)
that as he would answer him in the day of the last judgment, before the face
of Christ, that he should train them up in the truth of the religion
professed now in England. How angry would he be, when he was at his Country
house, if they came not duly to prayers? He never could endure that they
otherwise should be matched, than where was sound religion. Concerning his own
soul, when the last year he was sick, besides ordinary prayers, he composed
himself to God by At Horseley.
receiving the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, when he looked to depart the
world. But two days before he died, devoutly and religiously he heard a Sermon
at home in his Lordships own At Dorset house.
Chapel. Nay to let all other things pass, how holily and Christianly in his
last Will and Testament does he commend his soul unto God! I must profess
when I saw it first, it did very much affect me. And because it cannot choose
but give very full contentment to all reasonably minded, yea perhaps may do
much good unto other by the example, I think it not amiss to read the very
words, that his own hand has delivered. These they are: First therefore as a
living creature most bound thereunto, I here throw down and prostrate my
self in all humility and thankefulnes, at the foot of my Creator, Redeemer,
and Savior, rendering unto his divine Majesty my most lowly, hearty and
infinite thanks, in that he has vouchsafed to create me a man endued and
infused with soul and reason, and fashioned like unto the image of his own
eternal Son, that might have made me a brutish and soule-lesse beast, to
have fed and grased upon the earth, like unto those irrational living
creatures of the field. But especially in that he has pleased to make me a
Christian man, whereby in this life I may joy and rejoice with the sound and
badge of that glorious name, and when I go from hence I may thereby, and
through the mercies and goodness of Jesus Christ depart and die in assurance
and comfort of my souls and bodies salvation and resurrection, and to rest at
his right hand, in the fruition of those celestial and unspeakable ioies and
blessedness that never shall have end. To him therefore my most merciful and
omnipotent God, and into the hands of his inexplicable and eternal goodness,
I give, will and bequeath my soul, firmly and assuredly trusting, believing
and freely confessing, That by the death and passion of his Son Jesus Christ,
and by his only mercy, mean and mediation for me, and by none other, and not
by any good work or merit of mine own (although I must acknowledge, that I am
bound upon pain of damnation, to do as many good works as possibly I can or
may; all which when I have done, yet am I but an unprofitable servant, and a
sinful creature full of all iniquity) I shall live and partake with his
Saints in his heavenly kingdom, of that eternal and inexplicable bliss and
happiness which he has prepared for his elect, of which number (through his
infinite mercy and goodness) I do confidently and steadfastly hope, know and
believe that I am one.

14 These things did God provide should be in his Lordships lifetime, that
those who did love and honor him (of whom I must evermore acknowledge my self
to be one, and so bound by due desert) might have the more comfort, in, and
after his death. Which must needs be confessed to have been on the sudden:
and yet such as has befallen many good and godly men; yea choice persons
amongst Gods servants. I need not give example, how many in a moment have been
drowned at sea, or in other rivers; or have been slaughtered in the wars; or
murdered by their enemies; or stifled in their beds; or passing through the
streets, have been beaten down with a tile, or slain with a stone thrown
from a Justin. li. 25.
wall, as some write that Pyrrhus was, or have had some such matter as the
tower of Luc. 13. 4.
Siloah to fall upon them. I need not run to Pli^. ^at. hist. lib. 7. 7.
Anacreon the Poet, who in an instant was choked with the kernel of a raisin,
or to Ibidem.
Fabius, who drinking milk was strangled with an hair. Neither need I fly to
Tull. in L^lio.
Scipio that admirable Roman, who being over night so honored by his
contrymen, that the Senators and the people of that city, together with the
Latins and other their confederates, in solemn fashion brought him home to
his house, the next day he was found dead. I may speak of our own age,
wherein many persons of honor, men of learning and of great reverence have
suddenly been called out of the world; touching whom for any man to give a
bitter censure, stands not with any rule of charity or piety, yea of common
Christianity. And for the ages past, I might tell you of Petrus Nich.
Hospital. in Tumulis.
Castellanus, Bishop sometimes of Orleans, who being preaching in the pulpit,
fell suddenly down and died. I might remember you of that worthy and most
renoumed Emperor, Matthew. Paris in Richard.
Frederike Barbarossa, who going for Palestina, to recover the Holy land out of
the hands of the Saracens, which he thought to be a service most acceptable to
Christ, and for effecting whereof, he left his country and friends, yet by the
way as he passed, in the presence of many of his army, was suddenly drowned in
the river Sapheth. I might mention the yoonger Hier. Epist. 19. Tom. 9.
Marcellin. Lib. 30.
Valentinian an Emperor endued with many most rare qualities: yet being on a
time much offended that the Sarmatae and Quadi, two barbarous nations, had
broken in upon the Empire, and speaking loud and passionately concerning that
matter, he brake some vein or some thing else within him, and presently so
died. Notwithstanding Saint Ambros. de obit. Valentinian.
Ambrose making a funeral Oration or Sermon for him, gives him most singular
commendation, and doubts not but that his soul was in peace and rest with
God. Yea albeit at that time Valentinian had not received the Sacrament of
Baptism, yet Saint Ambrose is resolved that propter voluntatem and votum
Baptismi, for his desire and wish that he had to be Baptized, the Lord had
received him to mercy. Where I may not forget a speech which he utters in
that Sermon, Iustus quacunque morte praeuentus fuerit, anima eius in refrigerio
crit: The righteous man, by what kind of death soever he be over taken, or
hastily caught away, his soul shall be at rest. I might rehearse the example
of Iouian another famous Emperor, who was the man that freed the Roman army
from the danger whereinto Julian the Apostata going against the Persians had
brought it. In the Socrat. Hist. Eccl. li. 3. 19.
midst of their peril, the Captains and soldiers assured both of his virtue
and his valor, proclaimed him for their Emperor. But he being a zealous and
most resolute Christian, and knowing that they not long before, (to give
contentment to Julian) had turned Heathens and Infidels, made answer that
himself professing for Jesus Christ, would never take upon him any government
over Gentiles; which made them by and by return to the Christian faith. Yet
this holy and worthy Emperor, Theodor. Hist. Eccl. Lib: 4. 4.
like to the Sun breaking forth after a fearful storm, was presently
caught away, and taken out of men's sight. For going in health to bed, he was
found dead in the morning; and no reason of that hasty change could be
imagined, but that either he had taken too Solon. Hist. Eccl. Lib. 6. 6.
liberal a supper, or was choked with the savor of new lime on the walls of
the house where he lay, or with the smell of bad coals, Hier. Epist. 3. ad
Heliod.
foetore prunarum, as Saint Hierome does deliver it. Nay I might tell of
Josiah, whom Jeremy did term, the breath of their ^am. 4. 20.
nostrels, the Anointed of the Lord, yet says withal, that he was taken in
their nets, that is, was caught away suddenly. 2. Chron. 35. 23.
He went into battle against Pharao Necho, and there was wounded and slain.
Iustine Martyr speaking of this most godly king, and the manner of his death
does make this objection, Justin. Martyr. Quaest. 79.
why the wicked did not say that Josias was so slain, and died in such a
fashion, because he overthrew their idols and their altars. Whereby he does
intimate, that the manner of men is to give a hard judgment on the good as well
as upon the bad, if any thing extraordinary, especially in their death, do
befall them. Saint Hieron. in Psa. 93. ^om. 7.
Hierome notes the same, where he writes thus: Solent aliqui dicere, Some
men use to say, He who was slain had not been killed unless he had been a
fornicator, or had committed some sin. The house had not fallen upon him,
unless he had been a malefactor. He had not suffered shipwreck, had he not
been an offender. But see what says the holy Scripture, Et sanguinem
innocentem condemnabunt: They shall condemn even innocent blood. Though the
person be innocent, yet God sometimes does suffer the evil man to condemn
him. This may well be a lesson to men in our time, that they be not too quick,
nor nimble in giving up their verdicts or censures of other men. Especially
since God disposes all at his pleasure. Since he has said, that Eccl. 9. 2.
All things come alike to all: and the same condition is to the just and the
wicked, to the good and to the pure, and to the polluted; to him that
sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not. Which is to be understood of
external and outward things; since the parties that speak this, have their
own breath in their nostrils, and it may be their own case, if God should so
determine it: it being true that this noble man spoke in another cause, the
very hour that he died, Eccl. 38. 22. Heri mihi, hodie tibi.
Hodie mihi, cras tibi: It is my turn to day, and it may be yours tomorrow. I
might amplify this point much farther, but I end it with that saying of the
Apostle Paul, What Romans 14. 4.
art thou that condemnest or iudgest another man's servant? He stands or
falls to his own master.

15 Yet, that truth may not be concealed in the matter which now I handle; as
God dealt with this noble person somewhat extraordinarily in taking him from
among us, so it may be well supposed, that he gave him more than an ordinary
conjecture, or suspicion, that his death was not far from him. The last year
when he returned after his grievous sickness, he spoke it more than once to
his honorable friends, that he had settled his soul and composed it to another
world, whenever God should call for him. Soon after he began to dispose of
all those worldly things, which the Lord had lent unto him. Of late it was his
common speech, I am now an old man, therefore this, or therefore that, as I my
self can witness. The day before he died, writing with his own hand to one
of his grand-childre^, he more than once in that letter used this or the like
phrase, After my death: and, when I am dead and gone. The last morning of his
life, it was noted by those who were nearest about his Lordship, that he was
apparently longer at his private meditations, then commonly he did use. But
the words of his will, written with his own hand may give great satisfaction
to a man of a hard conceit, that he did fit himself to mortality, whereof in
the former year he had had a warning piece. I will read his Lordships own
words, in which letech man judge, whether it may not be thought that there was
some instinct more then ordinary. Thus then his will begins: The eternal
God of heaven and earth, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, guide and
prosper this mine intent and purpose, which in their name I here take in hand
and begin. Because it is a truth infallible, such as every Christian ought not
only perfectly to know, and steadfastly to believe, but also continually to
meditate and think upon, namely, that we are borne to die; That nothing in
this world is more certain then death, nothing more incertaine then the hour
of death, and that no creature living knows, neither when, where, nor how it
shall please Almighty God to call him out of this mortal life: So as here we
live every hour, nay every instant a thousand ways subject to the sudde^
stroke of death, which ought to terrify, teach and warn us to make our selves
ready as well in the preparation of our souls to God, as by the disposition of
all our earthly fortunes to the world, whenever it shall please the heavenly
power to call us from this miserable and transitory life unto that blessed and
everlasting life to come: Therefore, etc.

16 Yet to all this I may add, that by us who are living, there is an use to
be made of these things: For Exempl. ^mori^ntum sunt documenta viuentium; The
examples of men dying are the instructions of the living. When in this present
spectacle we may sensibly behold, that life is so uncertain, that we may say
with Pliny, Plin. Not. Hist. li. 7. 51.
Whereas there be in men innumerable signs of death, there is no assured sign
of safety and of security in the youngest or the strongest: let us remember
the counsel of our Master and Savior, Matt. 24. 42.
Wake therefore: for ye know not what hour your master will come, either by
death, or by the last and general judgment. Let us be like the wise Matthew.
25. 4.
virgins, ever ready with oil in our lamps; the oil of faith and good life.
Let us say to our selves as God said to 2. Reg. 20. 1.
Hezechiah, Put thine house in an order, for thou shall die and not live. Let
us speak thus to our souls. Let us not weaue the spiders-web; that is, bestow
all our labor upon that which is but vain, but weak, and of no profit. Let
us not fasten our selves to this transitory world, making that to be our joy,
our comfort and delight; but let our mind be settled on some thing of higher
nature. Let us daily pray to God as Moses sometimes prayed, Psalm. 90. 12.
Teach us so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom:
which must be the wisdom spiritual, celestial and eternal. And this is so
much the rather to be desired in this life, because as we read in Solomon,
Eccle. 11. 3.
if the tree do fall toward the South or toward the North, in the place that
the tree falls, there it shall be, that is, as Olymp in Eccl. 11. Bern.
Sermon. paru. 49.
Olympiodorus, and Saint Bernard do expound it, as a man does die, either in
the favor or the disfavor of God, so he must remain immutabiliter and
irretractabiliter, without changing or recalling. Therefore men while they do
live should carry themselves warily, as being ever assured, that they are in the
eye of God, and that he is among them in their greatest consultations, and most
honorable assemblies. Psalm. 82. 1.
God stands (says David) in the Congregation of Princes; he is a Judge among
Gods. A Judge to see and examine them, a Judge to strike and call unto him,
whom and when it pleases him. Let him ever be before our eyes, that when he
shall send for us, we may appear with readiness, with alacrity and with
confidence before the Throne of his Grace. Which God the Father grant us for
his Son Christ Jesus his sake: to both whom with the Holy Ghost be laud and
praise, and glory, now and evermore.

Amen.
TO THE READER.
BEcause there is mention made in this Sermon of a Ring sent unto that
Honorable person by his most sacred Majesty, the humble acceptance whereof is
set down with so grateful remembrance of his duty and devotion to his
Highness; and because the words otherwise imply a great deal of obseruable
matter, I have thought it not amiss to offer them to more public view, as
they are delivered by his Lordship in his last will: which is as follows.

ALso I give, will and bequeath unto my said wel-beloued son ROBERT Lord
BVCKHVRST after my decease for and during his life only, out of those Jewels
of Gold, Pearl and Precious stone, which I keep and reserve as Jewels for my
self, the sole use and occupation only of one Ring of Gold enameled black,
and set round over all the whole Ring with Diamonds to the number of twenty,
whereof five Diamonds being placed in the uppermost part of the said Ring do
represent the fashion of a Cross; and the other fifteen are set round and
over all the said Ring. And after the decease of my said son BVCKHVRST, then
I give, will, and bequeath the like sole use and occupation only of the said
Ring unto my Nephew RICHARD SACKVILLE, his eldest son, for and during his
life only. And after his decease, then unto the next heir male begotten of the
body of the said RICHARD SACKVILLE my Nephew, for and during his life only.
And so from heir male to heir male of the SACKVILLS, after the decease of
every of them severally and successively for and during the life and lives only
of every such heir male severally and successively: charging and earnestly
requiring all and every of my said heir males before specified; even as they
regard the last request of him by whose great travel, care and industry (if
the Divine providence of God that has vouchsafed to give it, shall so please
to continue it) they are like to receive the addition and advancement of so
great honor, possessions and patrimony, that although percase in this strict
course of the common laws of this Realm, the Entaile of goods and chattels
may hardly stand upright, that yet for the preservation and continuance of this
gift of mine intended by me to remain as an heire-lome to the house and
family of the SACKVILLS, so long as almighty God (according to the effects of
his former goodness unto that house, by the continuance thereof during the
space of so many hundred years past) shall please to uphold the same, they
and every of them will forbear in any sort to oppugn it, or to bring it in
question, or to brandle and controuert the will of their so well deserving
Ancestour, and specially in a matter so honest, reasonable, fit and convenient
as this is, but rather with all willing, ready and contented minds to suffer
the same to pass as an heire-lome, from heir male to heir male, according to
the true intent and meaning of this my last will and Testament in that behalf.
Which said Ring set all over with twenty Diamonds, as is aforesaid, I desire
and charge my said son BVCKHVRST upon my blessing, and in like sort all other
the heirs male, whom God shall vouchsafe from age to age to raise unto my
house and family, and unto whom (if the Highest so please) my hearty desire
and meaning is, the said Ring set with twenty Diamonds, as is aforesaid, may
lineally and successively descend and come for ever, namely, that with all
provident care and heedfull circumspection they will safely keep, retain, and
preserve the said Ring whenever and as often as he shall come to their hands
and possession, even as one of the greatest gifts and jewels which (in true
estimation) all circumstances considered, I have to leave unto them. And to the
intent they may know how just and great cause both they and I have to hold the
said Ring in so high esteem, it is most requisite that I do here set down
the whole course and circumstance how and from whom the said Ring did come to
my possession, which was thus: In the beginning of the month of June 1607 this
Ring thus set with twenty Diamonds, as is aforesaid, was sent unto me from my
most gracious Sovereign King James, by that honorable personage the Lord Hay,
one of the Gentlemen of his Highness Bedchamber, the Court then being at
Whitehall in London, and I at that time remaining at Horsley house in Surrey,
twenty miles from London, where I lay in such extremity of sickness as it
was a common and a constant report over all London, that I was dead, and the
same confidently affirmed even unto the Kings Highness himself. Upon which
occasion it pleased his most excellent Majesty, in token of his gracious
goodness and great favor toward me, to send the said Lord Haie with the said
Ring, and this royal message unto me; namely, That his Highness heartily
wished a speedy and perfect recovery of my health, with all happy and good
success unto me; and that I might live as long as the Diamonds of that Ring
(which therewithal he delivered unto me) did endure: And in token thereof
required me to we are it and keep it for his sake. This most gracious and
comfortable message restored a new life unto me, as coming from so renowned
and benign a Sovereign, unto a servant so far unworthy of so great a
favor; and upon whom, not long before, it had pleased his Majesty, yea in
that very first day wherein we all had the happiness to behold him, not only
to bestow the honor of a Privy Counselor, but also without any answerable
desert or merit of mine preceding, to confirm that most honorable place of
High Treasurer of England unto me, which the late Queen ELIZABETH after
fourteen years service and ten years following her Court (but not before)
vouchsafed (I must needs yet say most graciously so soon as it became void) to
grant unto me, and likewise within a short time after to advance both me and my
succession to the high honor and degree of an Earl; which is and shall be to
me, my house and posterity, an everliving demonstration, as well of his great
benefit to us, as of our infinite bond to him thereby for ever. The which
inexplicable goodness of his Majesty toward me, besides many lustres of his
bright shining favors, from time to time cast upon me, do give me just cause
to agnize, that I am no ways able to merit, no not the least part of them, but
only with the humble and infinite earnestie of my heart in desire to deserve;
which I can yet no ways manifest, but by that faithful testimony which shall
never fail in me, namely, by demonstration of mine incessant cares, labors
and actual endeavors for the behoof and furtherance of his Majesty's*
services, at the least thereby to show that good will which is in me, though I
cannot show that effect which is due to him, since all that I possibly can or
may do, is but mere debt and duty, and so in that course to spend such
remain of life as is left unto me, yea even to the very last of my days here,
and when I am dead and gone, if ever occasion may or shall be offered to any of
my posterity to do his Majesty or any of his any acceptable service
hereafter, then let them hold and esteem themselves most happy, if with the
expense of life, and of all the fortunes that this world shall give them, they
may actually approve and witness with effect, that they are not only most
loyal and dutiful vassals to this Imperial Crown, but also the most humble,
faithful, and thankful sons and sequel of such a servant, as was more
bound unto King JAMES, his liege Master, than ever subject was unto his
Sovereign, especially he being such a Sovereign, adorned with such excellent
parts of justice, clemency, and goodness, endued with so admirable gifts of
memory, learning, and judgment, and finally beautified with so many other
regal graces and virtues so far beyond all the Kings and Princes that either
written story or this present age has to present unto us, as I know not how
any greater honor and felicity can possibly be added to the imperial Crown
of and in this Great Britain, by his undoubted right so happily united unto
us, than we now presently possess and enjoy in the Royal person of this our
so renowned and so rare a King. Beseeching the eternal God, that he and his
may evermore both rule and reign over us, yea even as long as the Sun and
Moon endures: and that I and mine may for ever and ever become more and more
thankful, (at the least if it be possibly in me) for so great honors, graces,
and favors, as this most clement and renowned King has thus most graciously
vouchsafed unto me; the remembrance of which, because it may never die but be
perpetually recorded in the minds of those, that by the grace and goodness of
almighty God, both now are, and hereafter shall be the lineall stirpe and
succession of my house and family, to serve both him and his: I have here
therefore set down this short narration, of the true state and circumstance of
the whole matter, to the intent it may remain to my posterity hereafter, as a
faithful memory thereof even in this my last Will and Testament for ever.


