THE GHOST OF RICHARD THE THIRD.

Expressing himself in these three Parts.
1 His Character. 2 His Legend. 3 His Tragedy.
Containing more of him then has been heretofore showed,; either in
Chronicles, Plays, or Poems.

Laurea Desidiae praebeturnulla. Printed by G. ELD: for L. LISLE: and are to be
sold in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Tigers head. 1614.

RICHARD THE THIRD. HIS CHARACTER, LEGEND, and TRAGEDY. Expressing more than
heretofore, either Chronicle, Play, or Poem.



Printed by Geo: Eld for Lawrence Lisle, and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard at the Tygers-Head, 1614.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR JOHN ^ROMPTON, KNIGHT; WITH HIS MOST WORTHY LADY,
THE LADY FRANCES.
SIR,
MY simple disposition could never make cunning observance of any, whose
deserts most bound me to their respect and honor; not more out of my Nature,
then Judgment; since commonly the worlds obsequious Insinuations in Trifles,
prove their obsequies of no more Importance. Nor can the weightiest duties, in
my poor habilities, sway much more the Balance of the World; because the
notice that the world takes of men's noble Loves to Virtue, and good Name,
impresseth nothing the more, but oftentimes their les^e price in only profit
and selfe-louing estimations. Notwithstanding, since I know your true Noblesse,
out of the common way, in all honored Inclination to the acceptance, and grace
of Goodness; I have been bold to publish this Poem (intending allurement to
Goodness, by deterring from her contrary) to your right generous countenance,
and graceful protection: Wherein, least a single and consortles^e disposition
might perhaps grow cold, by the too many companions that encourage the death of
it to all respect of unprofitable Virtue; You have taken into your Bo^ome so
free and gracious a love to it in my most honored Lady; that the comfortable
and nourishing flame of it, can never want fuel to maintain and keep it ever
at full. To both whose one-light, for the direction, and progression of all
good Endeavors, belonging and consecrate to all true Worthiness and Dignity; I
offer this well-meaning Material; hoping that such as have no matter to Judge
it, shall be far from enclining your Apprehensions to condemn it: And
rather establish, then diminish in you Virtues increasing encouragement. To
which, in all resolved service, I humbly submit; ever abiding, and desiring to
my utmost, your most respected commandment.

C. B.

The Epistle to the Reader.
AN Epistle to the Reader is as ordinary before a new Book, as a Prologue to a
new Play; but as Plays are many times exploded, though the Prologue be never
so good, and promising; So ( Reader) if thou find not stuff, in this Poem,
to fit thy humor: If the wit with the fashion, hold not some tolerable
proportion; this Enducement (though nere so formal and obsequious) would
little preu^ile with thy acceptance, but thou would conjure my Ghost down
again, before his time, or torment him upon earth, with the Hellfire of thy
displeasure. Therefore it matters not whether I humor thee with complement, or
in^inuate with glozing Epithites. I know (in a play or Poem) thou like best
of Satyricall stuff; though perhaps thou see therein thine own Character;
and not without some show of Reason are things bitter, the better: For the
Gluttonous Senses (the Eye and Ear) so cloi'd and surfeited, with variety of
effeminate pleasures; the rough Satyr does sometimes not unfitly enterpose
such Courtly delight, which growing a Burden to it self, his entermixt vain
with the others vanity, gives entermission to the humor, and proves no less
tastfull to the Gallants judgment, then tart sauce to whet his dulled
appetite. And of this kind I have enterlaced something, naturally rising out of
my subject; where (by way of prevention) if any shall object that I have not
amplified the Legend to the full scope of the Story; I answer; I should then
have made the volume too great, to the discouragement of the Buyer, and
disadvantage of the Printer; let it suffice I have the substance, if not the
circumstance; and when I undertook this I thought with my self: That to draw
Arguments of Invention from the Subject, new, and probable, would be far more
plaucible to the time, the^ by insisting upon narrations (made so common in
Plays, and so notorious among all men) have my Labor slighted, and my Pen
tax't for triuiall. The Generous Censor (as he is Ingenious or Ingenuous) I
reverence; likewise the Crittick (as he is knowing, and learned) but when his
censure shall be leuell'd with neither of his good parts, but favor more of
Spleen, then Brain; of Disease, then Judgment I do heartily appeal from
him, with all of that faction; And though many did inly wish, that this (not
the meanest Issue of my Brain) might have proved an Obortiue, and seen no
comfortable light; Yet they see it is borne, and (without prejudice to Nature)
with Teeth too, to oppose theirs, that shall open their lips to deprave me;
but whether to lie upon the Parish, or the Printers hand that rests in clouds;
howsoever, I have got sheets to lie in, (though they be but course) and am
sure to be cherish't in good Letters* if I be entertained in the world, and
prove a companion for the many, I know I shall not be much chargeable; if not,
yet this is my comfort, there will be some use made of me in this land of
waste; In which Resolution, I set up my Rest.

Thine if thou will.

To his Ingenuous, and much loved Friend, the Author.
YOu now amids our Muses Smithfield are
To sell your Pegasus, where Hackney ware
(Rid by the swish swash Rippiers of the Time,
Pampered and fronted with a Ribband Ryme)
Though but some half Hour soundly tried, they tire,
Yet sell, as quickened with Eternal Fire.
All things are made for sale; sell man and all
For sale, to Hell: There is no Soul, to sale.
Your flippant sence-delighter, smooth, and fine,
Fyr'd with his Bush Muse, and his sharp Hedge Wine,
Will sell like good old Gascoine. What does then
Thy Purple in grain, with these Red-Oker men?
Swarth Chimney sweep, that to his Horn does sing,
More Custom gets; then in the Thespian Spring,
The thrice bathed Singer to the Delphia^ Lyre,
Though all must needs be rid here; yet to aspire
To common sale, with all turne-seruing Iades,
Fits Pandars, and the strong voic't Fish-wife Trades.
Affect not that then, and come welcome forth,
Though to some few, whose welcom's ^omthing worth
Not one, not one (says Perseus) will read mine;
Or two, or none; It Is Pageant Orsadine
That goes for gold in your Barbarian Rate,
You must be pleased then to change gold for that.
Might I be Pattern to the meauest few
Even now when hayres of Women-hated-hew
Are withered on me; I delight to see
My Lines thus desolately live like me,
Not any thing I do, but is like Nuts
At the ends of Meals left; when each Appetite gluts.
Some Poet yet can level you a Verse
At the Receipt of Custom; that shall Pierce
A sale Assister; as if with one Eye
He went a Burding; strikes Fowls as they fly,
And has the very Art of Foulerie.
Which Art you must not envy; be you pleased
To hit Desert; fly others, as diseased,
Whose being pierst, is but to be infected;
And as bold Puritans (esteemed elected)
Keep from no common Plague, which so increases;
So these feed all Poetical Diseases.
Best Air, lest dwellers has; yet think not I
Fore-speake the sale of thy sound Poesy;
But would in one so worth encouragement
The care of what is counted worst, prevent;
And with thy cheerful going forth with this;
Thy Muse in first Rank of our Muses is.
Non datur ad Musas currere lata via.
GEOR: CHAPMAN.

To his worthy and ingenious Friend the Author.
SO far as can a Swayne (who then a Round
On Oaten-pipe no further boasts his skill)
I dare to censure the shrill Trumpets sound,
Or other Music of the Sacred hill:
The popular applause, has not so fell
(Like Nile's loud Cataract) possessed mine ears
But others songs I can distinguish well,
And chant their praise, despised Virtue reares;
Nor shall thy buskind Muse be heard alone
In stately Palaces; the shady woods
By me shall learned, and Echho's one by one
Teach it the hills, and they the silver floods.
Our learned Shepherds that have used tofore
Their happy gifts in notes that woo the plains,
By rural ditties will be known no more;
But reach at Fame by such as are thy strains.
And I would gladly, (if the Sisters spring
Had me enabled) bear a part with thee,
And for sweet groves, of brave Heroes sing,
But since it fits not my weak melody
It shall suffice that thou such means do give
That my harsh lines among the best may live.
W. BROWN. Int: Temp.

Ad Lectorem de Libro.
HIc nihil inuenies quod carpas; mentior; ecquid
Carpere quod pigeat, tam bonus Hortus habet?
Hinc carpat, quisquis gratos vult carpere Flores;
At Dextra carpat, carpere si quis amat,
FR. DYNNE. Int: Temp:
To his friend the Author upon his Poem.
NOt for thy Love to me, nor other merit,
Do I commend thy Poems form or Spirit,
For though I know thou art a Friend of mine,
I praise this for it own sake, not for thine.
Here have I seen Charactered the Condition
The Life and End, of a mere Politician;
From which, I learn; It Is no good Policy
On any terms to part with Honesty.
And the Oppressed may view (to his content)
How sweet it is to be an Innocent.
Or by contraries learn with what dear rest,
The Souls of harmless dying men are blessed.
So may the bloody Tyrant here attend,
What Horror and Despair pursues his End.
And those that (living) loath their faults to hear,
May (reading this) perhaps repent for fear.
Since though reproves they scorn now here they dwell,
Thus their own Ghosts proclaim their shames from Hell.
George Wythers.

To the Author upon his Poem.
I know thou art t^^ knowing to enq^ire
This Title to thy Praise, which does require
A Heart so constant, and a Brow so chaste,
That virtue must not fall, how e'r^ low placed,
Who this way merits (...), must look to bring
Only a Flower to an intemp' rate Spring;
Which hows^e' (...)
Must feel the Earth-bred Blasts in barren wants,
Of ruder Elements often suffering spoil,
To snew such Herbs grow not on natural soil,
Nor cannot be aptlier said of Verse, and Rimes
They are but Strangers to these wau'ring Times;
For as men shift their fashions for new Shapes;
They are in Souls the same (Inconstant Apes)
Which each Bo^k^-seller knows; for as to day,
Your Pasquill like a mad-cap runs away;
To morrow Plays; the next day History;
Mor strange another time, Divinity:
And in my Age (which is indeed most rare)
I have known Gallants buy up Books of Prayer;
But they were Gamsters, loosing a^l in swearing
Tried a contrary way in their vprearing:
To this my common observation, Thou
Have took a course (which I must needs allow)
TO include them all in one, to catch their Eyes,
That soon are dym'd without varie^ies;
Wherein I will not flatter thee to tell,
There Is much of good; and what is worst, is well.
ROBERT DABORNE.

To his friend the Author upon his Richard.
When these, and such, their voices have employed;
What place is for my testimony void?
Or, to so many, and so Broad-seales had,
What can one witness, and a weak one, add
For such a work, as could not need theirs? Yet
If Praises, when they are full, heaping admit,
My suffrage brings thee all increase, to crown
Thy Richard, raised in song, past pulling down.
BEN: IONSON.
THE GHOST OF RICHARD THE THIRD.
His Character.
WHat Magic, or what Fiends infernal hand,
Reares my tormented Ghost from Orcus Flame?
And lights my Conscience, with her burning Brand,
Through Death, and Hell, to view the Worlds fair Frame?
Must I again regreete my Native Land,
Whose Graves resound the horror of my Name?
Then gasp those Marble Jaws; and Birds of Night,
Perplex my passage to the loathed Light.
Some Consciences, with souls, may hope for Peace,
When all their venial, and their petty Crimes
Are expiate, but mine will never cease;
T'augment my Torment, past all Worlds and Time;
Damned deeds in life, damned penance does increase;
Men's souls may fly their bodies putrid Clymes;
But horrid pains still cleave to foul offense;
Nor will the sin forsake the Conscience.
Give way Times Pageants; Bubbles, but a Blast;
Objects for idle spirits, whose vanity
Feed Streams of Humors, in this Sea of Waste;
Where Carpet Courtlings swim in Bravery;
Such Comic Puppets are not Things to last;
Subjects unfit for Fame, or Memory;
But Time, nor Age, can parallel, or stayne
My Bloody scoe^es, which Death has did in grain.
Vale Natures ^urselings; Fortunes Favorites;
Whose percell-guylt, my Touch will not endure;
Fostrers of Fools, and glib-Tongu'd Parasites;
Sick of Times Lethargy; past hope of Cure;
Cameleons in your Change of gaudy Sights;
How wanton Salmasis with Lust impure
Cleaues to your souls? proves ye of two fold Kind,
Male in the Body; Female in the Mind?
Wallow in Wast, still iet in sumptuous Weeds;
Wave feathered Gulls with Wind: and shrinck with Rain,
Buskined ye are but not for lofty deeds;
No stately Matter e're inspyr'd your Brains;
Naught but soft Love, your great Ambition Feeds;
None sencible of Pleasure; but of Pain
Must look on me; such whose high Thoughts are fed,
With spirit, and Fame, from dust of Bodies, dead.
Think Ye that Graves, and hollow Vaultes inherit
Naught but Oblivion, and Impotence?
Does not from Death arise an other spirit,
Of high Resolve th'extracted Quintessence?
Fame is the Agent to substantial merit,
And bears about the Worlds Circumference
All deeds notorious; which Time remembers;
Thus Phoenix like, Life springs from down-trod E^^bers
Then as the Almighty Thunde^er does shake,
(With selfe-bred Fumes) th'Immense and Massy Earth;
No less amazement may my Fury make
In my Lives horror, from my Monstrous Birth:
And since I Am raised from Hells burning Like,
I Will fright the World* and chase all Forms of Mirth,
From this now Mimick and ridiculous stage;
I sing of Murder, Tyrany, and Rage.
Then let the Cankered Trumpets of the Deep;
Proclaim my Entrance, to this stagie Round;
That I may startle Worldlings from their sleep,
Their senses in security fast bound:
My Tongue in fiery Dragons Spleen I steep,
That Acts, with Accents, Cruelty may ^ound;
As once the Furies snakes hist in my Breath,
When I kissed Horror; and engendered Death.
And that my Deuilish Brain may not be dull,
But touch the quick of each ambitious Soul,
I take the Wittiest Polliticians Skull,
That ever Hells black Book did yet enroule;
His Mazor filled with Stygian Juice brym-full,
And innocent Blood, fit for an Ebon Bowl,
I quaffe to all damned spirits, and I know well
They Will pledge me, though they drink as deep as Hell.
All ye then that are flesh't in Tyranny,
View me, your ruthlesse President and Mirror;
Now all Earths glew^d together villainy,
Dissolve, and melt, with pale, and ghastly Terror:
Lo I unclasp the Book of Memory,
Rowze bedridden Age, foul sin, and smooth faced error,
And with all these awake Antiquity,
To sing my Actions to Posterity.
In my Conception, Nature strove with Kind;
When in the hea^e of Blood, and Lusts desire,
Imagination moved (a part of Mind)
And with the Seed commixt an ardent Fire;
A strange Effect, these Powers should be combyn'd,
The Mortal, with the Immortail Part Conspire
To form a Prodegy, the World to fright,
To blemish Humanes, and distayne the Light.
For Why, my Mother in the strength of Thought,
Proposed unto her Apprehensiue Power,
Some monstrous Birth, by Natures Error wrought,
On which all Plannets of good luck did lowre;
My Sire, Corruption to this Fancy brought;
My Mother languish't many a tedious hour;
Travel brought Sweat, and Groans; She longed to see,
Her burth'nous Fraught; at last She brought forth Me.
My Legs came foremost; an unequal Pair;
Much like the Badgers, that makes swiftest speed
In ways uneven: which showed that no course fair
Should crown my Life, and actions to succeed:
Hollow my Cheeks; upon my Breast, black Hair,
The Characters of spleen and virulent deeds;
My Beetle-Brow, and my fire-cyrcled Eye,
Foreshew'd me Butcher, in my Cruelty.
Then as a Brow bent Hill, much vndermin'd,
Casts scowling Shadows, over the neighboring Plains,
Which th'approchers fear, as being enclyn'd
To bury all, his spacious Reach contains,
So Mountaine-like was I contract behind;
That my stretched Arms (plumpe with ambitious veins)
Might crush all Obstacles, and throw them down,
That stood betwixt my Shadow and a Crown.
And as a Ravens Beak, pointed to the South
Crokes following Ill, from sharp and rau'nous maw;
Such cry Yorkes Bird sent from a fatal mouth;
Boading confusion to each wight I saw.
To add to these (as Token of more Ruth)
The Amazed Women started; for each Iaw
Appeared with teeth; which Mark made these Ils, good;
That I should woorry Souls; suck humane Blood.
My Father rau'd; my Mother cursed her Womb;
Th'impris'ned winds shook Earth, (...)
and burst their Caves;
And Time (swollen big with sad Events to come)
Did send forth Throes, echoed by gasping Graves;
The Lights of Heaven, dropped on the worlds dark Tomb;
Horror inuades the Maine, whose raging Waves
Do foame, and swell above their bounds (the Earth)
These fatal Signs reigned at my fearful Birth.
In progress of my Childhood; with delight
I taught my Nature to see Fowls to bleed;
Then at the Slaughterhouse with hungry sight,
Upon slain Beasts my sensual part did feed;
And (that which gentler Natures might affright)
I searched their Entrayles, as in them to read
(Like The Ancient Ba^ds) what fate should thence be^ide,
To cherish Sin, and propagate my Pride.
Then (as I waxed in Maturity)
I would frequent the Sessions, and those Places
Where guilty Men received their doomes to Dye;
As well to note the Gestures, and the Graces
Of those were cast; as of the Judges Eye;
How these look pale; the others Front out-faces
Eene death it selse, and hence I learned how
To conquer Pity, with a bended Brow.
Now (to confirm these Notions in my Brain
And to chase thence, all Natural Forms of Good)
To press to Executions soothed my vain,
To see men reeking in their Sweat, and Blood;
O how remorslesse was I of their Pain!
It was my Cordial, and my nourishing ^ood:
These ruthles Thoughts, were in my heart so rise,
That I could laugh at Death, and sport with Life.
A^ Butchers and loathed Hang-men, in their Life;
(Through Bent of Mind, and isntrumental parts)
Being often used unto the bloody Knife,
Make Blood, and Death, the habits of their Hearts:
And therefore since with them, such Acts are ri^e,
The Laws of Kind (in Liew of their deserts)
^xempted have from Life and Deaths stern Iewries,
Who (for their Natures) might well rank with Furies.
So this habitual Custom, ever breeds,
Such fixed impression in th'Affects, and Sense;
That thence the Mind receaues Corruptiue Seeds,
Nor does sincerely take the difference
Twixt Cruel actions, and compassionate deeds;
So Man, and Beast, with Guylt, and Innocence,
Are all alike to Tyrants, in their swayes;
Where sensual Will commands; and not obaies.
Thus as Contagious Air breeds some disease,
Which all unseen creeps on in foul infection;
Till at the lat the vital parts it ceaze,
And in his Mortal kind, attaines perfection:
So by Corruption of such Thoughts as these:
And giving way to Humor and Affection,
Pernicious Ills increased; and thus I found
How Pity lost, and Cruelty won her Ground.
Now, for I knew great spirits in Ignorance,
Were far unfit to sway, or to Command:
Since cunning Arts, do Pollitick Ends advance,
I sought to join their Strengths into one Band;
And (t'arme my self against the Threats of Chance)
I gave my self corruptly t'understand
Letters, and Arts, who^e superficial Skill,
Might lay the Ground, to propagate my Ill.
Hence were my Organs apt, and Parts disposed
To give my Intellect, the Forms of Things:
Hence was the Chao^ of my Brain disclosed,
That through each sense, conue^'d their hidden springs;
Their winding Streams yet, in my Sea were Cloz'd;
Which made me swell in state, and surge with Kings;
Yet with no Line, or Plummet, to be sounded;
Nor in no Limit, but a Crown, be bounded.
In my Designs, I bore no wexen face,
To take the Print of any Forms within;
I had a Forge, that tempered it like Brass;
Not by my Tongue, my Heart was known, or seen;
Between these two there was so ample space,
That Words and Thoughts, were never of a kin;
With Threats I could all^e, smile, when I fround;
Kiss, when I killed, and heal, when I did wound.
From Schoole-mens Customs, I observed some Skill;
What Is their nice Learning, and their wrangling S^r^fe,
But Gain or Glory, to turn Good to Ill;
As if from Reason* Passion we derive?
Then since these En^s, in Sciences reign still;
And few profess them for an after Life,
As they took swindge then from their Polliticke schools
So I took License from their Positive Rules.
What Midas touched turned Gould, such learnings use,
For like the Spider, and Industrious Be,
What one makes Good, the other turns to abuse;
Such was the Nature of my Subtilty:
With Good, and Ill, so played I fast and loose,
Converting Things of most Indifferency,
To the peculiar Habit of my mind,
And to my forecast thought all others blind.
I did allow of Colleges, and Schools
And learned their Logical distinction;
Yet I perceau'd the greatest Clerks but Fools,
In Judgment, raw; weak, in Prevention,
I heard their Lectures, could digest their Rules,
And make good use of their Division,
Yet like to Wards, in Nonage still I held them,
Though they were witty, yet could Wisdom weild the^.
Religion I professed (as most men saw)
But in my Heart denied it Reverence;
For I esteemed it as a Penal Law,
To curb, and keep Men in obedience;
Yet from her Ground, such Notions I would draw,
To touch my Wished point of Eminence,
That, I, in others, would exact her Breach;
As Great Ones in their Lives such Doctrine teach.
Arts raise their Collumnes upon Natures Bases;
And but observe, and play, what She propounds,
And every Act of science enterlaces
Humors, and Mirth, among their scoenes profound,
But Cunning only, is the Art that graces;
And most affects, in this Conspicuous Round;
Which having shown, with Fame we part the stage,
And others enter, moved with self same Rage.
I saw it was a Work of Natures Kind,
Ambitiously to prick-men on to state:
By Force, or Cunning to make way, or Wind
Through any Course, whose End might make them Great
Huma^ity (by good sense I did find)
To be compact of Power, and ^lye Deceats,
Proposing Rules to our own wish in Fortune,
Thus each Man's selfe-good, did him most importune.
All aim at Wealth, or Pomp, so catch at Fame,
Vertu's invisible, therefore not known:
Few Love Her, for herself, but for her Name.
Yet what is without us, we would have our own:
And Honor (being vsurp't by Virtues Claim)
Seems but an Accident, in Virtue grown;
If Accidents by substance only live,
Take virtue from us, what can Honor give.
I was not one of Virtues fond Approuers,
That Courted her Imaginary Face,
I saw her Servants and her doting Lovers
Were poor, and bare, exempt from State, or Place;
I saw that he, her Colors that discouers,
And bears the opinion only of her Grace,
Did make most show* with Truth to be entyre;
To be, is vain, to seem, men most desire.
It was not in my Days, as once of old,
When Virtue had the Worlds fair Emperie,
Then was that ^nnocent Time the Age of Gold,
Whose Coin, was Truth, whose stamp, Integrity,
Now moneys love, proves us of baser Mould;
For as the Ages fell successively,
From Gold to Silver, thence to Brass, now worse,
So men translate their chief good to the Purse.
He that insinuates with Policy,
That Hats and Hearts, with admiration draws:
That shadows Tyrannous Thoughts, with Clemency;
And keeps his height with populare applause,
Intycles Goodness, with Pr^sperity,
And makes his Acts authentical, as Laws,
Proves, Actions fortunate, though nere so vile,
To get the Type of ^ame, and Virtues Style.
Then each Man's Deeds has Pra^se, his Actions, Grace,
If squared by Form, and ru'ld by Imitation,
And Honor, got by Blood* by Wealth, or Place,
Will hold his die i^ glost by O^tentation;
But where both Truth, and Colors want, all is base:
Then if we use the Virtue most in Fashion,
Honor attends v^, Grace will never swerue;
All strive to have, but few men to deserve.
Clours, not Truth then, win the Worlds reward;
For like th'obsequious, mercenary Mind,
Few love the Merit all affect Reward;
And so for Current, Counterfeits are Covn'd:
Then no Ascent so steep, no Door so ba^'d;
But he that with Deceit the World can blind,
May make his way (though stradling in his Gate)
Through Heads vncouer'd to the Chair of state.
And such was I: for Wit, and Fortune make
Crooked Things strait, to these Opinion cleaues;
Which Alchimy, for Current Gold does take;
And like the busy Spynner ever Weaues
Slight Webs of Praise, and all for Greatness sake:
And thus we see how slye Deceit, deceaues
The credulous Route, Whose suffrage (though but Breath)*
Yet from that Air, Greatness takes Life, or Death.
Proud of this Knowledge I scru'd into the state,
And of that Nature got intelligence;
There saw I public Fortunes private hate,
In several tempers of impatience.
One stirs too soon, and brings on his hard sat,
Others subdue with time and providence:
Some mix their bloods to gain the^ powerful friends,
And by that means work safest to their ends.
I saw in Friendship Virtue best did suite;
In Factions, Power, and the most pollitick Head,
Since it can only plot, not execute;
With meaner Fortunes, best was seconded;
Some Wise, some Valtant, some of base repute;
And all like several simples tempered;
Which well prepared by a proiecting Brain,
Give Greatness strength, Ambitious hopes maintain.
I noted Statesmen, in their Agitations,
How they dispatched suitors that implored them;
The Followers of their Fortunes, and their Fashions,
How like to Demy-Gods they did adore them;
I saw (in offered Cause of several Passions)
With what unmoved Countenance they bore them;
Grief, cast not down, Joy, spritned not their Eyes;
Rage, bent no Brow, their very Fear seemed wise.
This taught my spleen should never open too fast,
That Pollici's not sound, if full of P^ares;
What Is violent in Ambition will not last;
The Foord is shallow'st, where the Channel roares;
I saw by them, 'twas waine to spend my Blast:
For first we must take in, then shut the Doors,
And but by secret Posterns, to convey
Our Aims by close, and vndiscouer'd way.
I learned like-wise, to appease an Enemy,
In Terms, without Hostility and War;
To win an Agent, without Jealousy,
And make him tractable, and Regular,
To hold Affection in Confederacy
Without Expense, and to prevent, or bar
Seditious Tumults without violence;
And keep Men, longing, still in Patience.
To get close Friends about a Foreign Prince,
To further home designs with Secrecy,
And (to relieve the private State Expense)
Make public Purses fill the Treasury:
In this they used Natures Intelligence;
That as the clouds do render plenteously,
The Sun exhaled Steames, to Earths increase;
So subjects change base dross, for welthy peace.
This is the Wisdom (says the ancient Saw)
That rules the Stars; outworkes the Wheel of Chance;
And from this Model did I seek to draw
Sound Principles, my Hopes with Haps t'aduance:
And as ill manners first made soundest Law;
So these Instructions chasing Ignorance;
Mine own corrupt Ends prompted me t'acquire
Not Laws to curb, but Ground^ orkes to aspire.
Also in counsel, I observed and noted
How (...), took Fire, and Blase
From others Light, Whose Innocent Margents quoted
From their Or^ginals, did win them Praise:
How some by Grace sat; Some again that doted
Through feeble Age; (yet traced in Politic ways)
Could help defects, and see with others eyes;
Extract their Wits, and make themselves seem wise.
These (like the Others) labored not to sound
The depth of Things; but fraught with Burden light,
They sayl^d more shallow, near unto the Ground;
And at the Tides return, discharged their Freight:
In quest of G^arie, all their Strengths were bound:
Not Matter, but the circumstance more slight
They touched at still; whose ma^^ Entents and Hopes,
Were ^o inuolue their Aims, in sounder Scopes.
Yet did this Mixture of Variety,
(Like melting Ha^le, and sollid Pearl, or Stone)
Seem like the Elements in Quality;
Assembled by a Disproportion:
For as their Iars work on Humanity;
And make sweet Music, in Confusion;
So Statesmen ioin'd in one, unlike in Parts;
One Body prove, one life, in several Hearts.
B^t as the Planets have a proper sway,
And move to Heaven (that turns them) contrary;
So I, from all, drew a peculiar way,
To right my self against Natures Injury;
For since She so mishap't my Bodies Clay,
I labored in my Minds Deformity
To mock her Work, She made me like to none,
Therefore I thought to be my self alone.
And as your self loved Politics, n'ere care
What Tempests vulgar Vessels do betide,
So that their mighty Argoses may share
Their ruined States, made Prize (...) their Pride:
So in the Ship of state, my self did fare;
(Driu'n with Ambitions Gale, and swelling Tide)
I forced no public wrack; no private Fall,
So I might rule and reign sole Lord of All.
Thus have I Charactered my spirit and state
In general Terms; next shall Ye hear applied
The sequel of mine Actions, to that Fate,
Which Heaven ordained, as Justice to my Pride:
This my Praeludium; now I must relate
My Life, in horrid sins diuersifi'd:
There note how saile-hoyst Barks incur a shel^e,
When Greatness, would be greater, then it self.
FINIS.
THE LEGEND OF RICHARD THE THIRD.
TO him that Impt my Fame with Clio's Quill;
Whose Magic raised me from Obliuions den;
That writ my Story on the Muses Hill;
And with my Actions Dignified his Pen:
He that from Heltcon sends many a Rill;
Whose Nectared Veins, are drunk by thirsty Men:
Crowned be his Style, with Fame; his Head, with Bays;
And none detract, but gratulate his Praise.
Yet if his Scoenes have not engrost all Grace,
The much famed Action could extend on Stage;
If Time, or Memory, have left a place
For Me to fill; t'enforme this Ignorant Age;
To that intent I show my horrid Face;
Impressed with Fear, and Characters of Rage:
Nor Wits, nor Chronicles could ere contain,
The Hell-deepe Reaches, of my soundlesse Brain.
Then hear Ambitious men, Souls drowned in senses,
And ever dry in quenchles thirst of Glory:
And ye that have no ears (ye hearts of Princes)
Measure your pomp by process of my story:
There is a Fate your boundles hope conuinces,
Though naught confine ye in this transitory:
Those that clime high in mischief rip'st of all,
Have still the feareful'st and most rotten fall.
What time my father York began his claim,
Whence civil, and uncivil Arms did grow:
When purple gore deaw'd many a fertile Plain,
And swords made furrows, English hearts to sow,
When sons by sires, and sires by sons were slain;
And Englands Commonweal a common woe:
When Heaven rained Vengeance; a Hell sulpher and spewed,
And every Age and sex those sad times rew'd.
I, though too young as then to manage steel,
(Yet in my thoughts the Theory of Arms)
My swelling veins and feeble nerves did feel,
The emulation of those hot Alarm's.
My Glories thirst made Appetite so reele,
Between my peaceful state and boistrous storms:
That in the heat and feruor of desire,
I (...) on Nature and set Blood on fire.
My fathers sword or title set on foot,
Whose Fate grown ripe he dropped to Earth and perish't:
But we the Sons, (green branches of his root)
The Aspiring virtue of his Hopes still cherish^,
I and my Brother held in swift poursuit
The royal Game; whose thoughts were jointly nourish't
With the possession of that chased prize,
As for a Crown who would not Nimrodize.
Now (seconded with Right, and wars ^aire merits)
I mixed my blood with gall, my spleen with ire:
Here I began to Ioutalize my spirit,
Midst thundering shock, dar^ing Cyclopian fire,
Fame pricked us on to that we were to inherit,
And we made way through blood, nor could retire,
Till on the Rubbish of our Enemy,
We reard the Ensign of our victory.
Then was the Kingly Lion (...)
held at bay
Coopt in the Tower; whose Lioness raged in vain:
To rescue, or redeem our purchased prey,
I pitched more toils wherein her whelp was taken,
Edward her fair Son (glory of the day)
My han^ eclipst with foul and bloody stain:
A murder, that might make the Sarres to wink,
The fixed Poles to shake, and Atlas shrink.
Next (to secure our parts from Henri^s side)
The By being barred, the chance fell on the Maine,
And damned Policy, instructed Pride.
To stretch my Conscience to a higher Strain:
The Devil whispered, that my hands not did
In Henry's Gore, my hope to rise was vain:
My Swords sharp point brought his Quietus est,
Which leuel'd to his Heart, sent Him to Rest.
Hence cruel Thoughts took Root, and ouerspred
My Syn-manur'd Soil, Nature^ shapelesse Frame;
The Ground grew Rank, with Blood and Murder fed;
And fearelesse Impudence, checked blushing Shame;
I cherish't Tyranny, struck Pity dead,
My Rage, like Salamander, lived in Flame,
And even as Drink, does keep the Dropsy, Dry;
So more I Drunk, the more Desire did Fry.
Yet now (secure) Edward enjoyed the Crown,
Wars stern Alarums here began to cease;
Banks, turned to Pillowes; Fields to Beds of Down,
And Boystrous Arms, to silken Robes of Peace;
Wars Counselor resumed the States-mans ^owne,
And welcomed Bliss grew big with all increase,
Wealth followed Peace, and Ease succeeded Plenties,
And needful Cates, were turned to wanton Dainties.
Now Mars his Brood, were chained to Women's Locks;
Surgeons, and Leaches, used for Venus Harms:
They that erst lived by Wounds now thrive by the Pox,
For smoothest Pleasure, still ensues rough Arms;
Whiles I, gryn'd like a Woolfe, lier'd like a Fox,
To see soft Men, turned swine, by Cyrces Charms,
And being not shaped for Love, employed my Wits,
In subtle Wiles, ^ exceed these hum'rous Fits.
O how I bit my Tongue when Edward wiu'd!
That (with the rest) forced Shoutes of, God give Joy;
When to the Center of my Heart there diu'd
Curses, and rankorous wishes to destroy;
My hopes grew Dead; Yet ( Hydra-like) suruiu'd
Fresh Heads of Strength, which Mischief did employ,
And my smooth Gen^us soothed me in the Ear,
That Blood, would Sanguine the pale Cheek of fear.
VVhiles wanton Edward doates on Mistress Shore,
Whose Lust, and Tryfling, soyld the face of Things,
And Coun^eilors (like Pandars) kept the Door,
My Thoughts were climing to the State of Kings:
He, painted Beauty; I, did Crowns adore;
And ever Impt Ambitions Ayrie Wings,
To reach at Fame, and Fortune, which might crown
Hope, with success; and Wit with Fames Renown.
And even as he (with an Insatiate sight)
Beheld a beauteous Face, a sparkling Eye,
Admired a pleasant wit (as Loves delight)
And still adored Cupids Deity:
So I (enslam'd with Glories Appetite)
Did Court the shining Beams of Majesty,
Prized Policy, Altars to Fortune reared,
He, studied to be loved; I, to be feared.
Clarence his Life in Fortunes tickle wheel
Had now a slipperie Stand; for (dreadlesse) He
In sound Estate of Health, began to recle,
(As Natures Power must yield to Tyranny)
My Adamant had pointed to his Steel,
And subtly drew him to his Destiny:
I had a Craft, to undermine each State,
My Engines, were the Instruments of Fate.
For why, an Ignorant Wisard, taught by Me,
That never knew a Letter in the Row
From his Spelled Lesson, took the Letter G,
To work my rising, and his overthrow:
And by a foolish childish Prophecy,
(As Fools and children still tell all they know)
Insinuates with the fearful King, that G,
Should put to death his Royal Progeny.
So harmless Clarence superstitiously
In sent to close Death to the Fatal Tower;
But I that charmed, fulfilled the Augurie,
So Polliticks kill far off with unseen Power,
With sheathed Points I wrought my Tyranny;
Thus could I whet, prepare, feed, and devour,
Concoct, Euacuate, with most nimble have,
Blood was my Cheer, and other Feasts, my Fast.
So George rid post; and at his Iourneyes end
(To quench his Thirst, and cool his bloody Sweat)
His gentle Host (being my secret friend)
Did broach a Butt, to allay his dangerous heat,
But so he sow'st him in it, that he did send
Poor George to rest, in everlasting Seat,
Yet no tart Wine, But Malmsey stopped his Breath;
So did he not the sharp'st, but sweetest Death.
Next, Time an other Point begins to attain,
When Edward (past the Solstice of his years)
With necessary change begins to wayne,
And I thrust in to undergo his cares,
Life (sencible of Pleasure) now feels pain,
Earth must to Earth; as natures course out-weares:
His Scene is done, Death strikes him to the Heart,
So parts the Stage; and now begins my part.
Now Back-steel'd Buckingham I made my Friend,
Him I sustained with hope, and fed with Air,
To further me, in my aspyring End,
In whom I found will, power, and faithful care:
I shot the Shaft, and he the Bow^ did bend;
And both could run with Hound, and hold with Hare;
And though to cross his Aim I had a Clause,
Yet strongest Agents, back the weakest Cause.
Next, Rivers, Vaughan, Gray, (that stood in light
And justly enterpos'd my unjust Aim)
Did feel the vengeance of my fell despite,
Whose Deaths did more secure my lawless Claim:
Poor simple souls they were to stand for Right
Not having Strength: for Virtues power is lame;
It Is desperate folly to oppose, not strong,
Then sink with Right, it is better wink at wrong.
So Regent made, Protector to the Princes;
Bare Heads, bent Knees, sooth Mischief, second hope;
Religious shows, do cover close Pre^enses,
More Towers, more Titles* are my Fancies scope;
Now I contract my wits, summon my Senses,
To smooth the rugged Way, the Doors to open
That lead to State; the Law being in my Will,
I had a License to make good my Ill.
I played with Law as with a waxen nose,
Now made it crookt, then straight, then saddle wise:
And its firm brow I bent unto the toes,
To make a footstool on it for me to rise.
What Wisdom stablisht policy ore'throwes,
Corrupts her pure Soul, bleares her fairest eyes,
Law's a mute female Judge: Gifts, Wit, and Tongue,
Often prostitute her parts to lust and wrong.
Truth had a tattering stand, I made Commander,
Tyrants are ever fearful of the good:
And Innocence in vain opposes slander,
Whom I accused or censured, who withstood?
My Brain was as an intricate Meander,
Whence horror issued and the streams of blood.
My Soul, like Stix, and Jove might swear by me,
As naught more adverse to his Detty.
Now whiles I trembled in an Agony,
Sole Sovereignty with safest means contriuing:
My working head (my Counsels Consistory)
Debates how I might reign, the Princes living:
My powers disioyn'd, and (for security)
Neither, to other a sure Hostage giving.
But in this doubtful conflict le^t me still
Between my Reason and my sensual Will.
Reason objects (to countercheck my pride)
How Kings are natures Idols, made of clay:
And though they were by mortals Deifide,
Yet in the Grave, Beggars as good as they:
That Sense was slavish, and for man no guide,
That Reason should Command and Will, obey:
And that with all worlds pomp and Fortunes good,
We still were nothing else but flesh and blood.
Reason inferred, Men in effect were Kings,
If they could rule themselves, and conquer Passion:
And that Desire soared with Icarus Wings,
When it out-stript her Bounds of limitation,
That Her Power only, could distinguish things;
Show what was Real, what but Form, and Fashion,
Suggests likewise, that man was overthrown,
Not more by others Flattery, then his own
Farther She urged, that Fortune had no Power
But in Men's Ignorance; although She boast
To bless, or cross, as She does smile, or Lowre,
And to make Fools of those She Flatters most:
That Virtue only was the Minds rich Dowre;
By Wealth, not bought, by Poverty not lost,
Which who so had not, ever purchased loss,
His Pomp was Bane, and Titles, but his Cross.
This Reason does suggest; which I convince;
And prove those Grounds for idle, false, and vain,
I knew her Power, was in decay of sense,
Which Age, not Youth; did Foster, and maintain;
And though your sagest Morrallists from hence
Gave Humane Precepts, with much thanklesse pain;
Such meager Wisdom, writ with Death-like claws,
I held as foolish as your old VViues Sawes.
Low Thoughts, in high-pitcht Hopes, despair do bring,
And as one walking when the stars appear;
Night fills his Eye, whence Shapes of Darkness spring,
And all his Thoughts, prove Visions by his Fear:
But when Aurora sets the Day on VVing,
And drives the Rauen-black- Night from Heavens bright sphere,
Then Flowers, and Trees spangled with dewes he spies,
And worlds of Glories glitter in his Eyes.
So when great Spirits do shrink in cloudy Fears,
Loosing their strength, diminishing their Pleasures,
Then Wealth, and Glory, and what else is theirs,
In darkest Womb do bury all their Treasures;
But when a Kingly boldness them vpreares,
Treading on cloth of state their solemn Measures;
Then do they graspe (in vigor of their Powers)
The Globe, and Scepter, and kiss Heaven with Towers.
Now then (quoth I) let tastlesse lives Define
Virtue, and her Reward, in after Time;
Richard, thou have an Essence more Divine,
Which Glories Flame, has purged from grossest Slime,
Crowns be thy Objects, and those Ears of thine
Relish no Music but a Sphere-like Chime,
Thus coucht I Reason with my Eagles wings,
If Reason rul^d Men, then what need of Kings?
No; I looked up, Nature bid me aspire,
So taught the fiery Essence of my soul,
Hearts are small Things, but infinite in Desire,
Which neither bounds containd, nor Bars control,
The Flesh, is vapor, and the spirit, a Fire;
And Iouiall Minds (when these begin to inroule)
Do part the Dross, and on the Bodies Head,
Dissolve in Thunder, what his Baseness bred.
So, on I went, in devilish politic wise;
The Young Prince now from safest sanctuary
A Prela^e forced (some such can tamporize)
Who held with Fiends to enfring Church liberty:
The Child being brought to me (as it was my Guize)
I kissed, and Blessed, with fein'd sincerity
The Innocent Soul, and therein did fulfill,
The part of Judas; for I meant to kill.
Him, with his Brother, lodged I in the Tower,
A pair ill met, to undergo like Fate;
Now wrinckled Brows (like Skies, before a Shower)
Spread gloomy Darkness over Englands State:
All sought to save; I purposed to deuou^e;
My Mines are laid, and they prevent too late;
Counsels divide; and a confused Rumor,
Time sent, as Throes, unto my swelling Tumor.
Now did I use each working Instrument,
Some Fyles to take off; some smooth Tools, to glaze;
Some serves t'insinuate; all for close intent,
Wrought one effectual end, in several ways;
I was prime Mouer in this Firmament:
And they, the Sphere-like Mouers to my praise,
But Buckingham, my Jupiter of Light,
Whose Influence, was Mirror of my Might.
And as the Catholic Spirit in Man applies
Each Sense and Organ, to their proper Ends,
Uses the Heart, the Brain, the Ears, and Eyes,
And to th'impulsiue soul, those Powers extends:
So in this pollitick Body, I devise,
By Buckingham (my Spirit) who slackes, or bends
My useful Engines; Him I made my Hand,
Temploy his power, with theirs, to my command.
Now good Lord Hastings (great in all Men's Grace)
(Of th'aduerse Faction, Fautor and chief Head)
I heau'd at, and removed him from his place,
That so the Rest might faint, vncomforted;
My Blood-hound Catesby foiled him in the Chase;
Who erst by him being raised, cherisht, and Bred,
Knowing himsel^e too weak, to stand for Right,
Proves treacherously Wise, and Friend to Might.
Thus could I Saint a Devil with a Fiend,
And make one Engine other to drive out,
From a main Faction cull, a secret Friend,
To hold with hope, and to prevent with Doubt,
I had a Power to break, what would not bend,
In cautions, used my Sentinel and Scoute;
In Jealousy, had Argoes hundred eyes,
And Nero's cruel Heart, to tyrannize.
How cunningly did Buckingham, and I,
Pretend, and set a color in the Treason
Of Hastings, to our Lives? how suddenly
We Butchered, (without Form of Law, or Reason)
That harmless Man? then gulled Simplicity
With forced fear; as if at that same Season,
Erinnis, and the Furies had been bent,
To cast their palenes on our damned intent?
And what a piece of Justice did I show
On Mistress Shore? when (with a fained hate
To unchaste Life) I forced her to go
Bare-foote, on penance, with dejected State?
But now her Fame by a vild Play does grow;
Whose Fate, the Women so commisserate,
That who (to see my Justice on that Sinner)
Drinks not her Tears; and makes her Fast, their dinner?
Now, whiles all wish to see young Edward Crowned,
And in each Place a solemn Preparation;
In my vast Sea, their Streams of Joy were drowned,
Whose Aim was bent to cross their Expectation:
For Buckingham, and I, had laid the Ground
To raise my Column, and suppress their Station;
And much vntemper'd Mortar was in hand,
To Dawbe, and Ciment, what could never stand.
The gain and Glorie-thirsting smooth Divine,
More learned, then true; yet of less Art, then Fame;
And many others with him do Combine;
To sleike, and pollish, my corrupter Claim;
And whiles their Wits do work to make me shine,
To guild my Guilt, and glorify my shame;
Like Racking clouds the people flock, and run,
With pitchie Breathes, to obscure my rising Son.
But I, that held the Conscience but a Saw,
In my self-love, con^ounding Idle Hate,
Found Tricks t'impeach the Princes claim, by Law,
Proving mine true; theirs Illigitimate,
And to this end subborn'd one Doctor Shaw
With servile Tongue, and Spirit adulterate
To preach dead Ed^ards slander, with my Mother,
And Bastardize the Issue of my Brother.
It was suggested then, most Impiously,
Edward, nor ^larence to be lawful Payres;
B^t (by th'erronious Rule of Phisnomy)
To be the Issue of some stranger Syres:
That Edward had with fowlest Brgamy
Blemish't his Stock, and had no rightful Heirs;
Thus Father, Mother, Brother, Race, and Name
I would have vilify'd, to advance my claim.
Report went out; and whispring Rumor drew
From every quarter, Men of each condition;
To know the Sequel, whether false, or true,
To clear their doubts and to inform Suspicion:
And to Paul's Cross (where State-foode fresh, and new,
After a Change, to feed their Inquisition)
The many Headed Beast, do flock, and gather,
To hear strange Tidings, from their Ghostly Father.
There Doctor Shaw stepped up: this was his Theam^
The Bastard slips do never take deep root;
Who from his Conduit pipe sent such a Stream,
As drench't his Audience from the Head to foot:
Such Milk and Honey, with such clouted Cream
Flowed from his Wit; and from his Tongue did shoot
Such spleenefull Venom; that all Men (perplexed)
Fear^d He Would go mad, running beside his text.
Where, having slandered Edwards Progeny,
Taxed his Life; and showed his Praecontract,
Defamed our Mother with Adultery;
Edward, nor Clarence, got in lawful Act;
Then proving Me (though most prepost^rously)
Yorkes true borne son; by us it was Compact
That I (by Miracle) should come in Place,
At the instant of my Praise, to meet with Grace.
He lo^kes us often, I came not on my Cue;
At last ( of course) descending to my Praise
Home it was sent, which done, I came in view
And spread amongst them my abhorred Rays;
Then Shaw (Verbatim) does again renew
What he had spoke, Things foul, need double Glaze,
Forgetting quite that twice sod Meat, would dull,
Witless, as shameless, praised me to the full.
Which (in Effect) was thus: That I alone
Was pattern, of each Princely Quality,
For Arms, and virtuous Disposition,
Vnparalell'd; That in Form, Face, and Eye,
I bore the Figure, and Proportion,
O^ York my Sire: nay, to the Extremity
His hired Tongue, my hope, and Glory brings
I was not borne t^ obey; but rule with Kings.
Which twice rubbed over, grossest Flattery,
(Met with opinions so preiudicate)
Enforced the Hearers universally
To vent in murmr, their concealed Hate.
Another too (of the bald-Frierie)
Instructed on like subject to Dilate,
Grew hoarse; and in the midst (abrupt) came down
Whose Hyre, was Hate; perpetual Shame, his crown.
Such Doctors were (I do not say there are)
Whose Breaths scall'd Heaven; Hearts clogged with worlds desire,
That without Scruple, touch of Shame, or Fear,
Would wrest the Scripture, to make Truth a Liar:
And these like Mercenarie Men appear;
That love the Word, for Wealth; the work, for Hyre;
whose tutored tongues, to take off Great Men's Blames,
Set stronger Seals on theirs, and their own Shames.
To give more color to this Enterprise;
My Agent Buckingham, (with wits high Strains)
Prepares the City States; men chiefly Wise,
In giving way to things above their Brains:
Such as were seen in Measures, Weights, and Siz
Of Grocerie; with Bread, B^ere, Ale, and Grains;
And better knew the weight of Bags, and Pence,
Then matters of this weight, and Consequence.
These notable, Wise-wealthy M^gistrates;
(Such they were then, what ever they are now)
Did only see with the Eyes of higher States;
And what these thought (though bad) they would allow:
The sweet Recorder, and the City Waytes
Did make them sound; and every Man knew how
Better to Coppie, from their looks Austere,
Then take true Notes of Wit from them, by Ear.
These Gray-hayr'd Sages, (Grave, in saying little)
My Subtle Buckingham like Wax had wrought;
Who surely sealed together with the People,
He brought to tender, what I long had sought;
And being their Mouth deliu'ring to a tittle,
Both what they would, and what our selves forethought,
Solicit me (and they would have no Nay)
To take the Crown, the Scepter, and the Sway.
He shows the public Good that would ensue,
The Peoples general liking, and Applause,
Prevention of seditious Plots that grew,
Through want of Execution of the Laws:
Said, that old sores, would fester, and renew,
If I took not the Sword, to right their Cause:
Behold us then (quoth He) with Pitties Eye,
Of your accustomed Grace, and Clemency.
Then I (with hart-cheek't tongue) made this Reply:
That, though I saw their heavy states with Ruth;
Yet so much was my loves sincerity,
Unto the promising Hopes of Edwards Youth;
Withal, so loath to stain Humility
(Professing seemelesse Zeal; and naked Truth)
That I (unapt for Rule, and Sovereignty)
Preferred content, to highest Monarchy.
He farther does enforce, and I deny:
He pleads my Right, and I dissemble strong;
Objects the Princes confirmed Bastardie,
And still the Maidens part is all my Song:
At last he dri^es his subtle Oratorie
To show of Spleen, that I their lives did wrong:
And if (quoth he) you will not Condescend,
We must elect some other: there is an End.
This Sc^ne so well performed on either part,
The play drew on to a Catastrophe,
I added to States double dealing Art
Devices that by Ebbing, filled my Sea;
I hung off; to be drawn by the Desert
Of making Conscience of the charge, my Plea,
To take as forced, what more then Heaven I wished,
And to which, would through troubled Hell have fish't.
I still put Bait on Bait, to make my Hook
The more Invisible, and gave away
More then men ask't: men used more care to look
Where any Suite but worth the begging lay,
Then how to get my winged Hand to the Book,
Proud Beggary made the whole week Holiday,
For Saboths, Beggary was a work of worth,
While merit grew as bamefull as the North.
Then made I civil men, make Riot way,
Men by Art Civil, that are ryotous ever,
When men play Arts prize once, they fight, and play,
Such danger in the open Field, is never.
Art drawn from Nature, draws her Soul away,
And then from Beasts, you can not men disseuer,
But in the worst part; These men for round Fees
Squared Arts, and all Terms out by Policies.
For Fees, I made them lawful prove my claim;
Disabling both my Nephews to Inherit;
Gold sets up marks, Hoyles, pricks for any Aim,
That still shall hit, how wide soever Merit;
Goulds Chymick Skill, can cure an aged Mayme,
And in at deaths last gasp breath Youths first Spirit,
Nay, so much, Art, and Nature, Gold controules,
That men it makes live without manly Souls.
Gold got by Begging; Begging not forgot
Could be at any hand; but (varied now)
For my good now they begged; that theirs might not
The Font find dry, since ever all the flow
Their Sewres renewed still; and made sees their Pot.
It Is sacred Truth: First good to our selves we owe;
Thus for themselves they Supplication made,
That I would take on me the Royal Trade.
I made it nice for my Good, (as from theirs
They turned their own ends over, all to mine)
And at the last for their Good heard their Prayers;
And as by any Floods side sinkes a Pine
To take more Root; and curle his leauie Hayres
The more in Bows, and Arms, that kiss the Skyne;
So stoopt I; so to rise; and being up
Both with their Goods, and Bloods, I crowned my cup.
This fearful doubt then being thus decided,
As a Praeludium to my Tragic Maine:
The factious Peers now joined that were divided,
Who with all sollemne Rites confirmed my Reign.
Thus desperately I took the Clew that guided
Through Laberinthian doubts; and now in vain
That monstrous Minotaure (the people) raged,
Whose turbulent Breath I calmed; and fiercenes swag'd.
Now though all heads are bare, all bend their knees,
Yet (in themselves) my Greatness they compare
To Senecaes high-stiled Tragedies,
Embost with gold, most glorious, rich and fair,
Which as they open, Thyestes greets their eyes,
Who proved his Childrens Tomb; and then they fare
Like men that see with horror, read with hate,
And so abhorred was my golden state.
For having died my hands in humane gore,
Made black my Soul; my wit a plot does ca^t
To feed my ravenous appetite with more,
My Gorge was empty for a new repast,
But such a one, not Ages long before
Offered to Time; or Fames all-sounding Blast:
Now does my Conscience play the Cowards part,
And Blood chased from my face, flies to my heart.
Then Joy, with Fear; and Hope, with deep Despair,
Adulterate their Powers, and did engender
Confusion, Horror, and blood-thirsting Care,
Which Passion (mixed with distraction) render;
Now Nature shrunk, and set on end my Hair,
My Heart pants thick, my Pulse beats slow, and tender,
At the Conception of a Thought, whose Hell
Contains that Torment where the Devils dwell.
In shapelesse Darkness I was then confined,
And every thing (that erst was my delight)
Turned to a Fiend; bro^d waking, I was blind,
As if enfolded in the veil of Night,
Astonishment, did all my senses bind,
Shame did appear; dead Pity rose to light,
When I conceau'd the Murder of the Princes,
Which Heaven, and Hell, Time, Nature, death, conuinces.
Yet thus my Devilish spirit shook off this Trance,
And thus my Genius chid: O Coward faint!
Did not thy wit above thy Birth advance?
Cut knotty Doubts, and Bars of all Restraint?
Does not thy Frown control the Frown of chance?
And shall thy Superstitious Fancy paint,
These hartlesse Fears, Imaginary Hell,
And have a Charm above thy Politic Spell?
Have not made God a Cloak, to get a Crown?
Without all Shame, parboyl'd thy blushlesse Face?
With conquering Tyrany, cast Pity down?
Established Wickedness; supplanted Grace?
And now like to a man (ready to drown)
Catch at a helpless Thing? Why this is base;
Not like a Kingly Pollitician;
But a poor Ignorant Plebeian.
What? will thou thus run from thy self to Error?
And make Indulgent Nature now thy Foe?
Plunging thy self into the Depth of Terror?
And where once Wisdom thriu'd, let Folly grow?
Shall ayrie Virtue, now become thy Mirror?
And things (merely without) afflict thee so?
If Conscience fright, and silent Shame be feared?
Thou art no King, but of the popular Heard.
It Is Shame (where parts agree) to make a Jar;
To bring Disturbance, and Distraction;
What Nature has established, to mar,
Is to deface the Habit, she puts on:
To bring thy Actions to thy conscience Bar,
So to be doomed to swift perdition,
But having seared thy conscience, sealed thy Blame,
TO unrip the womb again, why this were shame:
No Richard: in thine own powers, still be free,
And what seems best, think absolutely well:
Confirm thy strength, make good thy policy,
Nor against thy name, and dignity, rebel:
Prove not a Zelist in fond Purity,
Nor paint a Heaven, nor counterfeit a Hell:
But wind into thy self; there, set thy rest,
So plot, and execute what thou think best.
Maintain thy power, diminish not thy sway,
Nor bound thy self, being a boundless King;
But of thy State still propagate the Sea,
And take the Tribute of each petty Spring:
Frame thine own Circle, and then boldly say,
This is my Center; hither will I bring
The lines of all my Actions; fair, or foul,
And see what power, or will, or can control.
Break open thy black Abissus, and take thence,
Worlds of advantages against the world:
Be false, and cruel, still with impudence,
And calmes, with ^empests, on thy Brow be curled;
From thy own Heaven derive thy influence,
And Fiend-like fear be into darkness hurled,
Thy Sun, to Sun; thy Stars, to Stars advance,
And let thy pomp in golden mountains dance.
So then (resolved) having thus debated
My tirannous Will, had laid the bloody train:
And in my doom the Princes lives were dated,
Whose ominous being, did impeach my reign:
I thought my self not absolute instated,
Nor could make free use of my purchased gain;
Till without Rival, I might show my brow,
One King in state; one Sun the Heavens allow
Now was my Frostie coldness, fully thawed;
And my resisted fire found open vent,
Now I digested, what so hard was chaw'd,
And turned it to familiar nourishment:
Then Buckingham (my artificial Bawd*
My Hand, my Factor, and my Instrument)
I grounded on, to work this last Design,
And give the Fire, to this my secret Mine.
Legions of Devils seconded my Thought
To join him with me, in this dangerous Main,
Whose powrefull hand, my counsel would have wrought
TO effect the complot of this Murderous Train;
But here he stopped, would by no means be brought
To add this fowlenes, to his former Stain,
And like on's Nails within an vlcerous Sore,
Touched to the quick, he shrinkes, and will no more.
My Motion did repeal his banished fear,
And Fear, Sollicites his num'd Conscience,
His coldness, moved my heat, which heat did bear
The churlish temper of Impatience:
And now his Love from memory I tear,
Turn his obsequious service to offense:
For Polliticians are no longer Friends,
When Friends can add no more to their main Ends.
So did he vanish, for he now had spent
The Marrow, of his Trust, and Flattery;
And so I used each servile Instrument,
When it had lost his steeled faculty:
I squeaz'd him dry, and his true service spent
I paid with empty handed Usury,
For like a Pol^itick, well taught, full grown,
I felt no want, or fulness, but mine own.
Besides; he had both power, and Subtlety,
And knew where I was weakest fortified,
Then of my self so much in him did lie,
That he had got the Raines to curb my Pride,
Nor stood it with my kingly Dignity,
To prove his Slave, that erst had been his Guide,
For his own neck he made the fatal noose,
They love no Traitors, that do Traitors use.
Great Buckingham thus paid with hateful Frowns,
I chose for him the Maleconted Mate,
One that will kill his dearest Sire for Crowns,
In hope to advance his long dejected State,
The hope of Heaven, and pains of Hell he drownes
In smiles of Fortune, and auspitious Fate;
And of this Rank* one Tyrrell I did frame
To do this deed, whose horror wants a Name,
This vpstart Gentleman, being styled a Knight,
Whose Back, and Belly, had consumed his Good,
Puts forth his long-hid-head, into the light,
To crown his valor in this Act of Blood:
Ages to come, a Catalogue may cite
Of such brave spitits, whose hated Crests do bud
With homicidiall honor; and do bear
A Sable conscience, in a Shield of Fear.
And note what State was kept when this was wrought,
The Close-stoole was my Seat most eminent,
A filthy Carpet fits an ordur'd Thought,
The Senses loathing, and Sins Excrement:
So Tyrrell took some State, whose pride had sought
Two loathed Sla^es, which o'ercloy'd Time did vent
Into this Sink of Shame, in which damned Fact,
Tyrrell commanded, and the Grooms did act.
The Even, before the Night, that this was done,
The headstrong winds did rage with hydeous Storm,
As red as Blood discends the fearful Sun,
And Nature, had put on a dismal Form,
Chaos was threatened by th'ecclipsed Moon,
And Ravens, and S^rich-owles bode the ensuing harm,
Then burst there forth (whiles darkness shook Hels Chain)
An angry Comet with a smoaky Train.
The fatal hour vsher'd by this Ostent,
Astonished all; and in the Princes bred
Oraculous Presages of the Event,
That they like Lambs were to the Slaughter led:
Their spotless Lives must clear the Element,
The angry Comet thirsted to be fed
With their heart bloods; they knew these storms would cease,
When they were lodged in their Graves in peace.
Thus they Diuin'd; and though by zealous Prayer
They sought t'auoid the danger, then so near,
Yet such vain hopes do turn into despair,
For Fate respects nor zeal, Truth, Love, nor Fear,
Heau^ns causes knit, do never break their square,
But run directly to the effects they bear;
And though hard Fates can never be withstood,
Yet Death confounds the Bad, life crowns the Good.
Thus Heavens just Law, ordered by upright Hand,
They that live justly, that true Course do run;
Which they that leave, apparently withstand,
And do pursue their own Confusion:
These innocents, being marked for Angels Band,
Keeping Heavens Course as constant as the Sun,
Although by my most bloody hand they fell,
Yet in their Fall, they rose; I, Damned in Hell.
These Deuilish Slaves, whose dark deeds fly the light,
(When Sleep, in binding deawes had steep't the Senses)
With glaring Eyes, cloak't in the vale of Night,
Rush't in, to act this Murder on the Princes;
Whose horrid Semblance, Death might well affright,
And whose attempt, even Hell it self Conuinces,
Medusa's Adders in their Hair were ^old,
Not Gorgons Head more ugly to behold.
As they approach the Bed where they repose;
Their drumming Hearts, panted their Fears Alarm's,
To see the sweetness Nature did disclose;
(that such Beauty should lie open to harms!)
There twyn'd the Lilly and the blushing Rose:
And as they clasp't like leaves) their Innocent Arms,
They seemed in the object of such Glory,
T'inuite some Pen to lyneate their Story.
The Humors, and the Elements, combined,
To form in them, the Abstract of perfection;
The Graces, in their sweet proportion shined,
Whose radiant Beams, shot Love, and fyr'd Affection,
And if the outward Beauty from the Mind
Receive all Grace, all Luster, and Reflection;
Then might one say, of eithers Spirit* and Feature;
Heaven held the Pensill, and the form of Nature.
The Worlds Abridgement in this Beauty lay,
Thus subject to the hand of Tyranny;
Whose light, from darkness might have struck the day,
And with his Beams, dazzled an Eagles Eye;
Yet these damned Hell Hounds had the heart t'assay
To roll these Orbs up in obscurity,
And pash to Chaos, their so fair built Frames,
To sacrifice their Lymbs, in Funeral Flames.
Now, in the Bed (which is the Type of Graves)
And in dead Sleep (the portraicture of Death)
Those dregs of Men, this Spawne of Earth, these Slaves,
Did bury them alive, and stopped their Breaths,
Where like a Sexton each himself behaues,
To cover them with that which lay beneath;
So left them sleeping in eternal Rest,
Whose Sainted souls, now live among the Blessed.
These Furies now are tortured with Despair,
And howl in horror of their murderous deed,
They beat their Breasts, and tear their Snaky Hair,
In their assured Torment to succeed;
With sinful Breaths they taint the pi^rest Air,
And in their Faces every one may read
Guilt, mixed with Fears; too late, they find too well,
That though they breath on Earth; they live in Hell.
Now when I saw printed in Tyrrels Brow,
These Characters of Death, and shameful Gore,
I bid him study for the best means how
I might requite, or he might well Implore:
But he, that did with Guilt enough endowe
His wretched state; would never look for more;
But summing up this Murder, with his Pride,
He got the Devil and all; so lived, so did.
Thus without Fear, armed with Herculean Force,
I saw this Hell, my Thoughts had shaped, and bred;
If fearful Hydra, had opposed my course,
I should have left the Monster never a Head:
Or like Rooms Tyrant (with as small remorse)
Thousand contracted Lives, have Butchered;
To raise my Glory to this complete Frame,
And set my Foot upon the Throat of Shame.
Yet now my Li^e was conversant with Danger,
Fear, and suspicion, did perturb my Sleep,
Th'apparant Hate of Men, stirred up my Anger,
And charged Pistols, for defense I keep,
For since I had professed my self a Stranger
To every Good; in Blood, and sin, so deep,
My Sores were to be rubbed, to avoid their Harms,
Whom (...) sollicits, Circumspection arms.
They that no Ill commit, no Ill need fear,
And Truth is their best Armor of Defense,
Ill comes not, when before it was not there,
And Weapons fit a wounded Conscience,
Tyrants, the privy coat had need to wear,
And ever waking keep their troubled Sense,
So kept I watch, and stood upon my Guard,
My Steel still drawn, of mine own Shadow feared.
Now the (...) Line, that scarce was seen,
With Sword (instead of Pen) begins to raze
The Line of York; whose Ink, is blackest Spleen,
To blot my Glory, and my Name, de^ace,
The Frost bit Rose, now sprouts, and waxes green,
Wanting but time to spread with wonted Grace,
The white Rose, must be joined with the Red,
To propagate fair Stems, in one chaste Bed.
Richmond, my Brothers Daughter to Espouse
(The sweet Elizabeth) is ma^k't by Fate,
Which to prevent, my Lion Spirit I Rouse,
With that fair Lyonesset Incorporate;
Which though nor Laws of God, nor Man allows,
Yet to establish, and secure my State,
I sought with wilful Lust, and powerful Awe,
To cross the Banes, and overrule the Law.
First Buckingham (whose hopes were vainly ^ed
To break the Ice for Richmond with his power)
I march'^ against, and (by good Fortune) sped;
My Stars herein did smile* and his, did lowre,
I pricked him kindly, he as kindly bled
His ancient Love; and so in happy hour,
I pai'd the arrerages of his lent Good,
And had m' Acquittance sealed with his Blood.
O Buckingham; thou were too open Brested,
And spent'st too freely to receive thy Right;
For of my State, by thee I was Invested,
A debt far greater, then I could requite,
Some States-mens Hands are shut; their Bounty Chested,
And ill do they abide those men in ^ight,
That may vpbrayde with unrequited Good,
Such Bonds are seldom cancelled, but with Blood.
Next Anne my Wife (whose Being did deny
My match, with my fair Niece Elizabeth)
Fell sudden sick with grief, or Jealousy;
And all my Love would not preserve her Breath:
I gave her Medicines for Sterilitie
And She grew fruitful in the Bed of Death,
Her Issue, crawling Worms; and there she lies,
Whose love, and life, lo thus I memorize.
This was that creature that I wooed, and wonn,
Over her bleeding Husband, stabbed by me;
Such different persons, never saw the Sun,
He, for perfection; I, Deformity;
She wept, and smiled, hated, and loved, in one,
Such was her Virtue, my Hypocrisy,
Thus women's Griefs, nor Loves, are did in grain,
For eithers color, Time, or Men, can stain.
For farther proof, my Sister Queen I chose,
Professing Truth, to her; to her Daughter, Love;
Insinuating with such artfull Gloze,
As if the God of Eloquence should move;
And notwithstanding all the banefull woes,
She had sustained by me; I made her prove
My Loves Attorney, furthering my Suit
TO astonish Wonder; and strike Rumor Mute.
By this I Instance, how these Fools are caught
With honors Baits; or tickled with their Praise,
Whose flexible conditions may be wrought
To any Form; Subjects for Sports, and Plays;
Angels they seem, and are with Angels bought,
Gilded corruption; Natures falsed Glaze,
No mean in their Affects; in Passion moving,
No moment in their Tears; nor Faith, in Loving.
Inconstant Sex; no sooner full, then wayning,
In weakness, dying; and imperfect, borne;
Their scanted wills, like half faced Moons complaining,
Which to supply they make the Forked Horn:
Nor hot, nor cold; now loving, then disdaining,
The Fautors of Deceit; of Truth, the storm;
Like Cotton Buds, which none can bruise, or pull,
But being put forth, like them they turn to wool.
Such were my Wyles, I could deceive deceit,
Guild Imperfections, with Imperfect Glory,
Building on Ruins my uncertain State,
Laugh at Oppression, from Prides Promontorie,
I soothed my Pomp with an eternal Date,
And in Ambition, perfected my Story,
Which Word, let Fame to after Ages sound,
As of my Life, the Pyramed, and Ground.
And as a Taper played within the night,
Where men do firmly sit, or walk, or stand;
Raises their Shadows, to the places hight,
Then to the Ground, in turning of a hand:
Now it empai^es them, by the wa^ing light,
And then extends their lengths, themselves beyond,
So Fortune plays with Kings, and worldly States,
She tosses, turns, reares, and precipitates.
As one that drinks more then he can contain,
He sur^ets in excess, and duls his Taste;
And then the Fume (spread through his Poares and Brain)
He speaks his secret's thoughts, and seems disgrast:
Nor does desist, till in his drunken vain
His Intellectual powers are so defaced,
That (loosing the office of his Feet) he lies
Shameful, and naked to all ^ober eyes:
So I, in thirst of Glory, Rule, and State,
Drinking excessiuely, and past my fill;
Swinging in Lust, and Thoughts intemperate,
Drunk in Ambition, and my ^ensuall will:
Was so transparent in my latest date,
And all my Good, so swallowed in my Ill;
That in my staggering Pride, and shameful Fall,
I grew a Monster, and a scorn to all.
I, that once thought, that no man could be blessed
In moderate kind of Humane blessedness;
And in my Tyrannous license did suggest
To comprehend (in Pomp) all Happiness:
Gave Reigns to Lust, and in my Will suppressed
The rule of Reason (man's sole Souereignesse)
That to the Worlds Doom, still preferred mine own,
And pitched my hopes, no lower then a crown:
I, that did make no conscience to Plot,
And perpetrate, all Beastiall cruelty;
That harrow'd Earth, and Hell for what I got,
As if those Tipes would last Eternally:
In Goodness cold, in Mischief ever hot,
And in my damned Tracts of Policy
Had sown men's Hearts, and with unfeeling Taints
Did dye my Hands in Innocent blood of Saints:
I, that could taint souls with corrupting Breath,
And from their Breasts root Faith, and Piety,
Steeling their Spirits for Acts of closest Death,
And suck the heart of their ability,
Then raise fresh bloods, and set the dry, beneath,
Fester'd, in conscience of their villainy,
Then rack them with delays; reward with air*
And laugh to see them perish in despair:
I that at best, held Virtue, and Religion,
No other Things, but well mixed Elements;
Nor Vice, nor Ill, but H^mors Disposition,
Depraved by the Bodies Instruments:
Esteemed the Soul subject to Deaths corruption:
Nor thought all these, but natural Events,
And their disorder cured by Phisicks Skill,
And nothing subject to The Eternal Will.
Now did my Conscience, that lay smothered
Under this Pile, of Damned Impiety,
And seemed (as with green fuel Maistered)
Conceall'd, and imprisoned in Obscurity;
Showed, that by Sin, 'twas rather comforted,
Then any way deprived of Faculty,
And in their Flame did rage so much the more,
By how much it did seem restrained before.
Now all my Acts of Murder, Sin, and Shame
(Bred by Ambition, and my tyrannous Will)
Appeared upon my Head like A^tn^'s Flame,
Or like a Beacon fyr'd upon a Hill;
Now Rumor, gives the Echo to my Fame;
Vprores, and Insurrections gin to fill
All places vast; and now in fear, I start,
To fall beneath the mountain of my Heart.
O how I cursed my Aspick Flattery,
That shed such ve^ome in my Rational Power,
I cursed the Glass that so corruptedly,
Did show the face of vice to smile, not lowre;
Now for each priuiledg'd Mischief did I lie
A Butt to Torment; and a fearful Shower
(By the Black vapor of my Sin being bred)
With blood and vengeance swollen, hung over my head.
Thus, in the VVayning Splendour of my Pride,
Compast with danger, and assaylde with Fears;
And in my Thoughts, all Torments multiplied,
That might augment the burden of my cares;
I found my self so weakly fortifyde,
Against the powerful Battery of despaires;
That I was plunged into Hels deep Abisse,
Secluded from all comfort, Joy, or Bliss.
Nor did the ancient Poets idely feign
Erinnis, and the damned Eumenides;
Since even those Furies, in their Mask contain
The Moral, of my tortured Tyranies:
For the Apparitions of ensuing pain
So danted me with their Extremities,
That I was racked in terror of my doom;
And made that present; which was but to come.
Then dreadful Melancholl^ did convert
My Nature, to the Temper of my Brain,
Which soaked with my Spleen, disturbed my heart,
And through my body, spread a pois^nous Bane,
It did confound my Sense, and every part,
Each Muscle, Sinnew, Artire, Ioin^, and Vain,
Had lost their natural working, and prepare,
To set me it the highway, to despair.
Such was the horror of my Malady*
Distract with fear, of that I was to inherit,
That it corrupted every Faculty,
Congealed my Blood* and dulled my active Spirit,
Thus my whole Nature ^elt like Sympathy,
With my despairefull So^le, for si^full Merit,
For all the Functions of my Soul, and Sense,
Were maimed by my wounded Conscience.
My Reason dotes; my Soul did idle sit,
VVanting fit matter of Intelligence:
Organs, deprau'd, and stupifyde my Wit,
My Understanding, weak; unsound my Sense;
And every part disabled, and unfit,
To comfort or relieve my Conscience,
Hopeless, and helpless, all my powers agree,
In Desperations Gulf to swallow me.
And as we see the Eye, the Ear, or Sent,
Affected long, and oue^ vehemently,
Retain their Species in the Instrument,
Though absent ^e ^he mo^ing quality:
So the Internal Sence^ strongly bent
To fearful Objects of obs^^^itie,
To judge of things by their depraved kind,
Give Passion vigor, and make ^eason, blind.
The Sun, the Moon, and Plan^^^ of ^y Nature,
So fearfully ecclipsed in their light:
My inward darkness casting on my Feature
A^semblance gha^^ly pale, and full of fright:
My leprous Soul* deformed, as my Stature,
Did in these Tragic Terrors seem to excite
The thoughtfull presage of my Destiny,
To be accomplished in my Tragedy.
Likewise my Name enter 'd in Hels black Roll;
So infinite my Actions of Arrest,
My grim ^ac't conscience ceazing on my Soul;
And my Tormentor e^e^ in my Breast;
So not the mind alone, but ^ody whole,
Equally feeling, and alike distressed;
Such watch they kept; such clamor they did make;
That waking, I did dream; and sleeping, wake.
Such was my Passion; of all faith (...),
Which should apply a Salve unto my wound,
That in my Mind, Hell only was conceau'd,
Which did all thought, and hope of Heau^n confound:
Thus my despairefull (...) wea^'d
The Web of my affliction; and I found
My State so desperate, and my Sin so great,
That no repenta^t means could expia^e.
Should I have filled the air with plain^s (...) ^ries;
Have wr^ng my hands in grief; straynd blood, in fears;
Eat into Marble with my still bent knees;
And all the Center rotted, with my tears;
Such was the clamo^ of my vi^^^ies*
And so importunate were my Despaires,
That nothing (as I thought) would satisfy,
The Offended Justice of the Dei^ie.
The settled Center, eas^er might a^^ume
The heavenly Motion that turns ever round;
Huge Whales might sooner fly with feathered plume,
And Birds (like worms) creep on the ba^er Ground,
Ere I could hope, or ever might presume,
By my repentance, mercy to have found,
For pressed with sin, and of all Grace bereauen,
I could not lift one Thought so high as heaven.
Not Saul, that (being possessed) did Reprobate:
Not Esau's self, that did his Birthright ^ell;
Not Judas, marked for vengeance by his Fate;
Not those which were devoured quick to Hell;
Not hardened Pharao, all as Desperate;
Nor cursed, and forlorn Achitophel;
Could be more surely seall'd, in Heavens just doom,
Then I, in conscience, for the wrath to come.
Thus blasted with the Whirlewind of Gods Breath,
And shaken, with the Terror of his wrath,
Vengeance above me, and Hellfire beneath;
So void of Grace, and so exempt from faith:
What could I look for but Eternal Death,
Since all my life was progrest in that Path?
Now did I fondly wish, in my Despair,
To be resolved to the Element, of Air
When drowsy Morpheus, with his Mace addressed
My turbulent spirits, to a quiet Truce;
My Thoughts, scarce gave me sleep; that sleep, no Rest,
Though bound my Senses, yet my Sin was loose;
For the Images of outward Things (Impressed
In common Sense) did (as it is their use)
Present unto my waking Fantasy
The horrid visions of my Tyranny.
For my ^ome^i^^ fears (that wholly tend
To ^xtacies* and ^roken sleeps, unfound)
Did to my (...), black ^umes of horror send,
Raised from ^^spare, and (...) ground;
Whereon the (...) did apprehend,
And forge such terrible objects, that I found
My self often strangled through those dreams of Terror,
Which showed my Death, and Hell, as through a Mirror.
Such appa^itions frighted me in sleep;
My Conscience, vnappea^^d; my Sin, still crying;
These terrible Impressions were so deep,
That waking, I was Transt; and living* dying;
I wished I had been made a worm, to creep;
Or from a worthless Egg, been hatched from flying;
Or like proud N^buchadnez^r, to nourish
My Beastiall Nature, and like Beasts to perrish.
Thus Sin, a venomed Tooth from Hell did borrow,
Which ranckled to the Death, with deadly Byte;
I sorrow'd desperately, because my sorrow
Was all too late, to help my helpless plight;
I plowed upon my barren Heart, whose Furrow
(Not deaw'd with tears; ^or sown with Seeds, Contrite)
Could yield no fruit, but ranckned with Sins Air,
For hopeful faith, brought Thorns of sharp despair.
Damnations fear did make me penitent
Which Reprobates may have with Gods Elect,
But Faith and Grace, (whose ends are to repent)
Were far removed, and absent in Effect,
I knew my Sin, with Sorrows languishment,
In Conscience sincking, and in horror wrak't,
But that Repentance, which should save and raise me,
Justice forbids me, and despair denaies me.
Now Engl^nds Genius does begin to swell,
Whose spirit, long suppressed, breaks out in Fire,
The Peers do stir, the Commons do rebel,
Gyrles great with spleen, and Women sharp with Ire,
Old men take Arms, Children (new crept from Shell)
Wrong, and Oppression, do with Rage inspire:
Factions now rend the State in several parts,
Swords in their hands, and vengeance in their hearts.
Richmond has set his foot upon my stand,
Who out of many letts has wrought his course,
And like a Stream, which lower Ban^^es withstand,
Swells over his Bounds, and spreeds his flowing Sourse,
The wrong incensed Peers, augment his Band,
And give his weakness, a resistfull force,
Of those, that did my Tyrannous Yoke still bear,
None lent their strengths in Love, but all in Fear.
Who in their staggering doubts of Wars event,
And to secure their Howses from Attaint,
Did set a Coulor, on their forced intent,
And with could Faiths, relieved my Hope as faint,
Distracted were their Minds, their Hearts were rent,
Weak are the Powers that fight upon Constraint,
Of some I took firm Hostage, to assure them,
And promisd others Mountains, to procure them.
From the could North, (summond by my Command)
I had a Company of Frozen Hearts,
Who seemed the very Scar-Crowes of the Land,
So poor they were, ill furnished at all parts:
These half Faced staruelings, and this Bandles Band,
These ragged outsides, and these tattered Shirts,
Came as to warm them, nere the VVestern Light,
With Mawes to feed, rather then Hearts to fight.
These were the Soldiers that I kept in Pay,
Such Fayndings never yet were pressed with Coin,
Whose heavy looks, their duller Spirits betray;
To make hope falter, in my Wars design,
All sought to loose, rather then win the day,
And seemed more Richmonds part, then friends of mine,
Yet these I termed true Hearts, with falsed Style,
And hartned them with many a hartles Smile.
And though enuiron'd with a darkesome Fear.
Yet in my face, I forced a seeming light,
Whose Substance crude, and could, I did out wear
The day, in cares, in waking Hours, the Night,
Unsettled were my Motions, and did bear
Undoubted semblance of distracted plight,
My Conscience pricked soliciting my mind
With Blood, for my most bloody deeds assignd.
O how I band the Welsh, with bitter spite,
Ap Thomas, Griffeth, Herbert, and their Train,
That with poor Richmonds handful, joined their might;
To take part with the Mean; and leave the Main:
But when they swore to our defensive Right,
With Sense reserved, they kept their Names from Stayne,
For I Usurped, and had noe Right at all,
Their Guardian Angels prompt their Rize; my Fall.
Yet on I must with these my dangerous Friends,
To try the Chance of vengeance threatening Wars,
Where guilt gives Terror, Terror Mischief lends;
And mix their Malice with my fatal Stars,
The Deulish Fury in my Breast entends,
In spite of danger and all opposite Bars,
To Cut this knot the mistick Fates conteyne,
And set my life and Kingdom on this Main.
Richmond comes on, relieved with still supplies;
Whose firmest Faiths, give heart to his just Aim,
S^eeling the Back of his great enterprise,
With Cambro-Brittaines, men of taintlesse Name,
My strength, is trustles; his, in true hearts lies,
And still increases, going; like to Fame;
Angels attend Him, with their imminent power,
Auspicious are his Stars, and mine do lowre.
The Prayers of old men, and the Nerves of young,
Give vigor to his Arm, and prompt his Spirit,
Cur^es, and Rage, (through Tyrany and wrong)
Attend my Action, and my hateful merit:
I faint in Millions; He, in hundreds strong,
For not the odds of multitudes inherit
The victors Prize, since War (in heavens just laws)
Is ever swayed by Justice of the cause.
Warr's the Tribunal, where all deeds of Arms
Receive their equal, and their partlesse Doom,
Not Fortunes Spells, nor Legions with their Charms,
But must give Fate Preeminence, and Room*
Though men, like Giants, with their proud Alarm's
Do brave the Heavens; yet if Jove's Thunder come
In awful vengeance down, such pride he quails,
So, not presumption then, but truth preuailes.
The bloody Field is pitched; suruey'd the Ground*
The Centynels are placed; Perdu's are sent,
Soldiers entrenched, and encamped round,
And in the midst advanced my shining Tent,
Counsels assembled, for directions, found;
Advantages proposed, for Detriment,
All Things disposed, night comes, strong watch we keep,
When weighty cares, do summon me to sleep.
Now does my conscience agitate my fears
In visions, of my waking Fantasy,
Now each particular action appears
A strong Appealant of my Tyrany:
Murder sounds horror, in my deafned Ears,
And all my deeds of damned impiety
Press to the Bar, where I receive my doom
Of death-Stabs here, and infinite to come.
Me thought I saw in those affrighting Dreams,
My slaughtred Numbers round about my Bed,
Opening their wounded Mouths, in Crimson Streams,
And pouring Blood upon my tyrannous Head:
The Furies Brands (me thought) shed flaming Beams,
To wast me in my passage through the dead;
Where at Hels mouth, each howling spirit proclaims,
And ring my welcome, with their clamorous chains.
Me thought I saw, and heard the loathsome Plight
Of dying Men; how bound in Frosts they lie,
Swimming in cold sweates, and berest of Light,
Their entrails gnawne; pulse, stayed, and veins drawn dry,
Their rattling Throats; fur'd Tongues; their broken sight;
Their gasping Breaths; their looks deformity,
Their earthy savor, in expiring Breath,
O horrid Dream! but O more fearful Death!
Me thought likewise, the dismal Rau'ns did croke,
As I approch't my death, to pass the Graves,
The Earth did shake, and coniur'd Tempests broke
In hydeous noises from their Bellowing caves,
Which threw down Turrets; roots the stoutest Oak:
Then from the clouds the Arm of vengeance waves,
And gives the Signal to the bloody fight,
Where thousand swords divide me, and the light.
These violent distractions broke in sunder
The heavy Band, tha^ bound my Senses fast,
Whose frightfull visions made me wild with wonder,
Yet up I rose, then had I slept my last,
And whiles with ghastly visage, I did ponder,
Present, ensuing, and the Times long past;
I started from my Trance with ragefull Teene,
Taking a Dragons Spirit, a Tigers Spleen.
And as the motions of all Natural Things
Prove swiftest in their Ends; more strong inclined;
As Torrents roar, derived from smallest Springs
And gentle Blasts, do turn to boystrous win^e:
So I resolved to put on fiery wings:
And in my End, add Spirit to my mind,
For yielding Thoughts, befit the basest Slaves,
Kings should soar high, although they drop to graves.
The Mornings Chanticlere proclaimed the day,
Whose lowering countenance vaild the God of light;
Yet glistring Armor (spite of Mornings Gray)
To valiant minds, do yield a cheerful sight;
The rolled up Ensign, when it does display,
Gives Heart, and Coulor, to the Martial wight;
From Richmonds Arms, his hearts took such bright shine
But leaden Spirits, could take no life from mine.
Now was my Battle ranged on Bosworth Plain,
The Vantgard, ordered; and the Wings were set,
Norfolk (my Chieftaine) with much sweat, and pain,
Tempered my Frozen Hearts, with his kind heat;
Surrey, and He, bore minds that had no stain,
Both well approved in Arms, and martial Feate,
Our Standards both advanced in open fight,
Summons are given, to prepare the Fight.
My Men with Soldiers Rethorick, I excite;
Enforce the vildnes of mine Enemy
Th'Iniustice of his cause, of ours, the Right;
Our wealthy States; their desperate Poverty;
Their fainting Force; and our assured Might;
Our living Honors; and their Infamy:
So I concluded with these hartning Words;
St George for England; and for me their Swords.
Now rotten Sin gives ripenes to my Fate;
And Jove does veil the Curtain of the Sky,
Reflecting Beams of Favor, and stern hate,
On Richmonds Conquest; and my Tragedy:
Heavens singing Motion (that deuoures lives date,
The working Organs of the Deity)
Have to my Period; when I must be thrown
From height of Pride, to depth of Acheron.
Signal is given; and the sound of death,
Showts, Drums, and Trumpets deafen all our Ears,
Breasts, Buts for Shafts; and swords in flesh do sheath,
Horse, meet with Horse; and Spears are lined with spears;
Blood, blends with Blood; and Breath does mix with breath;
Life, flies with life; and Beeres, are laid by Beeres;
Mazors to Bills, do stand for Butchers Blocks,
Fire, twined with Lightning, Thunder, ioin'd with shocks.
Bellona raged not so, as I did storm,
My L^on Spirit hunts Richmond for my pray,
I out-fac't death in his most ugly Form;
And through the thickest Shocks, I hewed my way;
My Spirit was like whirle-winde, and mine Arm,
A pointed Comet* in this cruel Fray,
Streaming forth Blood, and foming Rage, and Gall,
Deathfull my spleen; my Fury, Funeral.
Vnequall'd was my more then mortal Ire,
Hels ever burning Lymbeck did distill
The Spirit of Devils, in my quenchlesse Fire,
Wishing such power to damn, as heart to kill;
My winged Horse did Regase my desire;
Winds, in my Passion; the Ocean in my Will;
My cloud-congested Rage, dissolved like Thunder,
My valor, more prodigious then VVonder.
But soon my Archers slack their strongest Bent,
My Soldiers Steel rebated; yet (more keen)
They brandish Malice with one free consent,
And against me, convert their pointed Spleen;
Stanley, with Richmond, ioines his Regiment,
Some fled, some stood at gaze, the rest were seen
With idle action to maintain the Field
Power, faintly answered, argues Will, to yield.
Then as I had attained the wished Ken
Of Richmonds self, by noted Marks he wore,
In bloody sweat I spurred through slaughtred Men,
To quench my fiery Spirit, with his Gore:
Brandon (his valiant Standard Bearer then)
I slew; with stout opposers, many more,
And with spent Blood being weak in every part
I failed to set my Seal on Richmonds Heart.
My Horse being slain, with him I fell to Ground,
And yet even then was not disanimate,
For my high Spirit, above my Flesh did bound,
Scorning the limit of my mortal Date,
Till with their thickest Troops enclosed round,
And wrestling manly with r^alignant Fate,
They Charactered in wounds my Tyranny,
And thus performed my bloody Tragedy.
My Brain they dashed, which flew on every side
As they would show my Tracts of Policy:
My years, with stabs; my days, they multiplide
In drops of Blood; to express my Cruelty:
They pierst my Heart; euaporating Pride,
And mangled me like an Anatomy,
And then with Horses dragged me to my Tomb,
Thus finished I my Fate by Heavens just Doom.
Ye, that in stately madness of desire,
Do think your selves firm Centered in your Spheres;
Ye that (subiecting Sense) like Gods aspire,
In rising Hopes, confounding headlong Fears;
Behold in me, your sudden quenched fire,
To depth of Hell fallen, from those lofty Stayres:
Assuage your Thirst betimes; remit your height,
For if ye fall you are crush't with your own weight.
But if ye slight my Counsel: still feed lust,
Pamper proud flesh; drink sinful Lethae free;
Till Time and Death resolve your Trunkes to dust,
Your Souls to Torments, Names to Infamy.
And so farewell, for back again I must
Unto the horrid shades of Destiny:
Now do I sink, as erst in Pride I fell,
And to leave fame on Earth, thus diu'd to Hell.
Now Englands Chaos was reduced to order
By God-like Richmond; whose successiue Stems,
The hand of Time has Branch't in curious Border,
Unto the mem'rie of thrice Royal James:
An Angels Trumpe be his true Fames Recorder,
And may that Britain Phoebus from his Beams
In Glories light his influence extend,
His Offspring, countles; Peace, nor Date, nor End.
Hac decies repetita placebit. FINIS.
Errata^
C. page ^ (...). 9. (...) for regard, Ibid. p^: 7. ^in. 5. way^e, fo^^ vain:
F. (...) for feamelesse; Ibid. lin: 22 (...) for loves. page 7. lin, 16.
b^^efull for b^nefull.


