THE NORTHERN LESS, A COMOEDIE.

As it has been often Acted with good Applause, at the Globe, and
Blackfriars. By his Majesty's Servants.

Written by RICHARD BROM.

Hic totus volo rideat Libellus. Mart. LONDON: Printed by AVG. MATTHEW'S, and
are to be sold by NICHOLAS VAVASOVR, dwelling at the little South door of St.
Paul's Church. 1632.

The Persons in the Comedy.
Sir Phillip Lucklesse, Contracted to Mistress Fitchow the City Widow.
Master Tridewell, Kinsman to Sir Phillip. Justices; Mistress Fitchows friends.
Sir Paul Squelch Master Bulsinch
Master Widgine a Cockney-Gentleman, Brother to Mistress Fitchow. Anuile, a
Braggart, Governor to Widgine. Master Nonsense a Cornish Gentleman, Suitor to
Constance. Pate, a witty Seruingman to Sir Phillip. Beauis, a blunt Seruingman
to Mistress Traynwell. Howdye, Mistress Fitchows man and Gentleman Usher.
Vexhem, a Constable. Cleark to Sir Paul. Masquers. Mistress Fitchow, the City
Widow. Constance, the Northern Less. Mistress (...) Governesse. Con. Hold
up, a cunning Whore. Chamb^rmayd to Mistress Fitchow.
TO THE RIGHT WORTHY AND NO LESS IVDIcious then ingenious Gentleman RICHARD
HOLFORD Esquire.
SIR:
RIch Friends may send you rich Presents, while poor ones have nothing but
good wishes to present you. Though I be one of the last rank, and therefore
cannot do like the first, yet it is my ambition to bring more then bare wishes
with me, to one of whom I have received real favors A Country Less I
present you, that Minerua-like was a brayn-borne child; and Iouially begot,
though now she seeks her fortune* She came out of the cold North, thinly
clad: But Wit had pity on her; Action apparrell'd her, and Plaudits clapped her
cheeks warm. She is honest, and modest, though she speak broad: And though
Art never strung her tongue; yet once it yielded a delightful sound: which
gained her many Lovers and Friends, by whose good liking she prosperously
lived, until her late long Silence, and Discontinuance (to which she was
compelled) gave her justly to fear their loss, and her own decay. Wherefore
she, now, destrous to settle her self in some worthy service; And no way
willing (like some of further breed) to return from this Southern sunshine,
back to her native Air; I thought it might become my care (having first
brought and estranged her from her Country) to sue, with her, for Your noble
Patronage; of Whom, she hears, (if Flattery abuse her not) she has,
heretofore, gotten some good opinion. Your love to witty, and pleasant
Recreations of this nature has brought her on: And Northern Spirits will soon
wex bold. If you be pleased to accept of her, she will travail no further;
but, together with my self, remain

Ever at your service, RIC. BROM.

To my old Faithful Servant: and (by his continued Virtue) my loving Friend:
the Author of this Work, M. RICH. BROM^.
I Had you for a Servant, once, Dick Brom;
And you performed a Servants faithful parts:
Now, you are got into a nearer room,
Of Fellowship, professing my old Arts.
And you do do them well, with good applause,
Which you have justly gained from the Stage,
By observation of those Comic Laws
Which I, your Master, first did teach the Age.
You learned it well; and for it, served your time
A Prentise-ship: which few do now a days.
Now each Court-Hobby-horse will wince in rhyme;
Both learned, and unlearned, all write Plays.
It was not so of old* Men took up trades
That knew the Crafts they had bin bred in, right:
An honest Bilbo-Smith Would make good blades,
And the Physician teach men spue, or shite;
The Cobbler kept him to his nall; but, now
He Will be a Pilot, scarce can guide a Plough.
BEN. IONSON.

To his approved Friend M. RICHARD BROM on his Northern Less.
What! will thou prostitute thy Mistress, (Friend)
And make so rich a Beauty common! What end
Do thou propose* She was thine own, but now
All will enjoy her free: it is strange that thou
Can brook so many Ri^alls in thy Less,
Whose Wit and Beauty does her Sex surpass.
I Have learnt it; Thou have tried her, found her chaste,
And fear not that She Will lewdly be embraced:
And now thou sendst her to be seen^, and see
If any be like fair, like good as She.
F. T. Mag. Art. Oxon.

To his ingenious Brother M RICH. BROM, upon this witty issue of his Brain,
the Northern Less.
ALthough I call you by a Brothers name,
I must confess (nor do I fear the shame)
I am in love with your fair Daughter, this,
As fair conditioned as her Father is.
Well met abroud, blithe, bonny, Northern Less:
Thy natural Beauties, others far surpass
That are enriched with Fucusses of Art,
Thy witty sweetness bears so fair a part.
Not a Good woman, nor a Girl worth Gold,
Nor twenty such (whose gaudy shows take hold
Of gazing eyes) shall in acceptance thrive
With thee, whose quaintness is superlatiue.
Dick may be proud she is Daughter to no other;
As I am proud that I have such a Brother.
St. Br.

Of Mr. RICHARD BROM his ingenious Comedy, the Northern Less, To the Reader.
POets and Paynters curiously compared
Give life to Fancy; and atchieue Reward
By Immortality of Name: So thriues
Art's Glory, that All, what it brea^hes on, lives.
Wi^nesse this Northern Piece. The Court affords
No newer fashion, or for Wit, or Words.
The Body of the Plot is drawn so fair,
That the Souls language quickens, with fresh air,
This well limbed Poem, by no Rate, or Thought
Too dearly prized, being or sold, or bought.
JOHN FORD The Authors very Friend.

To my Son BROM and his. Less.
Which, then of Both shall I commend?
Or Thee (that art my Son and Friend)
Or Her, by Thee begot* A Girl
Twice worth the Cleopatrian Pearl.
No: it is not fit for Me to Grace
Thee, who art Mine; and to thy Face.
Yet I could say, the merries^ Maid
Among the Nine, for Thee has luyd
A Ghyrlond by; and Iieres to see
Pied Idiots tear the Daphnean Tree;
Putting their Eyes out with those Boughs
With which She bids me deck thy Brows.
But what I bring shall crown thy Daughter
(My Grand child) who (though full of laughter)
I^ Chaste and Witty to the Time;
Not Lumpish-Cold, as is her Clime^
By Phoebus Lyre, Thy Northern Less
Our Southern proudest Beauties pass:
Be Iouiall with thy Brains (her Mother)
And help her (Dick) to such Another.
THO. DEKKER.

To his known Friend Mr. R BROM on his Northern Less.
MY Love may wrong th^e, Friend; and, should I praise
Thy Book, I (...) 'twould stayne the wreathing Bays
That crowns thy Head: No, they that know, can tell
This Piece craves not a bribing Prayer to sell.
Here Is Beauty, Wit, and Language in a Glass.
Who would not have a Copy of this Less?
Prologue.
GAllants, and Friends-spectators, will ye see
A strain of Wit that is not Poetry?
I have Authority for what I say:
For He himself says so, that Writ the Play,
Though, in the Muses Garden he can walk;
And choycest Flowers pluck from every stalk
To deck the Stage; and purposes, hereafter,
To take your Judgments: now He implores your laughter;
Says He would see you merry; thinks it long
Since you were last delighted with a Song.
Your Books, he says, can show you History;
And serious Passages better then He;
And that He should take pains in Act to show
What you already by your Studies know
Were a presumption. It Is a Modesty
Vn-vs'd amongst Poets. This being only He
That boasts not his worth; and does subscrib^
Himself an vnder-seruant in their Tribe.
Yet though he slight himself, We not despair,
By him, to show you what is Good and Rare.
THE NORTHERN LESS.
Act. I. Sce. I.
Enter Sir Phillip Luckles. Tridewell. Tri. But I beseech you sir, Take me
somewhat nearer your Council. May I assure my self, that this report goes
true; that you are on this treaty of Marriage with that Widow?


Luc Faith cosen, I take it as my fortune; and ^m fully bent on the adventure.


Tri. Troth in my mind, you were better venture your self, and fortune to the
Bermudas. It Is true, she has a good estate: some nine thousand, I think: and
were an apt match for one that knew how to govern it, and her; some hard bred
Citizen, crafty Lawyer, or country Justice. But you, a tender Nur^eling of
the Court, altogether unmixed with such nature or education, to cast your self
upon her, who for her years might be your Mother (they say: I never saw her)
and has been the Town widow these three years, still conversant with
Doctors, and Proctors of the civil Law; of which Tribe her husband was too.
Never look to be the better for her Riches: She Will consume yours and you
too* though your back were Herculean; and lay you in your grave, or in Bedlem
(my life on it) before she dream of dying, though it be all that you can hope,
or pray for, after Marriage.


Luc. You speak sir out of some unfortunate examples, and your extraordinary
care of me. But truth is, all deswasion comes too late; and all vrgings against
it are now uncharitable: For we are already Man and Wife.


Tri. What married!


Luc. Lustily promised sir. Absolutely contracted.


Tri. Send you joy. I Will out of Town.


Luc. I hope you will see our Marriage. I sent indeed to bid you.


Tri. No, good sir Phillip, rather then I would be in sound of a Bell that
should ring at it, I would have my brains fillipt out with the Clapper.


Luc. Nay good cosen: I intended you my principal Guest. We Will have all very
private: not above four or five friends more.


Tri. Sir, I intend to be none of your Mourners, which indeed my presence
there would m^ke me; and so, perhaps, infect the rest. I leave my best wishes
to you, and will endeavor to pray for you. Indeed I will.


Luc. Indeed this is very abrupt.


Act. I. Sce. II.
Enter Anvile, Widgine. An. Mr. Tridewall! well met. Why so fast sir, I took
you for a Foot-post.


Tri. A Foot-post! Indeed your fine wit will post you into another world one of
these days, if it take not the whipping post in the way. And why Foot-post, in
your little witty apprehension?


An. Because you went so fast. B^t since you are angry, I would you were going
twice as last. If I interrupt you, hang me. Dee hear?


Tri. Nay I know you are apt to decline any man's anger, good Captain Anvile:
you have been beaten to it.


Wid. Why, if he have, he may thank such as you are, that can endure no jest.


Tri. What are you there too? Mr. Widgine, I take it?


Wid. My name is Walter Widgine sir, not to be denied* the only brother here of
sir Phillip Lucklesse his betroch'd. She is a Widgine borne sir, and of the
best family: Our Ancestors flew out of Holland in Lincolnshire to prevent
peri^cation.


Tri. From Crowland, I warrant you, a little before a Moulting time.


Wid. Like enough sir. My sister can tell you. Since, by marriage, she was
made a Fitchow: Her husband was Fitchow the civil Lawyer; He was called the
great Canno^^r of the civil Law: because he could dischardge or make report of
every Canon therein; Canon after Canon, or Canon upon Canon at his fingers
ends, as readily as I can tell these pieces.


Tri. A fair Demonstration!


Wid. He had many rare parts in him, besides sir, as my sister can tell you.


Tri. This fellow cannot choose but have a rare sister: He quotes her so!


Wid. But all the good I can speak of him is, that he left my sister rich; or
at least a reasonable estate, half a score thousand pounds or so: which she,
with her self, bestows upon this honorable knight sir Phillip Luckles, to
be a Lady* of that name, and God gi' him joy. And for you: being his kinsman,
I shall desire your nearer acquaintance.


Tri. In good time sir.


Wid. The match was not altogether her own seeking sir, though she refused
two Aldermen for him, on my own knowledge.


Tri. Might she have had'hem both sir?


Wid. I and half a score Aldermens fellows to boot: yet refused all for him.


Tri. In deed six yoke of such cattle would plow up all his acres in a
forenoone.


Wid. My sister can tell you more sir.


Tri. Still she is his Authority. I will see this woman. Sir Phillip, here are
Guests will applaud your match. Bid'hem welcome* God buy.

Ex.
Wid* For my part I honor any Man, that marries my sister. Sir Phillip, and my
noble brother in expectation, I pray embrace my Governor, Captain Anvile,
here; and give him and me our gloves: you shall find him worthy your
acquaintance. He has wit, I can tell you; and breaks as many good jests as
all the Wits, Fits, and Fancies about the Town, and has traind up many young
gentlemen, both here, and in diverse parts beyond the Seas. He was dry nurse
(that's one of his own jests upon himself) to the English youth, a dozen
years together beyond Sea: And now he is my Governor, and I find profit in
it: you cannot think what an ass I was before I met with him: And I mean to
travel with him, two or three years hence, my self. In the mean time, he
shall spend a hundred a year out of Wat Widgines purse. Shall ^faith
Governor, what aylest thou? art thou not right?


Anv. I shall find a time to right my self, I doubt not.


Luc. But will you travel at these years Mr Widgine?


Wid. Will you not call me brother? Two days hence when you have married my
sister, you must. Must he not, Governor?


Anv. Yes an't please him.


Wid. He ails something.


Luc. Well then, Brother two days hence, will you travel?


Wid. I some two years hence, mistake me not. I know I am but young yet:
besides I mean to marry first as other young heirs do. And then towry lowry,
faith, my noble Governor, and I! Twill be brave going into France then: I may
learn half their fashions before I go, and bate so much, being taught at
when I come there. What Is the matter Governor? thou were not wont to be thus.
Is thy money all gone? Here Is five pieces to buy pomps against my sisters
wedding.


Anv. Have I eyes and ears, and can think of trifling Money matters?


Wid. Pox on it I had forgot. That sciruy surly gentleman angerd him ere while,
and put him out of patience. How the hot ^ome of his rage boyles out at his
Mouth* If I durst go so near the heat of him I would skim the pot.


Anv. If I try not this Tridewell; put him to the dearest trial of his life.
--


Wid. I there it is, he will never come to himself till he beat, or be beaten.


Anv. Let me have these knockd out; these pulled off; these pluckd out, and these
sawd off.


Wid. I must venture on him. Nay Governor: pray thee consider. --


Anv. The time and place you mean. Think you he durst have done it, but in
his kinsmans house; he and the multitude of his servants present.


Wid. I, and we know not how many armed men in the next room. Hark
Governor.


Luc. What things are these! I shall marry into a fine stock! How untimely
some considerations fall into my mind* My Cosens council, which has ever
been oraculously good; against which I violently bear my self, to mix my
blood amongst a race of fools. Had but these thoughts been mine but one day
past, they had prevented all that may prove dangerous in this, so great and
doubtful undertaking.


Act. I. Sce. III.
Enter Pate, to Luckles, VVidgine, Anvile. Pa. Sir, there is a gentlewoman would
speak with you.


Luc. Who is it? Do you not know her?


Pa. I never saw her before sir. I asked her name. But I perceived some
displeasure in her look (whether it were shame, grie^e, or anger I know not)
that made her conceal it: Only telling me she was a woman very hurtlesse, and
warrantable against your fear.


Wid. I warrant it is my sister. She frownd, did she not, and looked
fightingly? If she did, it is my sister, your wife that shall be. She will
look so at you, I can tell you, or me, or my Governor, for all he is a
Captain. She fears no colors I faith, to tell you true, she beat him once
for a jest he broke upon her Monkey. Is it not she, think thou?


Pa. No sir it is not she. I know my Lady that shall be.


Wid. My Lady that shall be! how sweetly it chimes. Here Is something for that
word.


Luc. Go bring her up. Good brother VVidgine, fly into the next room, with
your Governor. I Will wait on you presently.


Ex. Pate. Wid. My Lady! And brother VVidgine! I must admire. Our house is
raised by this two stories higher. --


Ex. Wid. Anv. Luc. There Is no recalling time; and vows of this high nature
are no trif^les.


Act. I. Sce. IIII.
Enter Mistres Trainewell. Tra. Sir I suppose you are sir Phillip Luckles.


Luc. I am the man Lady.


Tra. And you are shortly to marry a City Widow, one Mistress Fitchow?


Luc. Most true.


Tra. For whose dear sake you purchased a four hundred pounds knighthood, to
go a woing in: out of which she is to give nine thousand pounds for a
Ladyship for term of life.


Luc. What mean you Gentlewoman?


Tra. Sir not to scold, or brawle, (a vice to frequent in our Sex.) But, in
few words (and civil ones) to make you sensible of a little of that infinite
injury, you have done to one, whose invaluable portion of virtue makes her fit,
(besides the right she has already in you) to take a brides place, before your
later choy^, or any she, whose wealth might weigh down hers. You stand as if
you knew not who I mean.


Luc. Nor what neither. Sure my name's abused.


Tra. Pray sir bethink your self. Has there not been a former contract made
betwixt you and some other.


Luc. No. Nor any faithful promise neither.


Tra. That I may well believe, when you forget it.


Luc. I pray speak nearer to my understanding: whom may you suggest to be the
woman ^o much forgotten?


Tra. If you have soul, or sense, you must remember her: No? Read then her
name subscribed to that.

Luckles reads. If pity, love, or thought of me,
Live in your breast I need not die.
But if all these from thence be fled;
Live you to know, that I am dead.
Constance. Farewell good Constance. I am sorry I have no further for thee.


Tra. Do you know that name sir?


Luc. Yes Lady so well, that I am sorry, that a gentlewoman of your good
seeming should have to do for so light a piece of vanity. Leave going of the
devils Errants: His kingdoms large enough, and too much peopled already.


Tri. Pray sir, are you in sober earnest?


Luc. I good faith am I.


Tra. You are unhappy then. For you shall loose, in this disdain of yours,
more honor then your life time in repentance can recover. So fare you well sir.

Ex. Tray.
Luc. Farewell old Whiskin. Slid I Will marry out of the way; it is time I think: I
shall be taken up for whores meat else. Constance! she had a Bastard the other
day too. What a mischeiuous Maw has this she Caniball that gapes for me!
Slight a common Trader, with I know not how many! I marvel she was left out
of Cupids Muster. Sure she bribd the Ballat-maker: One that I have paid at all
times too; here is one, there is the other* And now she hears I am toward marriage
pretends a claim to me. And what a Minister she had procured! A Devil in a
most gentlewomanlike apparition. It had been well to have pumpd her. Is she
gone?


En. Pate. Pate. Who sir, the Gentlewoman? I put her in her coach.


Luc. Her Coache! Coaches must needs be common, when their cariages are so. By
this light, Oliver, a Bawd; a very Bawd. Where Is my brother Widgine, and his
Governor, Anvile! They are wholsomer company of the two, yet.

Ex.
Pa. A Bawd I Bless my Masters wits. But the best is, if he be mad, there is
that at hand will tame him, or any man: A fine Cooler, called Marriage, to take
his batchelors button a h^le lower! Can it be possible? She might have been
Mother of the Maids, as well, to my seeming; or a Matron, to have traind up
the best Lady Daughters in the Country. Here comes her Man, again.


Act. I. Sce. V.
Enter Beavis, to Pate. Be. Is sir Phillip Lucklesse in the house still sir?


Pa. Are you the Cock-bawd to the hen was here, ere while sir.


Be. Are you mad, or are you drunk sir?


Pa. Come you to bargain for a Punke sir? Faith where is the meeting? Where Is
the Supper? at the Bridgefoot, or the Cat? or where is it?


Be. Nay then sir, though your Master be allowd to measure his manners, by his
pleasure, here, on his own yard, I Will be bold to pull you out on it by the
ears, and beat you into better fashion.


Pa. Hold, hold. Pray hold a little sir. I cry you mercy. I might be mistaken.
I see thou art a good fellow. I have half a dozen for thee faith. S' foot what
big words and terrible action he has! Is this the Bawds language? Pray pardon
me sir: I have been overwatch'd of late, and knew neither place, person, not
what I said at the instant.


Be. Indeed?


Pa. I sir, it is an infirmity I am much troubled withal; a kind of a --
between steep and waking -- I know not what to call it. I would give twenty
nobles to be cured on it. I pray take it not ill sir; I use any man so, when
the fits on me, till they thoroughly wake me.


Be. What as I did now? by the ears? Are you come to your self enough yet? or
shall I help you further sir?


Pa. No, it is very well now I thank you sir. Alas I put my Master to the
pains, twice or thrice a week, I assure you, to my grief.


Be. A very strange disease! How might you get it?


Pa. Faith I fell into 't first, with a conceit I took for overbuying a
bargain of Drink. Your business with my Master sir? I pray.


Be. Only to speak with him from the Gentlewoman was here eene now.


Pa. I shall acquaint him with it.


Be. I shall be your servant.


Pa. I pray pardon my error.


Be. And you my boldness.

Ex.
Pa. O not so sir. Well master Pimp I have a plot upon your employment, as
bravely as you carry it. I know he is a Bawd by his out-facing. And I do
humble and disguise my Manhood to work on him by policy: And if I put not a
fine^ slurre upon him for all his brave brauados, then Oliver Pate has no
brains; nor is there any difference betwixt a Seruing-man and a Pandar. --

Ex.
Be. What a Trim-tram trick is this? the Master and the Man both brain-cras'd;
as the one used me, so did the other my Mistress. But I have brought this into a
kind of civil sense again. Do we look like Bawds? There is some strange
ground for this mistaking. I am sure she has ever been reputed a virtuous
Gentlewoman; and has now the government, and bringing up of a Virgin, of a
most hopeful goodness. And I think, I know my self; and dare beat any Man
into a better construction of my quality.


Ent. Pate. Pa. Now wit, and be thy will! Sir, my Master desires to be
excused: for he is with some friends, on private business, concerning his
Marriage; which is to be to morrow. But says, if it please you to meet him in
the Evening, between four, and five, in the great Palace; and condnuct him
to the Gentlewoman, he will attend her with his best service.


Be. Between four, and five in the Palace: but how shall I know him? I never
saw him.


Pa. As I wished: But you may easily. He is of a comely stature; and will be
in a red cloa^e and a white Feather, Besides I Will wait on him.


Be. I thank you sir.

Ex.
Pa. Fare you well sir. Good Foist, I shall make a Whiskin of you now, and for
nothing too. I have been a little bold with my Masters name in this answer;
the knowledge of which he is unguilty of. I saw how he shifted her off:
Therefore I will further be bold both with his name and person, which I will
put upon a friend in store. My special friend, Captain Anvile, a notable
lecherous Tuppe: He has been at me for a bit out of my Masters flock any time
these three weeks. I Will pleasure him with her for ready money. I know it is some
cast stuff, that my Master has done withal. And let him take what follows.

Ex.
Act. I. Sce. VI.
Enter Fitchow, Howdee, with Ink and Paper. Fit. Well sir. And what said
Master Lucklesse?


Ho. Sir Phillip you mean forsooth.


Fit. The very same sir. But I begin to call him now, as I must call him
hereafter. Ladies do not call their husbands, as they are Knights: as sir
Phillip, sir Timothy, or sir Gregory. Did you ever hear my Lady Squelch call
her husband sir Paul? No. But master Squelch. Indeed all others must sir them
by their Christen names; because they are Knights, and to be known from other
men: only their own wives must master them, by their Sirnames; because they
are Ladies, and will not know them from other men. But to our business. What
said he to you?


Ho. His worship said forsooth --


Fit. Nay, What said you to him first? I love to hear things in order.


Ho. I said that as you bad me forsooth.


Fit. As I bad you, Clotpoll? what was that? Shall I ever mould thee into a
Gentleman Usher think thou, that stand'st so? Come forwards sir, and repeat.


Ho. My Mistress commends her best love unto your Worship; and desires to know
how your Worship came home last night; and how your Worship have rested; and
how your Worship dos this morning? She hopes the best of your Worships health;
and would be glad to see your Worship at your Worships best leisure.


Fit. This was very well: word for word as I instructed. But did you worship
him so much?


Ho. Yes truly, and he commended me for it; and said I showed my breeding.


Fit. Now sir. His answer? in his own words.


Ho. Quoth he. I thank thy Mistress, and I thank thee. Prithee commend my
service to her, and tell her, my worship came home upon my worships
Foot-cloath; my worship took very good rest, in my worships bed: My worship
has very little to do this Morning, and will see her at my worships leisure.


Fit. Did he say so?


Ho. It Was either so, or so much I am sure. But he did not make me repeat, as
you did, till I had cond it by heart.


Fit. Well Howdie get you down. And ^oe you hear Howdee? If sir Paul Squelch
come, bring him up.


Ho. I will forsooth Mistress.


Fit. I bad you learn to call me Madame.


Ho. I shall forsooth Ma-dame.


Fit. You shall forsooth Madame. It Is but a day to it; and I hope one may be a
Lady one day before her time.


How. A day too soon ^ doubt in this forward age.

Ex.
Fit. In the mean time, let me study my remembrances for after marriage.

Imprimis, To have the whole sway of the house; and all domestical affairs;
as of accounts of household chardges, placing and displacing of all seruant^ in
general; To have free liberty, to go on all my visits; and though my knights
occasions be never so urgent, and mine of no moment, yet to take from him the
command of his Coach; To be in special fee with his best trusted servant; nor
to let one live with him, that will not bewray all his counsels to me. To
study and practice the Art of jealousy; To feign anger, melancholy, or
sickn^sse, to the life. These are Arts that women must be well practiced in,
ere they can attain to wisdom, and ought to be the only study of a widow,
from the death of her first husband, to the second: From the second to the
third, matters of deeper moment; From the third to the fourth deeper yet; And
so proportionably to the seventh, if she be so long blessed with life: But of
these I may find time hereafter to consider in order as they fall. Besides, in
all, to be singular in our will; to reign, govern, ordain laws and break
'hem, make quarrels and maintain 'him; profess truths, devise falsehoods;
protest obedience, but study nothing more then to make our husbands so;
Control, controuert, contradict, and be contrary to all conformity: To which
end we must be sure to be armed always with prick and praise of the deceased;
and carry the Inuentory of our goods, and the gross sum of our Dowry
perpetually in our mouths. Then dos a husband tickle the spleen of a woman,
when she can anger him to please him; chide him to kiss him; Mad him to
humble him; make him stiff necked to supple him; and hard-hearted to break
him; to s^t him up, and take him down, and up again, and down again, when,
and as often as we list.


Enter Howdee. Ho. Madame.


Fit. I marry, now thou say well.


Ho. Andt please your Ladyship.


Fit. Well said again.


Ho. One M. Tridewell, ^ Gentleman, desires to speak with your Ladyship, from
Sir Phillip.


Fit. Tridewell! O it is Sir Phillips Kinsman. I have heard him speak much
good of him; and entreated me to give him good respect; which were enought to
mar his entertainment, had I not another purpose of mine own, that may prove
as ill. Bring him up Howdee.


Ho. I will Madame --

Exit.
Fit. I that was very well. This Howde^ do I mean with a cast Gown to put in
apparel, and make my Gentleman Usher; Not only for the aptness of his name,
to go on my visits; but for his proportionable talent of wit and manners.


Act. I. Sce. VII.
Enter Tried well to Fi^chow, Tri. If I can yet redeem him, he is happy. By
your leave Lady: May my boldness prove pardonable?


Fit. Sir the name of him, you come from, is warrant sufficient to make your
welcome here: All that is here being his.


Tri. Is this she trow!


Fit. I understand you come from Sir Phillip Luckles.


Tri. It Is true, I brought his name thus far to enter me to your presence.
But here I shake it off, as I would do his remembrance: but that I know him
too well.


Fit. Too well Sir? How mean you?


Tri. Too well indeed Lady; but in the ill part. I know him to be no equal
Match for you. Yet I hear you receive him as a Suter.


Fit. Right Sir. and him only.


Tri. It is not gone so far I hope.


Fit. Beshrew me but it is; and farther too Sir. He has all wooed and won
me.


Tri. Beshrew your fortune then. And if my coun^ell;
The friendliest counsel e're you hearkened to,
Stop not your ventrous foot from one step further,
(For now you are upon the brinke of danger)
You fall into a Sea of endless sorrows.

Fit. This is pretty!

Tri. Look back into your self; read over your Story,
Find the content the quiet mind you lived in,
The wealth, the peace, the pleasure you enjoyed;
The free command of all you had beneath you,
And no^e to be commanded by above you.
Now glaunce your eye on this side, on the yoke,
You bring your neck to, l^den down with cares,
Where you shall faintly draw a tedious life,
And every step encounter with new strife.
Then, when you groan beneath your burdenous charge,
And wearily chance to reuert a look
Upon the price you gave for this sad thraldom,
You Will feel your heart stabd through with many a woe,
Of which one dies not while a thousand grow.
All will be then too late: Now is the time,
Now rings the warning bell unto your breast:
Where if you can but entertain a thought,
That tells you how you are beset with danger,
You are secu^e; Exclude it, you are lost
To endless so^rowes, bought with dearest cost.

Fit. Pray Sir deal freely with me. What respect
Moves you to make this strong disswasion?
Is it your care of me? or love of him?

Tri. A subtle question! This woman is not brainelesse.
Love of him Lady? If this can be love,
To seek to cross him, in so great a hope,
As your inioying; being all the means,
Or possibility he has to live on;
If it be love to him, to let you know
How lewd and dissolute of life he is,
By which his fortunes being sunk, he is grown
The scorn of his acquaintance, his friends trouble,
B^ing the common borrower of the Town.
A Gallant lights not a Iobacco Pipe,
But with his bor^owing letters (she is not moved)
And if you put him off a fortnight longer,
Hee^l be laid up for moneys he took up
To buy his Knighthood; besides his deep engagements
To Goldsmith, Silkman, Tailor, Millener,
Sempster, Shoemaker, Spurrier, Vintner, Tapster,
(All stirs her not, she stands as if prepared
To hear as much of truth and bear with it.)
Men of all Trades, and Occupations,
From his Mercer downward to his Waterman,
Have venter'd the last sixpence on his Credit;
And all but wayt to pay themselves from you.
And I may well imagine how't would grieve
A woman of your wealth, to disburse all,
To save a Knight out of his Ward in the Counter;
And lack with all his company at home;
While he frequents youthful society
To make more charge for Nurseries abroad:
For I have heard him say you are old; and that
It is your wealth he marries, ^^d not you.
If this be love to him, that I discover
(The means to save you to be his undoing,)
Let no man take a friends help in hi^ wooing.

Fit. And how this should proceed from care of me
Falls not into my understanding Sir.

Tri Consid^r Lady --

Fit. Sir I have considered
Before, and in your speech, and since; and cannot
By all that can be said remove a thought.
I loved him not for words: Nor will I use
Words against yours: 'twere poor expression
Of love to boast it. It Is enough I know it.
Boasters of love, how can we Lovers call,
When most of such love one no more then all.

Tri. Sure, I was much mistaken in this woman.


Fit. Nor would I have you to expect a railing,
To say you basely wrong the Gentleman:
A way so common, common women use it.
But this Sir I will say, I were too blame
If I should think your love to him were less
Then the great care of me, you seem to urge,
As you pretend it is.

Tri. She will discover me.

Fit. You are his Kinseman nearly; and reputed,
By his own mouth, his best of chosen friends;
My selse an utter stranger, one from whom
You never had, or can expect least good.
And why you should, for a respect so contrary,
Call my poor wit in question to believe you,
Is most unconscionable.

Tri. Me think I stand
Like a false witness against another life,
Ready to take his punishment.

Fit. Nor will I foudly think you meant to seek,
Crossing his Match, to make it for your self:
Both for my known unworthiness; and your
Deprauing him being no possible way
To make me think the better of your worth.

Tri. Can this be she? how strangely am I taken!

Fit. But I forgive, and charitably think
All this brought no ill purpose; pretty Pageantry
Which may hereafter, among our marriage mirth,
Fill up a Scene: for now I Will take no notice.
Indeed I will not: you may, if you please,
And tell your Cuz how haynously I take it.

Tri. If thou have mercy, Love, keep't from my heart.
Will It please you hear me?

Fit. Sir I have, enough.
And crave but leave to speak this little to you,
Which shall by heaven be vncontrol'd as Fate.
If I shall find him bad, I Will blame my fortune:
Never repent or thank you for your counsel.
If I shall find him good; and all this false,
Which you so violently have urged against him;
I Will love him nere the more, nor you the worse:
For I am not so poor, nor weakly spiritted,
That should all friends to whom my faith is bound,
Say on their knowledge, that all this were true,
And that one hours protraction of our Marriage
Should mak't appear, that I would give allowance
To all their bugbeare reasons, to defer
That hour the uniting of our hands: because
Our hearts are linked by the Diuinest laws.

Tri. What have I done? The curse of ouer-weening brains,
Shame, and disgrace are guerdon of my pains.
O, I shall fall beneath the scorn of fools:
A punishment as just, as great for such,
That do in things, concern them not, too much.

Fit. What ails the Gent?

Tri. O^ what a settled rock of Constancy
She planteth her affection? not to move,
Though all the breath of sl^nderous reproach,
Driving tempestuous clouds and storms of horror,
Should beat, at once, against it.

Fit. Sir How dee?

Enter Howdee. Ho. Ma-dame.

Fit. Not you Sir.

Tri I would I had not seen, at least not heard her
In all so contrary to all opinion.

Fit. You are not well Sir.

Tri. They said she was old, unhandsome, and vnc^uill,
Forward, and full of womanish distemper.
She Is none of these: but opposite in all.

Fit. Sir.

Tri. My witty purpose was to save my friend
From such a hazard; and to loath her so,
That I might make her loathsome to his fancy:
But I my self am fallen into that hazard;
To wrong my friend; to burn in lawless love;
Which oh that prayers or penance may remove.

Fit. You are not going Sir?

Tri. I beg your pardon; dare not look upon you. --
Ex.
Fit. Gone in a dream* Well, I perceive this iugling.
This strain was only to explore the strength
Of my affection to my lucklesse Knight.
For which, if both their Cunnings I not fit,
Let me be called the barren wife of wit.

The end of the first Act.
Act. II. Sce. I.
Fitchow. Fit. The strangenes of this Gentleman's action will not out of my mind
yet. Sir Phillip could not but have a hand in it. Does he repent his bargain
already; and desire to be quit with loss of his earnest? It Is but his faith
and troth.


Enter Widgine, Anvile. Wid. Sister, where are you? My Governor and I are come
to wait upon you in sir Phillip Lucklesse coach. It waits at door for you;
and what to do think you?


Fit. I can not tell. Perhaps to inuit me forth into the air of ^ideparke or
Maribone; or else --


Wid. Or else me no or elses, sister, you cannot guess it. And I was a fool
to ask you the question, now I think on it.


Fit. That was well remembered brother.


Wid. Sister, you are to be a Lady, within this half hour. Your knight is
ready, so is the Parson too. My Governor here knows.


An. Yes Lady; and that he entreats you, to bear with the sodain^sse of the
occasion, which he protests, deeply vrges him to be married presently;
desiring you not to trouble your self in examination of his reasons: for upon
his honesty and honor, the end of it is for good to you both. Come sweet
Madame (now I am bold to give you your dew title) your knight is ready pressed on
his aduontures (dee hear) and it is only you, that he seeks to encounter.


Wid. There Is a jest now: but she understands it not. He makes her an
Infidel, a wild beast or a Monster, by that word Encounter; what do Knights
adventurers encounter else? look all the Mirror over. He Will encounter her. O
the wit of a Governor!


An. It Is as I say Madame, (dee hear) the good fit's come on him.


Wid. Ever at the tail of his dee hear, I am sure to smell a jest: the fits
come on him:


Fit. This sudden importunity confirms my former doubt: He thinks his
Scarecrow will make me keep off now; but he is cossend. Well sir. He shall
find me obedient to his hand. I am in all prepared to meet his purposes;
Though, Brother I had thought to had conference this Morning with sir Paul
Squelch touching a match for you.


Wid. For me sister: have you found out a wi^e for me? have you? pray speak,
have you?


Fit. And a good match too brother; Sir Paul's Niece: on whom, he, being
childles, means to bestow a large Dowry.


Wid. By my faith, and he may do it. He is rich Governor; one of the best Ten
in the hundred men about this Town.


Fit. He is a right good man. Within there. En. Howd. Bid Flaps your fellow
bring my Fan and Masque.


Ex. Howd. An. Is he bounteous and liberal ha? Does he make large Suppers and
lend money. Dee hear? Is he good at that?


Wid. Nay, there you mistake Governor. A good man in the City is not called
after his good deeds, but the known weight of his purse. One, whose name any
Usurer can read without spectacles; One that can take up more with two fingers
and a thombe upon the Exchange, then the great man at Court, can lift with both
his hands; One that is good only in riches, and wears nothing rich about him
but the Gout, or a thombe Ring with his Grandsites sheepmarke, or Grannams
butter-print on it, to seal bags, acquittanc^s and Counternanes.


Enter Maid, Howdee, with Mask and Fan. An. A Butter-print?


Wid. I twere a cunning Herald could find better Arms for some of 'hem: though
I have heard ^^r Paul Squelch protest he was a gentleman, and might quarter a
coat by his Wives side. Yet I know he was but a Grasier when he left the
Country; And my Lord his father whistled to a teame of horses (they were his
own indeed.) But now he is right worshipful, and I would I had his Niece
vnsight and unseen I faith for her moneys sake. You never heard me ask if
she were fair or hansome, dee mark that sister? My fathers rule right. And
if I be not a true Widgine. (God forgi' me) I think he was none.


Fit. But she is very fair brother, and very hansom^ and the prettiest
innocent country thing withal. Do I want nothing here?


Wid. I now you bring me to bed sister.


May. Your Masque sits well forsooth.


Fit. But where is my Wimple forsooth?


May. Upon the Cupboards head, pray Humfrey fetch it.


Ex. Howdee. Wid. He lives not that loves a Country thing like me* Alas none
loves a Country thing l^ke me. And though I am a Cockney, and was never
further then Hammersmith; I have read the Country man's common wealth; and can
discourse of Soccage and Tenure, Freehold, Copyhold; Lease, Demeanes,
Fee-simple and Fee-taile, Plowing, Hedging, Diking, Grubbing, occupying any
Country thing whatsoever; and take as much pleasure in it, as the best Clown
borne of 'h^m all.


Fit. And she is very young, (...) above fifteen, brother.
How this fellow stays! Go you.

Ex Maid. An. And that is a safe age for a Maid in the country: dee hear?


Wid. Pardon me Governor. I do hear and not hear thee at this time.


Fit. And sings, and speaks so pretty northenly they say.


An. Is she Northern (dee hear) will she not shrink in the wetting?


Wid. Governor, I know thou spokst a jest now, by thy dee hear: but prithee
forgive me; I cannot applaud nor mark thee at this time.


Enter Howdee with a Wimble. Fit. What mak^s you stay so? I fear you have
been among my sweet meats.


How. She said it was upon the Cupboard; and it was under the Cupboard.


Fit. Is this my Wimple? Do you bring Carpenters tools to dr^sse me withal.


Ent. Maid. Ma. Here is your Wimple forsooth.


Fit. I shall teach you to know a difference between gentlewomens geere and
Carpenters tools. I shall


Wid. Nay, she is so vexed now I Dear sister to the Country Less again. You
said, she spoke and sung Northernly. I have a great many Southern songs
already. But Northern airs nips it dead. York York for my money.


Fit. Yes brother she is Northern, and speaks so: for she has ever lived in
the Country, till this last week, her Uncle sent for ^er up to make her his
child, cut of the Bishopric of Durham.


Wid. Bishop, nor Bishopric shall hold her from me.


Fit. And brother --


Wid. S^ster no mo^e, though I have never seen her. No Bishopric in the land
from me shall win her. If you will go, and clap hands with your knight,
come; I would see you matchd first: because that will add some honor to the
Widgine^, when my self shall be brother to a Lady. I shall write first of
that name. And then am I no sooner married, Governor, but we will set our
travels a foot: to know Countries, and Nations, Sects and Factions, Men and
Manners; Language and Behavior.

And so in height of complement grow complete
More goes to making of a Man, the^ meat.

Exeunt. Act. II. Sce. II.
Enter Trainewell, Constance. Tra. Pray tell me; and tell me truly. What is
the most has past between you? I^ it be the maine loss of your Mayden-head,
it shall near go further: therefore let me know it.


Con As I live Mistress Trainewell, all that ere he had of me was but a kiss.
But I mun tell ye, I wished it a thoosnnd, thoosand till him.


Tra. How often have you seen him?


Con. Feath but that bare eance another, and your seln were by too. Trow ye
that I Would not tell ye and twere maer. By my conscience Mrs. Trainewell I lee
not.


Tra. That once that I saw him with you, your V^cle was there, too, in the
Orchard, but last week.


Con. Vary true, Mine Uncle was than by too. And he brought sir Phillip to see
his Orchard. And what did he than do, trow you, but tuke me thus by the
haund, and thus he kust me; he sed I were a deaft Less: but there he feind.
But for my life I could not but think, he war the likest man that I had seen
with mine eyne; and could not devaise the thing I had, might be vnbeggen by
him. Then by and by as we walkd, he askd mine Uncle, gin he would give him me
to make a Lady till him. And by my troth Mistress Trainwell, I lee not, I
blushed and luk'd upon him as I would feine a head it so: Mine Uncle said yes,
and sir Phillip shuke my haund, and good feath my heart ioyd at it. God gin the
Priest had been by. But I thought all sure enough; and would not have sold my
part for the Spanish Ladies Ioincture. But straight anon mine Uncle and he fell
on other talk, of Lords and Ladies, and many foud like things, I minded not:
For I is weell sure, this keept me waking ere sine. And God pardon me what I
misthought every hour in the night.


Tra. How have you made me wrong this Gentleman, to challenge him as if he had
been your due upon this idle complement? when I undertook the Message, I
presumed (for so your words did intima^e to me) you had been sure, as fast as
faith could bind you, man and wife. Where was my discretion? Now I perceive
this was but common Courtship; and no assurance of a Marriage promise.


Con. I wot not what he meant. But I is weell sure, I Will nere be sure to any
Man but he. And if he love me not as weell, God pardon him. For I meant him
none ill.


Tra. I know not how to counsel or comfort you, until I hear him speak. My
man tells me, he appointed him to meet, and bring him to you about this hour.
Poor heart I pity thee. Before thou come to half my years thou will forget
to love half so truly.


E^t. Beauis. Bea. Mistress.


Tra. O, are you come? where is the Knight?


Bea. He stays below, and wild me to come up first, to to make his passage
clear and secure.


Tra. That was discretion.


Bea. Rather fear I think: for he asked me if the house were not much haunted
with Roarers or Swaggerers, poniards and pistols: whether there were not an
Assurer for it as upon the Exchange, as i^ his life were upon hazard? whether a
Man might come on without loss of credit, and off without need of a Surgeon?
Much odd talk he delivers; that in my conceit bewrayes, at once, both a
^asciuious and cowardly disposition; and upon my understanding, cannot be so
generous, or nobly spirited, as he is received. Do what you will.


Tra. I suspect something.


Con. Will he not come Mrs. Trainewell?


Tra. Yes sweetheart. But go you to your Chamber and let me have a word before
you see him. Go call him in. Do so swetheart. I Will not be long.


Con. I Will do ought you bid me God gin I saw him eance.

Ex. Con.
Act. II. Sce. III.
Enter Anvile, Beauis. An. A place of fair promising! How have I lived that
never discovered this place before? This place royal! But sought my
recreation, in by-lanes, and sluttish corners, unsavory Allies and Ditch sides?
when here the whole house is perfumed: An Earl might think it his own
lodging; Ladies might come to see the pictures, and not blush, to go in or out
unmasked.


Bea. Sir, will you speak to my Mistress? The man is transported sure!


An. I understand thy office, leads thee no further; thy pains are abroad and
below stayres. Here honest Fetch. Look thee, here is the poor price of a new
pair of shoes; take it. Descend, and execute thy duty.


Tra. Bless me! this is another man. More abuse yet?


An. Now gentlevvoman to you. What fees belong to your Key? Come, vvher's the
bed? where is the party? Here Is the man: her^'s the money. Chunke chunke you
old Gamster, do hear? Here Is half a piece to buy t^ee complexion, sack or
Aqua-vitae. What thou like.


Tra. What are you sir I pray?


An. Faith one that's a little ill given at this time. Where Is the ^^ece? here
are the pieces ^ tell thee.


Tra. What piece sir? If you can imagine what you are, where you are, what you
would have, or where you would be, I pray tell me sir. ^le do the best I can
to satisfy you. OF my discretion will I sir.


An. Give me but a little space to wonder at thy strange demands and I will tell
thee, good discretion. If I should purchase a broken Cock^combe, or bruz'd ribs
now, for mistaking another man's habit, the smart were only mine. The villain
swore to me, his Master was sent for; and that his Master swore this was a Bawd
to his choice Whore, newly intertayn'd; and that she knew not him, and might
well mistake me for him. On which presumption I have waded thus far: and if I
stick in the Mud, or be driven back by a tempest, I am armd. It Is not the
first time I have been Wether-beaten, or Dry-beaten, dee hear?


Tra. Sir.


An. You do not know me? or, at least, not remember me?


Tra. If I erte therein sir, I hope your pardon. For as you shall reveal your
self, I shall either repent me of my oblivion, or accuse you of unadvisedness.


An. She speaks like the wife of an Orator, that could dictate her husbands
speeches! Were not you this Morning at sir Phillip Lucklesse lodging? spoke not
you with him? sent you not for him afterward to repair hither to the party?
And know you not the man?


Tra. O infinite abuse! Sir I cry you mercy. I hope you will pardon my weak
sightednes. The worlds ^ad and we love to deal securely. Could not your
worship make your self known sooner? Please you to entertain you self here
a while, I will instantly provide for your better welcome. O horrible
indignity! But if Porters and cudgels may be had for money, and I fit you not,
let me loose my discretion. I am furnished with blankets already. --

Ex.
An. I will instantly provide for your better welcome! Will you so? Twill
pass: and by this light I think for my Masters jest: I will recover my
chardges, and gain over and above for three returns more with the bare
repetition of it out of one ma^s pu^se, the Widgine. My jests are his
nutriment; and my wit is his own^, he pays so duly for it. If the Wench be
but pleasing, now, ^o my expectation, my felicity is crowned.


Tra. O child, we are undone.


Con. Mary, God shield Mrs. Trainewell. Is he geane? Must I not see him?


Tra. A less it is not he: but some Villain s^nt by him to vex and spite
you. One that persuades himself, we are of those common creatures* that sell
their honesties.


Con. Heaven bliss us, and give us leave to dee first. Can he be so vnkaind,
to scorn me so, Woe i^ me.


Tra. He is so dishonorable. But I wi^^ fit his Undertaker, what ere he be.
Look you, is that he think you?


Con. O Weell a near Mistress Trainewell! Sir Phillip is the likest man that
ere you saw days of your life. This Lozell dow not. Nor would he send him. So
trim a Man cannot have ^ike bad purpose.


Ent. Beauis. Be. Mistress, there is a Gentleman, one Master Tridewell, that says
he is sir Phillips Kinseman, will by all means speak with him.


Tra. Sweet heart, can you dissemble your sorrow with a Song, to pass a little
time? I Will down and sift out the subtlety of this deceit.


An. There is no government under the Sun, like the politic government of a
Bawdy House.

She sings above. Song.
You say my Love is but a Man.
But I can find more ods.
Twixt him and others then I can,
find between him and Gods.
H^ has in's eye
such Majesty.
His shape is so divine.
That were I Owner of the world.
He only should be mine.

An. Sweet prolog^e to the ensuing Intertude^ Ent. Bea. Do hear me honest
fellow? was this the Parties voice?


Bea. Only hers upon my sincerity sir.


An. Excellent! She has raised my desire above her noates. Why am I th^s
rauishd, and yet delayed?


Bea. Sir, for that my Mistress craves your Pardon. It Is not her neglect, that
works upon your patience; But the necessity to rid a troublesome Lord or two
out of the house, before the Party can appear to you. But please you to
obsucre your self in this dark Cl^set, while I convey them hence, and then,
instantly, the top Gallant of pleasure shall crown your Maine-mast, she says.


An. O how her wit and care reviues me! From hence forth she is my Bawd for
ever. My discretion! But are they wholesome Lords Sirah?


Bea. It Is no matter for any thing they did here sir, I warrant you. Inquickly
pray si^.


An. Must I be lockd in?


Bea. You cannot be safe else sir.


An. The politic government of this little common wealth!


Act. II. Sce. IIII
Enter Tridewell, Trainewell. Tri. Indeed Lady, I am so far from being in any
plot herein, that I protest it was merely by his outside, and that in the
do^btfull light of the Evening, that I could guess it was he. An^ had he been
denied, I had gone well satisfied, it had been some other man. Which if it
prove, and so his name be abused -- Or if it be he indeed, though hitherto my
most respected Cosen, that offers such an outrage, as you deliver it to be: I
am so much a friend to honesty, that let me but see the man or beast, I Will do
the fair office of a Gentleman to right you. Indeed Lady I will.


Tra. You profess nobly sir. First will it please you, see this Gentlewoman;
so much the servant of your Kinsman? What she is I have told you. Only I
present her to your judgment, whether her outward seeming may d^s^rue such
scorn?


Ent. Constanc^. Tri. Alas fair Lady, would they iniure you?


Con. Yea feath, and scorn me too sir. Ill betide them. But and you do me
help, and ma' sir Phillip love me, God reward you.


Tri. And has your youth and b^auty placed your love on him?


Con. Good ^eath sir, I may not say how well I love him: But were I one of
near ^a mickle, heest eene have all. And yet he loves me not.


Tri. Indeed it is pitiful. Weep not sweet Lady. He shall love ye.


Con. Now Gods benison light o'yee for it.


Tri. Show me the mischief, that has abused us all. Can you conceal him
longer?


Tra. In thus much* to conjure you by your Manhood; to do nothing that law may
question, to your, or our disuantage: we shall not need,

For our own ^ight, to do our selves misdeed. Therefore take this in hand. --


a Ropes end. Tri. You do instruct me well. Pray let me see him.


Anvile out of the Clos^t. An. Oh for a large Window, one of the last edition,
to leap out with half my life or limbs.


Con. Lo ye lo ye, the worst like man to Sir Phillip ye saw in all your
days.


Tri. Mischeiuous Devil! What magical madness coniur'd you i^to this shape?

Indeed I Will conjure you out on it.


An. Oh hold: for heavens sake hold. I Will confess.


Beats him. Tri. Nay, indeed I Will beat you a little first, you will confess the
better. Twill come the easier from you. It Is a good preparati^e.


An. Oh! oh, i will co^f^sse any thing.


Tri. No sir, not any thing. But the truth the truth sir.


An. The truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth (...) h^lpe me --


Tri. You would be sweari^g now would you? there is for that.


An. No indeed, indeed, and indeed la I will not.


Tra. Go^d sir no more. What may this poor thing be, that br^^' it ^o bu^ n^w?


Tri. I Will t^ll you Lady. The most notorious, base, beat^n Rascal ^^out the
Town. Twere l^st breath to say more by him. H^e is as you see* Only is name
is Anvile: and they that know him not, call ^im Cap^aine.


Bea. Anvile? Pray sit let me try in* blade on him too.


Tri. I pray thee do, to laue me a l^bour: for he is not h^lf^ b^at^n yet.


Beauis beats him. An. Oh, oh. Ladies speak for me. have you no mercy?


Tra. Hold. No more.


Tri. Well sir, thank the Ladies. Now sir, put this Ladies favor here in your
p^cket; and keep it there till I call f^r it. And mark what I say, if ever I
find thee without this Instrument or the like, when I shall call for it, to
beat the^ (mark me) indeed ^le ^eat thee (...). And now to your ^xamination.
How got your rotten Mutton ship into this Lyo^s case? was it by the Owners
knowledge? was the Master of these Clothes privy to your undertaking? Answer^
sirah, bonafide, I or no.


An. No upon my life; only his Man abused me for my Mo^ey.


Tri. What presumption made you think so vilely of the^e Ge^tlewomen?


An. Sir Phillips own words to his Man, upon a letter this Lady delivered to
him this Morning.


Tri. The Error's found. Her name you say is Constance, which likewise is the
name of a prostituted Strumpet, with whom, it is thought, the wantonness of his
youth has held former familiarity; and now it seems makes doubt, imagining
that letter to be hers, that she pretends a claim to him.


An. Right sir: which he took so contemptuously, that instantly he resolved
to mary the Widow, Mistress Fitchow; and was this Morning married privately in a
Chamber, within an hour after you saw him.


Con. And I undone than.


Tri. And I if it be so.


An. It is undoubtedly true. I saw them married, and dined with them, at his
lodging, where they will sup too: But after S^pper they go to her house in the
Town to bed.


Tri. This fo^le mistaking we shall all repent; if we preu^nt not what may
issue from it.


Tra. Alas sir all will be too late.


Tri. Will you but trust my service for your honor?


T^a. We will wait on you sir.


Tri. Then Sir for this time you shall be repriu'd,
from further penance: Rise and be our Guide.
But ke^pe your fear still: for if all out art
Miscarry, thou art sure to share the smart.
Ex.
Act. II. Sce. V.
Enter Pate, H^wdee. Pa. Brother Hum^rey, take my hand and word for thy
instructions. I will acquaint thee with an old Ladies Usher, in the Strand,
that shall give thee thy Gait, they Postures, thy Language, thy Habit, and thy
whole chardge in so plain^ a Method, that thou shall instantly start up as
pretty a Gen^leman Usher, none disprays'd as any between Temple Bar and
Charing-crosse; mary further I cannot promise you^ B^t prithee tell me. Is our
Lady of so hot a temper and stately carriage as she is reputed?


Ho. O I brother. She must command all, or all shall smoke for it. She did so
in my old Masters days I a^ (...). And he glad of peace at that rate too.


Pa. But how is she to her servants? Bountiful and free?


Ho. Y^s both of her voice, and han^s.


Pa. She will not strike will she?


Ho. And she could bite as well, the rankest Jade that ere was curried could
not come neat her.


Pa. Heaven be good to us! she nere struck thee, did she?


Ho. It Is no matter for that.


Pa. Nay brother, you know we have vowed to be all one: the Marriage has united
us. Prithee tell me.


Ho. She broke me a tooth once with a deaths Headring on her finger? it had
like to have cost me my life! 't has b^ene a true Memento to me ever since:
bobs of the lips, tweakes by the nose, cuffs of the ear, and trenchers at my
head in abundance.


Pa. Will she throw too?


Ho. Any thing she can lift. and makes us pay for all she bre^kes, though
she break our heads or races withal. Fan-handles, Look^ng-glasses or any
thing.


Pa. We shall have a foul h^ use on it I feare^ But since it is too ^ate,
fight Dog, fight B^are. I Will turn my Master loose to her. Here they come. By
this light me thinks they look as if they were fallen out already.


Act. II. Sce. VI.
Enter Lucklesse, Fitchow, Wayting-woman, Widgine, and Bulfinch. At the other
door Squelch, Nonsense, and Beauis. Squ. Though I were absent at the Ceremony,
I now bring my wishes of much joy.


Luc. And not too late I hope sir Paul. We may yet c^rry them to bed with us*


Fit. You had been chiefly sir invited, had we not stolen a day fr^^ Time, to
have done a^ athers part at Church, to which (...) your absence, I entreated
our worthy friend Mr: App ^he^sion Bulfi^ch ^ere.


Squ. M^st^r Bulfinch, I rejoice t^ meet you here directly. Look you sir. Do
you know this young Gentleman?


Bull. Yes sure, methinkes I should know him. But I am sure I never saw him
before. ha --


Squ. Have you forgot sir Hercules?


Bull. I apprehend him to be Master Salom^^ Nonsense, Son and Heir to my right
worthy friend, sir Hercules Nonsense of Cornwall. If you be not he sir. I am
sure it is you. I may be deceived, but I am certain it is he.


Luc. He is doubtful, but yet he is sure he knows him. What a Bulfinch is
this I sure it is his language they call bull-speaking.


Non. You say very well sir. And never credit me as you knew my Father, I would
be very ready, as you know how duty binds: for because it is a usual thing in
these days, desiring the love and friendship, I protest and vow sir. I should
--


Luc. Most perfect Nonsense! this is a finer youth then the other. My wives
acquai^tance are most answerable to her Kin^red.


Squ. It Is so dir^ctly Master Bulfinch, and I have brought him to Town -- I
vnderst^nd my N^^ce is in your house, my Lady Bride. Is she employed in your
Chamber?


Fit. She is not here sir. Is she Howdee?


Ho. Certes no Ma-dame.


Squ. How! not here? Sir^h what did you tell me?


Bea. What shall I say or do? (...) hanged directly.


Squ. How was she accompanied?


Bea. By my Mist^is sir, and (...) Gentlemen of her acquaintance, whose names I
know not.


Squ. Kmuery, Villainy and ^he^uery! ^ s^^ll it rank. She Is stolen, she is gone
directly.


Wid. It Is indirectly sir if she be stolen. There your word fails you.


Squ. If she be in the land I will recover her, I hope I shall find (...)
much right in Law, as a Broaker or a Ioyner.


Fit. Good sir Paul, I have not seen you thus d^^^^mperd. What a^flicts you?


Squ. Oh Mistress Fitchow, my Niece, my Niece.


Widg. He Is mad I think. Sir you forget my sister is a lady.


Squ. She Is is lost, she is stolen, and all my joy is gone. My Niece my
Constance.


Luc. Constance!


Fit. Who your young Niece that came la^y^^ out of the Country?


Wid. My Country thing sister, that you promised me?


Squ. Promised you? I am abused. I do suspect you accessaries. Sir I have
purposed and promised her to this Gentleman. And here I charge you to restore
her me.


Wid. Are you the Man si^ that must have her?


Non. Never credit me sir, if I have her, or have her not to my knowledge.


Squ. Sir Phillip, you are courteous and noble: as you will continue so in
opinion of honest men, let me have right.


Luc. Sir Paul, upon my faith I am ignorant of any such wrong. And, for her
part, should she fare amiss, I should suffer in her injury equally with your
self: for I profes^^^ to you, I did love the Less so well; and at the first
sight, that had I not been otherwise allotted, and indeed contracted to her,
from whom now there is no starting, she should have been my Bride, if all my
love and fortune might have won her.


Fit. Had you spard this Protestation, Sir, you might have dissembled your love
to me the better.


Luc. Dissemble?


Fit. It Is said sir.


Pa. By this hand my Lady's jealous already.


Ho. Bless us! what looks are these!


Squ. Sir I must take my leave, this is no time to trouble you.


Luc. Nay good sir stay, and share in our ill Banquet. Hark, some friend I
hope. Look firah. --


Cornets flourish. Ex. Pate. Fit. Some of your old companions have bro^ght you a
sit of Mirth. But if they enter to make a Tavern of my house, i will add a voice
to their consort shall drown all their fidling. What are they?


Ent. Pate. Pa. Some that come in gentile fashion to prese^e a Mask.


Fit. Lock up the doors, and keep them out.


Ex Howd. Luc. Break them open and let them in --


Ex. Pate. Fit. Shall I not be Master of my own house?


Luc. Am not I the Master of i^ and you --

Ex. Luc.
Wid. Nay sister.


Fit. Passion of my heart.


Squ. Bu^^. Madame, Madame.


Squ. you must allow of reasonable things.


Bu^^. Be contented, sir Phillip in a noble Gentleman, and a Courtier, and as I
apprehend.


Wid. I dare warrant you sister these are of his friends, that come with their
Loves to congratulate his fortune. Speak Master Nonsense. A speech of your
would do it.


Non. Never credit me, but I for sooth am of that opinion, that it is as it
were. I protest and vow -- I should be as sorry as any Man. --


Wid. It this were to be put into latin now. Which were the principal Verb.


Fit. M. Nonsense, you have preuaid. You see Iam content. But what I purpose,
Fate shall not prevent.


Wid. Did I not tell you.


E^^. Lucklesse. Luc. More lights, and let them enter. Gentlemen take your
places. Sir Paul to night forget your sorrow. So will I mine, though I renew ^
tomorrow. Come sit sit. M^stris please you.


Fit. You wrong your honor sir, your most humble Handmaid.


Wid. Brother I told you always she had hasty humors, and as unreasonable as
heart can wish: but soon over. Now she is as mild as any Dove again.


Luc. Then we are friends; and she is my Dove again.

Musick^. The Masquers Enter. All in willow Garlands. Four Men. Four Women.
The two first payres are Tridewell and Constance. Anv^le and Train well.
Before the Da^nee, Constance sings this Song. Song.
Nor Love, ^or Fate dare ^ accuse,
For that my Love did mere ^use;
But oh mine own unworthiness,
That durst presume so mickle bliss.
It was too much for me to lou^
A Man, so like the Gods above;
An Angels shape, a Saint-like voi^e,
Are to Divine for Humane choice.
Oh had I wishly gi^'n my heart,
For to have loved him but in part;
Sought only to enjoy his face;
Or any one peculiar Grace
Of Foot, of Hand, of Lip, or Ey,
I might have lived where now I dye.
But I presuming all to choose
Am now c^domned all to loose.

At the end of the Dance, Tridewell and Constance Whisper with Anvile, each of
them giving him a folded paper. Luc. It Is well performed. Now we would gladly
know. To whom we owe our thanks.


An. That I Will deliver to you. Mean while the rest desire they may withdraw a
while.


Luc. Light and all fair respect be given unto them. --


Exe^^t all the Masquers but Anvile. Squ. The Woman's voice had much in it like
my Niece.


Wid. ^our Ne^ce sir Paul, ods me I must go see her.


Luc. Nay brother give them all their free pleasures. By your leave you shall
stay.


Wid. (...) shall? I will then.


An. Now to your (...) I disclose my self.


Wid. Whoo^ (...) Gouer^our: Look you sister. Look you (...) ^hillip. Did nor
I always tell you he was the (...) wit ^the world? This was his own invention
^e be hanged else. Sweet Governor the conceit of the Willow, and why tho^
wearest it?


An. My self, only to make the number in the Dance suitable. And so did all
the rest to fulfill the fashion, only two excepted, that were the Leaders and
subject of the Dance. The one, your Cosen Tridewell, who holds himself a lost
Lover, in that you Madame to whom his affection is wholly devoted, have made
your self incapable of him, in being the lawful right of another. This paper
shows him more at large.


Luc. Is It possible! Did he for that so earnestly deswade me from her this
Morning?


Fit. I never saw him before this day, nor he me. These are tricks and studied
fooler^es to abuse me --


tears the Paper. Luc. Who was the other.


An. She was your fair Niece sir Paul; the most disconsolate Beauty that ere
I saw, giving her self for ever lost unto your love sir Phillip, presuming you
once promised her Marriage, of which she made a claim this Morning by her
Nurse, whom you reviled by name of Bawd, calling fair Constance Whore; and to
her more despite, hastened your Marriage sooner by ^ day, then you before
intended with this Lady.


Luc. Constance! May that name in all other women be accursed beyond
themseLucs. Hell it self could not have vapor'd such an error forth, as I am
lost in. Constance! why was that name made her^, that Saint-like Maids, when it
brought to my mind a Devils, nay worse, a Whores? to whom before was given.


Bull. Sir Phillip, and Madame, you apprehend these things as things done, when
they are not things indeed, but as it were show and devise, as by the sequel
you may at large apprehend.


Squ. I am of your mind Master Bulfinch. And trust me I am glad my Niece was
drawn into the witty conceit. For which with a new Gown he thank her.


E^t. P^t^. Luc. Where is she? I will endure no longer till I see her.


Pa. The Masquers are all gone sir.


Luc. Gone Vill^ine.


Pa. They took their Co^ches instantly, and dispers^t themseLucs by (...)
ways, I had no Commission to stay them.


Fit. Are you so sensible of her loss? --


Ex Fit. With her Servants. Squ. My Niece might not withstanding her lost love
have taken me home in her Coach.


Luc. You shall have mine sir Paul and my company so far to see her; and
whether their presentation were jest or earnest, I will not rest till I be
satisfied; My Coach. ^le make no stay S^eet-heart. She Is gone.


Wid. Excellent! the Bride's stolen to bed.


Squ. It should be so. I like the custom well.


Bull. ^ or if you apprehend it rightly, it expresses duty in the Woman to
lie prepared for him; and love in the Man, not to be slack to ^mbrace that
duty.


Wid. A p^^tty M^r^ll^ A Woman's duty to lie down, and a Man's love to get up.
One may learn something of these old fellows every day.


Squ. Therefore no Coach, no Company noble Knight. Pursue your home occasions,
and God g^'yee joy.


Luc. Nay sir Paul. I protest.


Squ. Not a word more of it directly.


Wid. Take me with you good sir Paul to see your Niece. I find Master Nonsense
here very indifferent, And I know ^will be the great^r ^oy to her to match but
into the family of sir Phillip, of which I am a half Pill^r now. Besides my
sister made me half a promise of her in good says, my ^ouer^ours my Witness,
and I have loved her ever since.


Squ. But you never saw her face.


Wid. No, but i will be hanged if I did not love her Visor the best ere while,
though I could not tell whose it was, nor which was which.


Squ. Good Master Water Widgine, this is no time of night to diue into business
of this depth. It is Nestling time I take it. How think you Master Bul^inch.


Bull. I apprehend it to be past 12^ Clock very near.


Squ. Therefore what your sister has promised you, let her perform if she
can; mean time this Gentleman is my choice: come Master Nonsense, you have had
a long time of silence. Master Bul^inch.


Bull. I apprehend you sir.


Luc. Weell, ^^e you to the Gate by your leave Ex Omnes.


The End of the second Act.
Act. III. Sce. I.
Lucklesse. Luc. What has she written here? It is the same hand I read in the
Morning.

I am not your c^unterfeit, or unchaste Constance; But that only Constance, that
truly love you, and that will, if you live not for me, die for you. Oh that^
could at any price or penance now redeem one day! Never was hasty Match sooner
repented.


Enter Widgine, Anvile. Wid. He Is me^ cholly me thinks. Slid my sister may
lie long enough languishing for a Ladyship, if this fit hold him: for she has
it not really till he go to bed and ^u^ her.


An. Will you not go to bed sir? we wait for your p^ints.


Luc. I will. But is it time? Brother, would you would do me the favor to
inquire.


Wid. Yes, i will go see for the Possets sake. --

Ex.
Luc. Captain, deal fairly with me. By what mean^s joined you with this
society? or how grew so soon your trust or great acquaintance with them?


An. Without offense i will tell you. You know this Morning at your Lodging, there
past some words betwixt me, and your sullen Kinsman, Master -- indeed la,
Tridewell, and from him too much indeed for me, a professed Soldier to bear:
But the place protected him. Till after upon m^ture consideration I made after
him for satisfaction, thus armed as you see. Purposing with this Ropes end to
right me; and to maintain that right with this sword, which I thank Mars
never yet faild me; as it has well been manifested by the effusion of much
unworthy blood of my abusers, in France, Spain, Italy, Poland, Sweden,
Hungary, all parts of Germany.


Luc. Good Captain travel not so far in your relation: but come home again
to the business.


An. I have used it in some score or two of Sea fights too by the way.


Luc. But to the matter Captain; where met you my Cosen?


An. The first sight I recouer'd of him, was as he was entering the house of the
greasy Knight there, what call you him?


Luc. Sir Paul Squelch?


An. Squelch, I a pox squelch him. I waited a quarter of an hour at his door,
for your Kinsman; and longer I would not, had he been Kinsman to the Emperor,
and my Enemy. Therefore in I went, told Master Tridewell in his ear, my
coming was to call him forth, to dischardge the office of a Gentleman with his
Sword, in answering those wrongs wherewith I held my reputation wounded. Was it
not well, ha? Could a poor Gentleman say more? and that in civil fashion very
privately in respect of the company, not showing any the least distemper, in
look or gesture. But the Women read presently in his countenance the whole
matter; and briefly by their pretty persuasion I took ordinary satisfaction of
him.


Luc. What was that Captain?


An. Why he confes^'d he wronged me, was sorry for it, and so forth. What
should we speak more on it. This you must not speak of neither. You must
promise me that of your honor, as you desire to hear what follows: I love no
ripping up old so^res.


Luc. Not a word I, Captain upon my word. What a Rascals this! to the point
good Captain.


A^. Then thus sir? I soon perceived, their drist to appease, and win me to
their friendship was for my assistance, and indeed to bear the^ out in this
nights work, the Mask. The whole plot of all which was merely to so we
dissension between you and your new married Lady, to work if they can a
separation, before carnal copulation, in which if they can prevail, and that
the dislike continue between you to that height, that a divorce be required
equally by the consent of you both, your Marriage then is frustrated, and you
stand in stat^ quo prim dee hear. So your Cosen Tridewell may lawfully pursue
his hopes in your Bride, who^ he loves as eagerly as the melancholy virgin
dotes on you.


Luc. But may this hold good in Law Captain?


An. There Is a Ganon for it Sir. If both parties agree to a divorce after
Marriage, so it be before Copulation.


Lu. Though the former part of his discourse, was a most egregious lie, yet the
last has some sound of pleasure in it: which I may make use of.


Enter Tridewell. Tri. Come gi'me the instrument. Shall I never find thee any
where, but thou will by just desert exact a beating from me? Have thou no
conscience? would thou have me lame my self, or melt my grease upon thee.
Come Sir, I have ouer-heard you all; give me the Instrument, the instrument I
say. Indeed I Will have it. So. Now Sir --


Luc. Nay Cosen, for the service he has done you to night, and love of me,
pardon him this time. Besides, his charge is in the house, at whose charge he
lives. You will both shame and undo him.


Tri. Well Sir, I shall for this time pardon you, and never beat you more, it
before Sir Phillip here you will subscribe to this. It Is nothing but a faithful
protestation to do reasonable things as I shall appoint, and not to reveal
what I shall trust you withal.


An. If you will covenant on your part in defense of my reputation, to let me
rail at you behind your back, I will subscribe*


Tri. Take your pleasure. I am content. Write Sir.
In what without a Knave we cannot end,
A Knave imployd does the o^fice of a friend.

An. Here Sir, I deliver it as my deed.


Tri. Here, and I deliver you this again to keep. Indeed you shall for
performance of covenants.


Ent. Widgine. Wid. Oh Sir you are defeated. My sister has fortified her
lodging with locks, bolts, bars, and barricados.


Luc. To what and brother: for what cause?


An. I know not whither it be discontent or wilfulness, that possesses her:
but you are to have no entrance there to night. That she has suificiently
sworn.


Tri. Good.


Luc. How! am I denied? To my wish.


Tri Pray let me speak with you Sir.


Luc. At large you shall. For though it be my wedding night you shall be my
Bedfellow. Lights there. Good night brother.


Tri. Good night Captain.


Wid. How now Goue^nour? what has angerd thee? something troubles thy
countenance.


An. Your coming, and the privilege of this place has once more preserved
that unworthy Tridewell from the justice of my fury, which should have fallen
on him, had he bin tw^nd with me by this light.


Wid. By this light, Governor? would you have fought by Candl^-light.


An. Sir I dare do it by day light, Moone-light, Starlight.


Wid. Ow'e-light.


An. Any light under the S^nne. And that shall be tried well on Tridewel^
head, dec hear?


Wid. A good jest! Tried well upon Tridewell. He has wit in his anger. But
Governor, laying your anger aside, let me be behol^en to your wit in
atchieuing this Northern Less. Thy acquaintance with her must be the means.
Prithee go lie with me, and help me to dream ^ut some course. Nay look now
thy fury blows so high thou do not hear me.


An. Not h^are? ye^, were I in a Combat as great as ever I my self fought any,
I could both hear, and give counsel. Therefore say unto your self, by the
help of your Governor she is your own.


Wid. O Man past example!


An. But dee hear?


Wid. Here, here. Thou shall have anything --


gives him Men^y. Exe^^t. Act. III. Sce. II.
Enter Squelch, Constance Nonsense, Trainewell. Squ. Come your ways huswife.
No more of your whynings, and counterset tricks. If this Gentleman be not
worthy of your love, I am not worthy to be your Vnc^e, directly.


Tra. Alas, what mean you sir.


Squ. Accept of him, you accept of me. if you refuse him you deny me directly.


Tra. She understands you not a word sir.


Squ. If you will join hands and faith with him, Here Is your portion, there is
your ioincture; if not, your way lies before you, pack directly.


Tra. Good sir, consider her disease. If her understanding were direct, you
might speak directly to her. But if I have any discretion she is too full of
melancholy to be purged this way.


Squ. What would you have me do? Or how in your discretion would you council
me?


Tra. Not to be mad sir, because she is melancholy, not by taking a wrong
course for her recovery to ruin her, and forfeit your judgment Do you
think, that commands with chidings, threats, or stripes have power to work
upon her, when she has neither will nor reason within her self to do, or
not to do anything whatsoever.


Squ. Now the g^gs up.


Tra. If her health in sense and understanding were perfect: yet as she is
Woman, her will were first to be wrought upon by fair and gentle treaty. But
as she is at this time so sick in mind, that knowledge of what she i^, what
she do^, especially of what she should do is dead in her, her Mind must be
first recouer'd; and that by a due course, in soft and temperate proceedings;
to which fit time as well as means must be ^ilovved. Moreover --


Squ. Oh. No moreouers I besee^h you, not more of her at this time. I
understand your purpose already. I do directly. Therefore speedily take what
course, and use what means shall in your discretion be thought fit. I will
subcribe, I will directly (...) to your discre^ion. My wise when thee went out
of the wo^l^ le^t me as great a c^^e behind her in the charge she gave me with
this Woman, this quick fighted Guide of my house, a blind one were better.


Tra. You should first see, if it pleased you, how her affection may b^e
wrought upon by the Gentleman's own fair entreaty. Pray sir speak to her like
a Su^er, look upon him Sweet heart: This Gentleman loves you. Pray speak sir.
Do you not?


Non. N^uer credit me pretty Gentlewoman --


Con. Nor will I, fear it not. Nor any man that says he loves me. For alas!
I was too lately sco^n'd.


Non. You are a L^sse indeed. I pro^^st and vow, and such ^ ^ne, as I would be
very ^^rry to appear any way, or in the least (...), as it were please you to
understand me: for I Will be sworn, ^he^e is not in the World.


Con. Truth in swearing, less in promising.


Non. If you will believe me Lady.


Con. Nor ne man for your sake.


Non. There is not in the world I say --


Con. I say so too sir. What wast I pray.


Non. There is not in the world any Gentlewoman --


Con. Tell that no further; for we are all too gentle lessen men were less
cruel.


Tra. Hear him speak Constance.


Con. You shall hear me sing first by your leave.


Tra. Poor heart.


Squ. Here Is wise work! direct ^^nacy and Ideotismc. Bless my house from the
Ward Masters Informers,


Con. Pray sir, are you sir Phillip?


Tra. Say you are.


Non. Yes Lady, I am sir Phillip.


Con. But you are none of my Sparrow. Your mouth's not wide enough for your
words.


Tra. She has stopped his mouth there.


Con. His words would soften Adamantine ears. And looks would melt a Marble
heart to tears. O Wea is me!


Tra. Nay you must not weep Swe^t-heart.


Con. What (...) I do them? Shall I ever get him by singing trou ye? In Troth
I would never but sing, if I thought that were the gainest way.


Tra. I had rather hear you sing though, then see you weep.


Con. It must be of my Love than, my Sparrow as I told you. And thus it goes.

Song.
A bonny bonny Bird I had
A bird that was my Marroe:
A bird whose pastime made me glad,
And Phillip it was my Sparrow.
A pretty play-fere: Ch^^p it would,
And hop, and fly to fist,
Keep^ ^ut, as ^ were a Vsur^rs Gold,
And bill me when I list.
Phillip, Phillip, Phillip it cries
But he is fled and my loy dies.
But were my Phillip comd a gain,
I would not change my Love
For Juno's bird with gaudy train,
Nor yet for Venus Dove.
Nay, would my Phillip come again,
I would not change my state,
For his great Name sakes wealth of Spain,
To be another Mate.
Phillip Phillip, etc.
No no, you cannot be the Man. I know him right weel by you sir, as w^ly as you
be. Gin you had all his trim geere upon you, and all his sweets about you, yet
I should not be so fond to mistake a Ienny How let for a Tasse^ Gentle. Ah,
ah, ha.


Tra. Why Lone, what faul^ do you find in this Gentleman?


Con. Feath, but eene eane. That her is not ^ir Phillip. For thus would he
do. Thus would he kiss his hand; and thus ta' me by mine. Thus would he
look, and set his eye on mine: And give me lea^^ to see my self in's eye^.
It Was the best Glass in troth that ere I saw. I nere look weell fine. Nor ere
shall i am sure, until I see me there again.

Sing. But he is geaue, alas he is geane, and all too late I sorrow.
For I shall never be well again, till yesterday be to marow.
God you good Even sir. --

Ex.
Tra. ^ollow her sir.


Squ. And put her to it sir, and out of this humo^. I Will add the the other five
hundred to her portion, and you bring her about handsomely. O when I was a
Bachelor! I think I can do somewhat yet in my old days. But when I was a
Bachelor, how I could have handled this geere.


Non. Never credit me sir, if you will believe me but --


Squ. I do believe you sir sufficien^ly good Master Nonsense. No more of your
impertinent speec^es. But follow her, and put her to'^ I say, to'^ directl^.
Take her into the Orchard^ ^as there she fell in love they say It may be the
place is O neno ^.


Ex. Non. Tra. Sir, there will be no way for her recovery, but to rem^u. her
lodging, and have some good Phisicians about her.


Squ. Where you please; and use whose help you please: sh^e is your own;
dispose of her treely, as I will of what is (...) course of life directly. Let
me see. She (...), past recovery. Say I should marry, I might yet have an
(...) mine own.


Tra. Yes, but of whose getting sir?


Squ. There might rise a fearful question.


Tra. Think not of it sir. A man of your years, and gravity, with the
respect the World gives you for your place and worship in the Common Wealth,
together with the riches you have p^ld up in a Mountainous estate; to cast all
down with your (...), and fortune at the foot of a stranger I Think what
would be thought of you, if such a dotage should possess you


Squ. She Is falling into a tedious Lecture.


Tra. Pray how was Master Spartledirt talked on the other day for doing such a
trick? yet he was held a wise Lawyer: You see a fair example in the late
Marriage of sir Phillip Lucklesse, and his Fitchow, a Match of your own
making, and ^^use of your Neeces and your ovv^e Misfortune.


Squ. No more I beseech you.


Tra. There Is tugging for a Mastery, and buffetting for the breeches. He barks
at her, she snaps at him; she breaks his wine Glass, he her looking Glass;
she puts away his Servants, he turns away hers; she locks her Chamber door,
he bolts his, begetting nothing but a World of strife and disorder.


Squ. I pray shut up that point, I will not marry. No directly I will not,
though the truth is my purpose: was to have cast my self and fortune wholly
upon y^u, if (...) might houe seemed well in your discretion, vmh vmh.


Tra. I pray stay a little sir, take me along with you.


Squ. Not a step further, this way by your leave. I think I have pusseld ^er
discretion.


Tra. Understand me sir. As I would not have you fall rashly upon anything; no
more would I have you fly suddenly from any purpose, without advise and sober
deliberation. If you should marry one that would be a Comfortable Nurse unto
you, as (though I say'^) you partly know --


Squ. Say you nothing, ^er I do know nothing, nor I will know nothing more of
this matter directly: For if ever I ma^ry, let me suffer a^ that the-Law
prouides for Periuty; let me be cropped and slitt worse then a French Curtall,
or a parliamentall delinquent for blaspheming the blood royal. No, I wi^ now
bestow my wealth in Mo^umentall good deeds, and ch^ritable uses in my life
time, to be talkd well on when I am dead.


Tra. Yes, build Alms houses and Hospitals for beggars, and provide in
Bridewell, and houses of Correction for your friends and ki^d^ed. Pray give
enough to Bedlem, you may feel some part of that benefit your self before you
die, if these sits hold you.


Squ. She would have me do no good with that I have n^^ther. Let me
consider. The most I have to say directly (...) not been very well gotten.
Were it not a point of good conscience, to spend that prodigally, and save a
(...) And that which I have g^t well and honestly, has been (...) much care
and travel; were it not then a point of equity to my self, to spend that with
ease and pleasure? It Is done directly, what I have is mine own; and I will be
merry with it. Within there ho.


Tra. What Is the toy now?


E^t. Clearke. Squ. Sirah. Take there twenty pieces. B stow it all presently in
choycest meats, and richest Wines for my Supper. This one nights Supper
directly. What I have is mine own: and I will be merry with it.


Tra. Cl^. Bless us!


Squ. Six brace of Partriches, and six Pheasants in a Dish. Godvvits, Knots,
Quails, and the rest of the meares answerable for half a score, or a dosen
persons of the best quality: whom I will think of presently.


Cl^. Brain of a down right Justice! What means my Master, to leap out of
thirty shillings a Week house keeping into twenty pounds a Supper? I may
sell my Clearks place: for sure he means to thrust himself out of the
Commission. He can be no Justice long if this humor hold. Who shall be the
Guests tro^?


Squ. I have it directly. You shall go to the Ordinaries, and from thence
inuit such young G^llants as you find to be Ga^^^rs. I mean of the highest
cut.


Tra. Men that you do not know sir?


Squ. I directly. If they know me, or have heard of me it is sufficient: we shall
be s^ one acquainted. Bring not a man with any paid for gold Lase or Searlet
about him, I charge you, nor without a Protection in his pocket.


Tra. You run a great hazard in this sir. You may perhaps be cheated of all you
have, if I have any discreation.


Squ. And much good do it their good hearts. What I have is mine own, and I
will be merry with it directly. You have put me by one or two courses: But not
all your discretion shall beat me out of this. If you take some care in the
business, and huswife the intertainement to make it brave for my credit, you may
get a Gown or a Jewel by it. If not --


Tra. Sir i will obey you. If he be mad I will not be foolish, bat strike in for
a ^^are. And for your Guests sir, let me alone. My man is b^st acquainted at
the Ordinaries.


Squ. Why now you speak.


Tra. Within there. Beauis. But in troth sir, I doubt whither any such Guests
will come, you have always been so strict and terrible in your iustitrary
courses.


Ent. Bea^^. Squ. Let him say mine eyes are opened, and their virtue is
revealed unto me. And if any of the youngsters have Mistrisse^, let' hem
bring'hem. They shall have Mn^cke^ what I have is mine own, and I will be
me^^y with it. My flesh, though not in the way of marriage, requires some
satisfaction too. Where might a man in all this plenti^ull Town, find a choice
piece directly that he might make his own? only his own? A very hard
question. And custom has made it almost an vnreasonaone, though it were in
ones own Wife. In a Citizens or Tradesmans Wife; a Man must suffer the
Riuall-ship of a slouenly husband: the stink of his horns ever under ones
nose. A cast Lady, or Gentlewoman of courtly acquaintance, to maintain her, is
to ^eed a Fountain, that wastes it self through many Spow^s: What I supply her
with, will be drawn out by twenty. All her friends must share of my
prodigality. To train up an innocent country Girl, is like hatching a
Cuckoe; as soon as she is ripe, and sees the world before her, she flies at
her advantage, and leaves me dead in the neast. How now.


Ent. Clearke. Cle. Sir, here is a Delinquent brought before your worship to be
examined, a Gentlewoman sir.


Sq^. Who brings her?


Cle. Ve^hem the Constable sir.


Squ. Look on his feet. Sure it is the Devil in his likeness: That old Bawd
knowing how it stood with me, has brought me one of his Succubae Art. Sure it is
Vexhem?


Cle. Sure sir? The devil himself knows him not better then I know him from
the Devil. I am sure, he has been in see with me these nine years: almost
ever since he was Constable; and has brought more profit to my deske then all
the honest Officers in the counties of your Commission sir. Oh he is a rare
fellow, he will tickle a Whore in Coany.


Squ. You know my mind. I will in and handle this g^ere in priuity.


Ent. Nons. Constable. Tra. Beauis, You understand me. Prithee go discreetly about
it.


Bea. Pray let me see a little of this first.


Non. If I put her to it or ever offer to put any Woman to it again, never
credit me: let me never be trusted, I protest and (...) Gentlewoman she has
used me --


Tra. Very ill fauouredly me thinks.


Bea. Have you put herto't sir.


Non. I cannot put her to it, nor she will not be put to it. Sing.


Con. I wo'not go to it, nor I man not go to it,
For love, nor yet for see:
For I am a Maid, and will be a Maid,
And a good one till ^ ^aye.
Yet mine intent, I could repent, for ^ne mane company.
But you are not he Sir. If you b^, you are wondrously changed. I am sure his
faults were not written on his forehead. God pardon him.


Non. If mine be, you can best read'hem, it is your own handwriting.


Bea. She has done a cure on him. He spoke sense now. Alas Sir, that a fair
hand should make such blots I what hand i^ it? Secretar, Roman, Court, or
Text? I have not seen the like: it is all dominicall letters, red Ink. His
face is like an Almanac of all Holy ^ayes.


Tra. Sure it is Stenography, every Character a word: and here and there one for
a whole sentence.


Bea. Here Is one might serve for a whole History. The life and deatho' Raw
head, and Bloody bones.


Non. I see I am not such an Ass, I would I might never stir but I am --
Wh^r^'s S^r Paull If I do not tell him --


Tra. What did you to prov^ke her thus?


Non. Nothing but what I can ans^ere in a sort dee see me as well as -- never
(...) credit I had warrant under his hand


Bea. How Sir?


N^^. By word of mou^h sir.


Bea. That Is about hand by your leave.


Tra. Is it so? Good S^r, his meaning was, you should put her fairly on like a
Lover, with sweet speeches, and gentle behavior.


Non. S^ee vnd^^stands nothing that I can speak.


Bea. Nor any body else I think.


Tra. And therefore you fell to express your self in rude action. She has
sorn'd you but well: you are a sine putter to it indeed.


Sing. Con. Mum to^t Mun toot, Muntara rara Muntara ra ra rarie, And ever I
sigh and cray alack for Phillips love I die.

^ust so did our Deyry Maid at home serve my Lady Fidledees Batler. And there I
learnt it. But when she had so done what did she than do? Bestowed a
penyworth of Vnguentum Album, and it made him whole presently. Good Mrs.
Traynwell send to your Poth^cary for some: 'twill make him we ^ e'n^^ now.


Tra I sweetheart: but first you shall go in the Coach with^^ to the Doctors.


Con I know I am not weell too. But I Will ha'no Doctor but Sir Phillip.


Tra. It shall be Sir Phillip, (poor soul,) all must be Sir Phillip. ^ou
shall lie at his house.


Con. But not wi^h him by my faith, and your leave, in it we be married.
Prithee Beauis gar him wash his face he will scare some bodies Barnes else. --


Ex. with Tra. Bea. I Will throw him into the Dock rather then he shall succeed
Jack O'Dandy. Come sir, all shall be well again. Fear not.


Non. I thank you sir.


Act. III. Sce. III.
Enter Lucklesse and Tridewell. Luc. Cosen, I understand you at full. And am
glad that occasion has pointed out a probability to lead me out of this
labirinth; and you to your desired end.


Tri. Follow but the way you are in Sir, and you shall arrive at your own
wishes.


Luc. She has put me into it her self too.


Tri. By sequestring her self from you the first night.


Luc. For which Cosen, if I take not occasion to keep my self from her, all
nights, days, and times hereafter, may the act of our bodies beget prodigeous
monsters and nothing else.


Tri. A fearful vow! look to it. And I warrant she sues for the Divorce
first.


Luc. May we prove but as certain as you are confident in out other project,
for recalling Constance to her self, and me then to her, these ^etters being
shaken off, may they pro^e g^lden ones to you, I shall not envy you.


Tri. For her take no thought sir. The intrest I have in her Tu^resse, with the
work I have fashioned upon my Anvil, shall bring all to your wish. I expect to
hear from him instantly.


Luc. I Will freely resign your wish to you, and add half I have to a^gment her
estate to you. Oh I tremble ^o think on her: her presence shakes the house
like an earthquake: the outrage of Prentizes is not so terrible to a Bawd or a
Cutpurse, as her voice is to me. Yet to you she may be calm as the breath of
friendship, and mild as the midnight whispers of chaste love.


Tri. Sir, I profess my affection flies eagerly at her. She takes me deeply,
how ever you have mistaken one another. Oh here comes my Anvile! Me thinks
his very countenance invites me to strike him* though I know he dos me good
service now.


Enter Anvile. An. It Is done sir. I warrant she is placed, succesfully, dee
hear?


Tri. How prithee?


An. I have sent her before his Worship by a Constable.


Luc. Who has he sent? before whose Worship?


Tri. You shall know all. He has sent your cast whore before sir Paul.


Luc. The Mystery, Gentlemen?


Tri. The success shall unfold it in good time to your and my benefit? doubt
not, if she but follow her instructions.


Luc. Nay, if she be not Mistress of her Art, there is no deceit among Trades
men, no bribery among Officers, no bankrupt out of Ludgate, nor Whore out of
Bridewell.


An. And if I have not fitted her with a Second, my friend vex him, the
Constable, then say there is no wit among Kna^es, no want among Scholars, no
rest in the grave, nor unquietness in Marriage, dee hear?


Luc. Of which here comes the truest testimony.


Enter Fitchow, Pat^, Widgine, Howde^. Fit. Out of my doors thou Miscreant.


Wid. Nay sister. O governor, art here.


Fit. Avoid my house, and that presently, I Will claw your skin off after your
Liuory else, and make you so much nakeder then time makes all other serving
Creatures.


Luc. Do you talk of turning away my Man? You shall give me leave to turn
away your Howdee first, and then put off my, God a mercy how do thou.


Fit. Am I ieerd? flowted to my face? Is this fit usage for a Wife?


Lu^. A Wife? a Witch.


Fit. A Husband? a Hangman.


Lu^. Out pusse.


Trid. Nay sir, indeed the fault is yours most extremely now. Pray sir forbear
to strain beyond a Woman's patience.


Fit. Am I scornd and reuild?


Luc. Ah, ha ha.


Fit. Made a property for laughter?


Luc. A ha, ha.


Fit. Have I no friend, no Servant to command?


Luc. Ah ha, ha,


Fit. Has my Ladyship made me so lamentable a thing, that I have lost the power
of a Mistress? You sir, run and call some friends to succor me, or I Will thratle
you.


Luc. Stir but a foot sirah, or utter but a syllable, and i will cut your
thratle pipe.


How. I shall be carved out betwixt them.


Fit. What will become of me? you, VVood-cock, Ninihammer.


Wid. Have you forgot my name sister? would not Widgin^ become your mouth, as
well? forget your natural brothers name?


Fit. Can you call me sister, and see me abused thus?


Wid. Foutre for sisters; I am not to meddle with an other man's Wife. I am about
one for my self. You mentioned her first to me. But I must be be holden to
others wits and means to compass her: or else --


Luc. Do as I bid you, or --


How. O sir she will rend me in pieces, tear me like a Lark.


Luc. Do thou fear her or me. Do It or I --


How. Sir, there is Master Walt^r can sing it rarely.


Luc. So he shall sir, and so will all; but you must put us in. Begin.


How. Hey down down, etc.


sing. Wid. S^ster, Wife, and a^l, is a present nothing to this. Come round
Gentlemen* Keep her but off, and let me alone.


They all take hands, and dance round. VVidgine in the midst sings this Song.
They all b^are the burden, while she^ scold^ and strives to be amongst'hem.
T^^^ewell holds (...) off.

Wid* Song.
He that marries a Scold, a S^old,
He has most cause to be m^rry:
For when she is ^n her fits, he may cherish his wits
By singing hey down derry.

A^l. -- Hey down down derry down down down, etc.


Ent. Bulsinch. Bull. I cry you mercy Gallants. I apprehend you would be
private.


Luc. O (...) M^ster Bulfinch, you shall make one of our Counc^ll.


Bull. I appreh^n^ Gen^lemen you are merrily disposed; in good ^adnesse.


Wid. App^e^end a ^o^les head. Come into play.


All. I, (...) with him, and about again.


They pull him into the Round. Wid. He that marries a merry Less,
He has most cause to be ^ad;
For let her go free in her merry tricks, she
Will work his Patience mad.
But he that marries a (...) a Scold, etc.
He that weds with a Roa^ing (...),
that will both ^crat^^ and (...)*
Though he study all day to make her away,
will be glad to please her at night.
And he that copes with a sullen Wench,
That ^carc^ will speak at ^ll,
Her doggednesse more then a Scold or a Whore,
Will perpetr^te his Gall.

All. Hey down down, etc.
He that is matchd with a Turtle Do^e,
That has no spleen about her,
Shall wast so much life in the love of his wife,
He were better be without her.
But he that marries a Scold, a Scold, etc.

Fit. O scorn upon scorn, torment upon torment. Let me rather be buried alive
then bear this. (...) She gets loose. Slaves, Rascals, get ye all out of my
doors. By virtue of my nails, I cha^g^ ye. ^e not leave an Eye (...) a No^e
amongst ye


Flies upon all. How. Wid. Bull. Anv. O Lord, O Lord.

Luc. Come bouncing after my boys.

Ex. singing. Fir. Oh how am I wronged.

Ex. Omnes preter Fit. Tri. Bull. Bull. Sure I (...) apprehend this (...) as
^ight as could be possi^le the wrong way.


Trid. Madame, I see too much of your vexation; and indeed I suffer too much
with you. As I am a Gentleman I will give you right friendly Counc^ll, if you
will hear me.


Fit. Sir I have per^^^'d humanity in you and do love it in you. But I know
not what to do, nor whom to hear. I am fallen unto the pit of bondage, and
will take any course for my Redemption. Oh Master Bulfinch.


Tri. This will make to my purpose.


Fir. Sir I am wrong^ b^yond e^pression. This Gentleman is an eye witness of my
sufferings. Pray come in Sir. I will hear your counsel together with this
Gentleman's advise.


Bull. Madam^, your case is in my apprehension, most d^sperate, yet (...)
comfort in regard you seek ad^ise and counse^l. Mine is ever ready, and more
fortunate oftentimes the (...). For I do nothing but upon good reason and
de^^beration.


The end of the third Act.
Act. IIII. Sce. I.
Enter Squelch. H^^dup. Vexhem. Vex. Sir I bes^^ch your worship, deal not so
severely with me.


Squ. Sirah I will teach you how to deal with Dealers, and not with virtuous
Gentlewomen; bring Innocence before Justice; and be able to lay nothing to her
charge.


Vex. Indeed sir, the Captain informed me of her; and said he would be here
ready to accuse her. Good sir.


Squ. Most officious Sir. What warrant had you? None. What is the Captains
name? you know not. Where Is his lodgeing? you are ignorant. But here was your
cunning; it appears most plainly, that you thinking her to be one of the
trade, thought to make a Prey of her pu^se: which since your affrightment,
could not make her open unto you, you thought to make her Innocence smart
for it. I will make your Knavery smart for it directly. Come is the Mittimus
ready? gi' mee't --


writes and seals it. Ent. Cle^^k. Vex. Good your worship, hold your hand. For
my poor family sake.


Squ. Here take him forth, and let the next Constable convey him to Nowgate.


Vex. Sir it is the first time that ever I offended in this kind. I pray your
worship be of a better mind toward me.


Squ. Away I say directly. As I am in my right Mind and Midlesex. I will show
my justice on thee.


Vex. Ah, ha, ha.


Squ. Does the Knave laugh? Bring him back. May a man ask the cause of your
Mirth? Vex. Sir I have laughed at the vexation of a thousand in my days. I hope
I may have lea^e once in my life to laugh at mine own.


Squ. Oh is it so? Pray hold you merry sir.


Vex. Ah, ha, ha, ha --

Ex.
Squ. Now Lady, whereas you were brought before me as a Delinquent, I retain
you as my Mistress. I like her beyond measure. A pretty young thing: new brought
to a pace! Ah, h^! She has committed a little Country folly, as she
priu^tely confesses. What Is that ^ It may stand in rank with that they call
virtue here; and then she is content to li^e as privately as I please. She
shall up, I will winter and summer her before she shall see a high way of this
Town. She Is for my turn directly. Mistress Holdup, is your (...) say you?


Hold. Camitha Holdup sir. A poor Gentlewoman. My father bore the office of a
Commissioner for the peace in the West country, till Misfortune wr^^gth his
estate out of his hands.


Squ. Holdup! I have heard of him, and know what it was that sunk him. He lived
by the Sea side; it was trading with the Pirates. Buying their goods, and selling
them victuals;


Hold. It Is too true sir. He paid so dearly for it at last, that I have no more,
but my bare breeding, and what I bear about me to live upon.


Squ. Which is enough ^ enough directly; if you can bear your self
discreetly, and contain your self within those bounds of Fortune, in which
I Will plant you. Alas good soul, weep not; let Money and Authority be thy
comfort. By which tho^ shall fe^le no want, nor fear no danger. But to our
business. I have already acquainted you with my Niece Constances disease, and
that she is removed out of my house for her health. I will lodge you at a
trusty Tenants house where she is unknown. You shall take her name upon you.


Hold. Which is mine own already.


S^u. And if you can but a little counterfeit her Melancholy, you may freely
pass for her; and my accesses to thee, my sweet Girl, shall crown us with
f^lnes of delight and pleasure.


Hold. Sir, you have most worthily made me your own; and all my study shall be
to obey you.


Squ. Now had I but ^ fit attendant for the person of my love*


Hold. Some simple honest body sir.


^qu. Then we were fitted. How now.


Ent. Clearke. Clea. My Lady Lucklesse man desire to speak with you.


Squ. Stand you by unseen a while. Send him in. I do expect some Message now,
in the behalf of her unlucky Ladyships wise brother, Master Widgi^e, tou^hing
my Niece. Now stend how does my good Lady?


Ent. Howd. How. I left her very ill sir; for she has beaten me, and thrust me
out of doors with her own hands, without penny in my purse, or other Cloak
of my back, then the bare Liuory, that a cast Se^uing man can not shake off, of
Kna^e and Beggar.


Squ. Thou leftest her very ill indeed. But well, thou would have me be a
means to reestablish thee in thy Lady.


How. In her service sir.


Squ. I speak by a figure Humfrey: for to be inward with, or indeed within a
Mistress, is to be a ser^^^e in the most Courtly phrase.


How. I sir. Those are convenient S^uants sir. We are covenant servants. They
are respected above husbands: We abased beneath slaves. They purchase place,
honors, and offices oftentimes with their Ladies (...), when we find not our
wages without hard words, and are in fear, (poor ^^akes) to have our sloughes
pulled over our ear^s before the year go about. We drudge for our Ladies,
they play with their Ladies: But the best is, we labor and sweat it out for
our Ladies, when they are feign to tal^e Physic, and lie in for their Ladies.


Squ. Most intelligent Humfrey. Let us retire to the purpose. Put ^ase I have a
Mistress in store for you; to whom I may comm^nd you upon my own credit, and
undertake for your entertainment and means by my own purse. What would you
say? what would you do?


How. Sir, I will say over the Gent. vshers Grammar to you, and do her service
by the rules.


Squ. Well said directly. Incipe Humfride. Say your part.


How. In a Gentleman Usher there be eight parts. Boldness, Neatness, ^attery
and Secrecy, rewarded. Diligence, Obedience Truth and Hon^sty, unrewarded.


Squ. What is his B^ldnesse.


How. His Boldness^ is the use of his Manhood in right of his Ladi^s honor,
degree, place or privilege, at home, abr^ad, in private or public meeting,
for the hand, for the w^ll, for the what she will, ^or the what she calls.


Squ. How is it rewarded?


How. By obtainin^ of Suits made out of cast Gowns or P^^^icoates. Which if
(...) be a Tailor, as most of our middle sort of Professors are, he is
thereby made a Man in spite of the proverb, and th^ust into the high way of
advancement.


Squ. Perge Humfrey His neatness now?


How. His neatness consists most diue^sly* sir. Not only in the decent
wearing of those clothes and c^eane linen, pruning his hair^, rufsling his
Boo^es, or ordring his shooe^ ties; these are poor expressions, a ^ourney man
Barbar will do it. But to do his office neatly, his g^rb^, his pace, his
postures, his co^es on and his comes off, complement^, his visites (...)*


Squ. His Howdees.


How. In which a profound judgment ^ould be pussell^d.


Squ. I believe thee.


How. And the most absolute or artificial memory set of the rack. To be able to
relate how this Ladies tooth does; and the other La^ies toe. How this Ladies Milk
does: and how ^others Doctor liked her last water: how this Ladies husban^; and
how the other Ladies dog slept last night: how this child, that Monk^y, this
Nurse, that Parrat, and a^thousand such. Then his neatness in Chamber-wo^ke,
or about the person of his Lady, in case her Maid or her Woman be otherwise
occupied, to convey a pin into her r^ffe neatly, or add a help to her head
dressing, as well as John among the Maids, Lastly, his dexterity in Caruing,
and his discretion in Marshalling of meats; to give eu^ry mess the due
service, and every dish his lawful pre-eminence.


Squ. And how is this neatness rewarded Humfrey?


Hum. Doubly sir: at board and at bed* by good bits, and the love of the
Chambermayd.


Squ. Well Humfrey, because we will not make this scene too long, we will omit
the rest: only why are your last four parts, Diligence, Obedience, Truth and
Honesty unrewarded?


How. Sir. They are parts that spring out of virtue, and are therefore borne
with their reward in their mouths, and ought to expect no further from any
service in these times.


Squ. Most edifying Humfrey. I have a Mistress in store for thee.


How. I long to see her sir.


Squ. Did thou never see my Niece Constance?


How. No sir. But I have heard she is diseased with Melancholy; and if she
should prove mad too, like my old Lady, I were then as far to seek as ere I
was.


Squ. Fear it not Hum^rey. My (...) ease thy care. Niece come forth. [Enter
Holdup.] I shall fit you with a servant. Fall to your Postures Humfrey. Your
C^rbe. [He does his postures] So. Your Pace. So. Your Congie. So. Hand your
Lady. Good. Arm your Lady. Good still. Side your Lady. Very good. Draw out
your Lady. Excellent. Present your Lady. Singular well, good Humfrey.


How. Sir, I can Shoulder my Lady too: but that is when (...) takes Co^ch; and
Foot my Lady, when she alights.


Squ. Precious Humfrey, I admire thy Art.


How. I learnt all of a good old Ladies man in the Strand sir, that must be
namelesse.


Squ. Now Humfrey, Walk your Lady to the Burse.


How. O most Hostlerly spoken! Under correction sir, Wayt your Lady I pray sir.


Squ. Well said Humfrey. Here Is something for my instruction. Now wayt your
Lady to the Burse. She has some tri^les to buy there. I will find you there
presently, and conduct you to your lodging.


Gives her money. Hold. What shall I do with all this sir? I would indeed but
buy an ounce or two of thread; some Netting pins and Needles, an^ a Frame to
flourish my work on. Hereafter I will work in gold and silver, if you please,
for your own wearing.


Squ. As I would wish! her simplicity takes me above her beauty. Go I say.
I Will follow. Me thinks I eene feel my self, thank my self for being in
this good humor. What I have is mine own, and I will be merry with it
directly. --

Ex.
Act. IIII. Sce. II.
Enter Fitchow, Tridewell, Bulfi^ch, Widgine, A^^^le. Fitc. Gentlemen, you now
know the calamity I suffer under. And you have sh^w'd me the best way to
comfort: for which I thank you. I have given you my resolution for a Divo^ce,
upon condition. Before which, I must promise you nothing sir. But I assure you
in the mean time, you stand prime in my affection: for I have in all found you
a right worthy Gentleman.


Tri. Madame, I have not utterance to declare my acceptance of your love. It
must therefore be locked up in my breast, the treasure of my heart. Now for the
condition upon which your Divorce depends, we must see that performed, and then
--


Fitc. Sir, I will make good more then I now may promise.


Tri. You speak nobly.


Fit. It relishe^ a little ^ do much of womanly ^^lfulnesse I confess. But all
my wilfulness (that I Will promise you sir) shall die in the end of this
business.


Tri. Well then, before your discreet neighbor M. Bulfi^ch here. If you have
not your will in this, I will disclaim in your favor hereafter. Sir, the
condition is (as you may remember --


Bull. I apprehend it Sir. That sir Paul Squelch his Niece be first married or
contracted, and then she consents to a divorce: And that you be assistant to
her brother here to obtain her for him.


Tri. To which I promise my ready help, only I must not appear in the
business.


Bull. I will only appear in it, for I will not be seen in the ^atter.


Tri. As how sir?


Bull. As thus sir. I will keep your counsel: not only in holding my peace to
all the world, but in saying nothing to sir Paul himself. Dee apprehend me
sir?


Tri. And thank you sir. Now every man to his part M. Widgine, You have both
your sisters and my best directions already, which I doubt not but with the
help of your Governor you will make good use of. Madame will you in, and but
wish well to our proceedings, and trouble your thoughts no further.


Ex. s^uerally. An. Sir, what help he has of me, is for the Ladies and his
own sake, not yours dee hear.


Wid. No blustering now good Governor: Prithee restrain thy fury. Thou can
never hear nor speak to that Gent. with any patience; and yet he is on our
side now. Prithee let us loose no time. I never ^ong'd more for my mothers
coming from a Christning, then to be at this Northern Less. --


Exe. Act. IIII. Sce. III.
Enter Tridewell, Trainewell, Holdup. Tri. Wanton, you have begun propitiously:
Proceed but confidently, and I Will warrant thee a wealthy husband by it, or a
composition that may prove the better purchase.


Hol. Sir, be you and thi^ Lady but as confident of my fidelity, and trust me
in this action, and if I break not the toils your Kinsm^n is in, and make you
Mistress of my Intrest in sir Paul, let all the good you intended me, be a
lockram Co^fe, a blew Gown, a Wheel and a clean Whip. You are sure the Lady
will yield to Divorce, if Constance whom I now perso^ate be first married or
contracted.


Tri. Right. She does but hold off till then, and that wilfully; because she
fears it is for Constances love only, that her Husband desires the Divorce.


Hell. And you are sure that Constance is safe from her discovery.


Tr^. I upon the hazard of my discretion.


Hol. To any then that knows her not very well, If I appear not the same
Constance -- you have given me her Character right?


Tra. The best that we can possibly.


Hol. Nay, I have a fu^ther help then, you both imagine yet.


Tri. Tra. May we know it.


Hol. It shall be no secret. My Servant Howdee, whom you and sir Paul, suppose
his Lady turned away, was by her Ladyship taught only to faigne it; and
cunningly instructed to work himself into the se^uice of Constance, to
further her brothers proceedings. And since fortune has put him upon me, whom
he takes to be the same Mistress, if I make not ^pt use of it --


Tri. It Is most fairly omenous. Come Lady. He cannot. but be at hand; and our
stay may do hurt, (You remember the Doctors lodging I told you of, and sir
Phillips appointment to m^et you there an hour hence?


Tra. All sir. I would use no other. She is there already. Ex.


Tri. No more then; away. Fare you well sweet Creature.

Ex.
Hol. If my deceit now, should be disco^ered, before my work be ended, my
Brain tricks might perhaps, in stead of all these fair hopes, Purchase me the
Lash. fore Ve^us. my flesh (...) trembles to think on it. It brings likewise
into my consideration, the baseness of my condition; how much vnpittied the
punishment of a Whore is, an^ how suddenly it ouertakes her? My joint
Con^piratours are in no danger. I only run the hazard, though they are as deep
in fact as my self. Well. If I escape this pull, and draw any fortune by it, i will
change my function sure. A common Whore? I Will be a Nun rather. They come most
fitly, and I must into my fit -- Withdrawes behind the ^anging.


Act. IIII. Sce. IIII.
Enter Widgine, Anvile, Howde^. How. Indeed sir, it was my Ladies plot, but you
must take no notice of it.


Wid. I Will thank her with all my heart, and she shall never know on it.


How. But if sir Paul, my now Master should discover my deceit, how shall I
escape his vengeance.


An. What do thou think of me, weak fellow? Am not I a Commander, ha?


How. I, in the war Captain: but he is a Justice of Peace, and a Commander
of Captains in Midlesex, sends two or three drunken Ones to Newgate at a clap
sometimes.


Wid. Fear no discovery Humfrey. Let me but see her, and I Will warrant thee.


How. She Will see none but sir Phillip, you must be no body else. Remember
that: you must know no other name you have. Now if you can sir Phillip it
handsomely there is it.


Wid. I warrant thee, and my Governor shall sir Phillip me at every word; and
if I do ^ot sir Phillip her, better then ever she was Phillips in her life,
then say I am no Legitimate Widgine.


Hol. ^is pa^^ your ^^rength or reach either by forty I believe. I doubt your
middle finger is too short Master Widgin^.


How. Well, I must venture it. Here she comes. Has a Baby.


Wid. What Is she doing. Ods me ^ making a Baby I think Are you good at that
in faith? I Will be at that sport with you, it shall cost me a fall else.


How. Oh she has a hundred such ^ pish toys. E^ne now she was great with
Child for^ooth as she could go. And was persuaded she had a Child as big as I
in her belly. I wondered at it, and she told me she had had a hundred there as
big in her days.


Wid. What, what?


How. I but she knew not what she said. By and by, I must be a Man-Midwife
forsooth and deliver her: for it was past all Woman's skill? Now she thinks she
is brought a bed, and nurses the Child her self.


Wid. And who is the father?


How. O none but sir Phillip.


Wid. ^le father it as well as he. I^t a Boy or a Girl trow* Would she would
make a Christning Banquet while we are here. Hark she sings.

Song.
Peace wayward Barn; O cease thy mo^e:
Thy far more wayward Daddy's gone:
And never will recalled be
By cries of either thee, or (...):
For should we cry,
until we dye,
We could not sc^nt his cr^elty.
Ballow, Ballow, etc.
H^e ne^ds might in himself forese^,
What (...) ^^ccessiuely might be;
And ^ould he then, (though me foregoe)
His Infant leave, ere he d^d know,
How like the Dad
would be the Lad,
In time, to make fon^ Maidens glad^
Ballow, ballew, etc.

Wid. How is this pretty Mrs. Con^^ance, that you complain of your Love before
he be lost?


Hol. Who be you I pray?


Wid. Pray thee tell her Governor. I have not the heart to lie now.


Anv. It is sir Phillip Lady, come to do you right. De^ hear?


Hol. Yes sir, I hear you vary weell; and could ^ene wish (...) my heart I
could believe you.


Anv. Speak your self sir.


Wid. You may Mistress Constance; for as I am an honest man, I never meant to
wrong you.


Hol. I do bele^ue you sir. But pray prote^^ no more by that name till you
make your self such by marying me. You have getten a barn by me, I is sure
o'that.


Wid. I come for the same purpose Sweetheart. I Will both father and keep thy
Child, and make thee an honest Woman. Give me your hand before this Gentleman,
and your Servant here; and say but the word; ^le get a License presently, fetch
you away, and dispatch you to night.


Sing. Hol. Marry me, marry me, quoth the bo^^y Less: and when will you
begin.


Wid. As for thy w^dding Less wee'^^ do well enough, in spite ^' the best of
thy Kin.


Hol. I can but thank you, obey you, and pray for you sir.


Wid. Governor; will thou believe me? It ee^e pitties my heart, to wrong so
sweet a piece of simplicity. But Fortune has dressed her for me to seed on; and
I Will fall to.


Anv. Or the Devil to choke you. Well boystrous Master Tridewell, your Ropes
end has driven me into a business, here, deserves a whole Rope. But I hope that
Dostiny attends not me, though this Marriage be his: And since it is his Fate,
fair befall it him, I am discharged


Wid. Come Governor, we are agreed^ lets go that we may hye us again, and
dispatch.


Hol. Nay sir. You shall not say, you married me for naught: you shall hear me
sing before you go.


Anv. What an Owsell it is ^ she means he shall marry her for a Song. B^rlady
a competent Modern portion.


Hol. Song.
As I was gathring Aprill's flowers,
He^ straight let fall one of his showers;
Which dra^e me to an arbor.
Twere better I my Lap had filled.
Although the wet my clothes had spilled,
Then to ha'found that harbor
For there a subtle Serpent was,
Close lying, lurking in the Grass.
And there while harmless thinking I,
Still watching when the (...) would dye,
Lay listening to a Bird,
That singing ^ate upon the Bo^er,
Her noates unto the falling shower,
the Snake beneath me stird;
And with his sting gave me a clap,
that swole my belly not my lap.

Wid. By my troth it is pretty.


Hol. And by my conscience it is true, twere made (...) Durham, on a Less of my
bigness.


Anv. And in thy clothes I believe.


Hol. But will you began now, than all my joy leaves me.


Wid. Sweet soul, thou shall have thy joy again. I will joy thee, enjoy thee,
and over joy thee. Governor let us fly about this business. I will not sleep,
before I have got a License, stolen her away, wedded her, bedded her, and put
her in her wits again.


Anv. Are you able to do that think you?


Wid. I Will warrant thee: for all Maids are mad till they be^ married.


Anv. What say you to that Lady. P^x on you, I run^ sweet hazard to advance
your fortune, do I not?


Hol. Remember your Covenant with Master Tridewell Captain. And when the work
is done, here is my hand, you shall partake of what I get by it. And hark you.


Wid. She may perhaps, when she comes to her self, and finds me to be no
sir Phillip, be a little startled. But I mean the f^^st night to put so much of
my own love into her, as shall work out his I doubt not, or any his that came
there before me.


Ent. Howdee. How. O Gentlemen! my Masters coming, alls spoild if he take
you. Part quickly.


Hol. Is mine Uncle comd? and mun we part than?


An. Kiss, and part; kiss and part.


Wid Sweet heart, not a word of me till I come to fetch you off with honor.


Hol. All be^isons be with you. Indeed you be the goodliest man, that ere made
Maiden feign.


Wid Poor heart she dotes. I do not know how much I am in debt to my
conscience, till I have made her amends. --


Ext. Hol. This may breed good blood. If I come but as well off of my old
Uncle, as ^^^like to come on with my young Cose^, here will be a match unlooked
for; a match without treaty; a m^tch vntalk'd or unheard of. He is coming
before I have shifted my ^ace. Me thinks I hear the rusting of ^is bristles
hither. ^et my lips must stand the assault; pray love the Porcupine, leave none
of his quills in 'hem.


Act. IIII. Sce. V.
E^ter Sq^elch to Holdup. Squ. Where Is my Girl? My honey sweet Girl? Kiss
m^e; (...) I say directly: I Will s^cure thee. As I am a Man of Authority, and
that of Midlesex, I 'le secure thee. Ha my Las^^, these lips have the true
Elixi^ in 'hem indeed, to restore youth and strength; past all Medeas charms,
or what the Poets would have fai^'d. How now (...) Love? I hope my Neeces
habit has not wrought her di^ease into thee.


Hol. No: now I see you sir, I am well: perfectly well: yet pardon me sir. Your
absence cannot but breed me fear, when I have leisure to think on my unworthy
condition, and the danger I undergo in it.


Squ. 'Twas a thousand pitties that this Wench was seduced. She might have
ma^e a Wi^e for a good Esquire. She would serve a Tradesman yet, most
vnblemishably. And when I have done with her, doing that f^r her, as I mean
to do. She may perhaps match with a younger brother, purchase him a place,
advance his fortune, to be able in the end to repay her with a Ladyship. It Is
not without a president; and I will help her to follow the example directly.
For what I have is mine own, and I will be merry with it. Ha my bird, my
chick ^ Kiss me. Kiss me up. So. Kiss me up I say. So again. Thou have
don't directly. Maintain it now, with a cordial ^isse. So, so, so* Good.
Very good; and while it is so, a word with you in private. Come my bird, mh mh
mh.


Enter Howd^e. How. Sit, there is a woman below. --


Squ. Sir, what have I to do with any woman below: Do you with your woman
below, I am very well here.


How. Is the old man mad trow. Sir, she will have to do with you above, if
you speak not with her below. I had much a do to keep her down stayres, her
case is so lamentable she says. I never saw a woman so importunate in my life
sir. You must down sir.


Squ. I am down already. All Is naught. What limb of the devil is' ^? Do
thou know her?


How. She says she is wife to a Constable s^r, that you lately committed;
and if your Worcester. dos not release him presently, that he is undone, and she is
undone, all their children ar^ undone, that unborn in her belly is undone, and
I know not how many more are undone for ever.


Squ. Hell take her. How could she know that I was here?


How. She spied you in the Street sir, and followed you, and follow you she
would, had you gone into the Privy Chamber she swears; her cause enforces her
she says. And she is so great with child too, that no man dares give her a
thrust to keep her back. I hear her blow up stayres.


S^n. Keep her down, I Will follow thee --


Ex. How. Hol. Good sir be pitiful for the vvomans sake, and release him.
Perhaps her reckoning is out, and she has no body to call the Midwife.


Squ. I must home to my Clearke then: for I cannot write here; nor do any good
besides I am so vexed. But I will return to th^e in the evening, Duck: And
since I am so apt to be spied, ^ will come disguised.


Hol. Indeed I Will put out the Candle when you are here then, for I shall never
endure to ^ee other shape of Man. O these trunk ho^^ are a comely wearing.


Squ. I will be ^i^guis'd directly. I will run through all the shapes of
Iupi^er, before I will again be prevented. Farewell. O my ^weet! At seven in
the eu^ning expect me. --

Exit.
Hol. Sweet say thou? Thou art not I Will swear. I am glad he was prevented. I
should never held out a course with him, that cannot endure a breathing: a
Cheese-shop on fire cannot out-stinke him.


Enter Ho^d^^. How. Your Uncle's gone Mistress, and says he will be here at
seven a clock ag^ine. But shall I tell you a five thing Mistress?


Hol. Yea marry Humfrey, what may that be and it is not of Sir Phillip


How. But it is of him Mistress. He says he will bring a Coach for your at
six a clock to fetch you away: will you go with him?


Hol. By my saul that will I an't be all the world over.


How. How shall you Uncle find you at 7 then?


Hol. We Will leave him at six and seauens. I mean betwixt both. 'Twill be trim
trust me. And hear'st thou me Humfrey. Thou must bid Mistress Traynwell (...) to
me a little before six ^ for a very good reason.


How. Hmh --


Hol. Nay, it shall hinder nothing. We 'le away the faster.


How. I think she be in her wits already. If not, I must humor her, though I
be put to the trouble to shift her away again. She shall mar no sport
that is certain.


Hol. Come with me Humfrey, thou shall go eene now, and tell her; and I Will be
packing up the while. --

Ex.
How. This Clinches. I shall win my Ladies heart for ever. To manage two
such bus^n^sses more, were enough to raise me Agent for a State.

Ext.
The end of the fourth Act.
Act. V. Scene I.
Pate in a Doctors habit. Traynwell, Constance. Pate. To discourse a tedious
Lecture unto you, Lady, in speaking philosophically of the disease of
Melancholy, were to show more learning then discretion. There are large
volumes of it in Print, to very slender purpose.


Tra. Sir, I desire rather your discretion, then the gloss of Learning. I am
rather governed by the wholesome effects of the one, then the smooth directions
o^ the other.


Pa. To the point then Lady. I see no reason why I should vex and torment this
delicate and tender body, with Physic. Her disease is Melancholy; The cause
of this disease I have found apparently in the two hours probation since you
left her with me, to be Love, which she has so greedily taken in, that it
has overwhelmed her spirits, and turned the faculties of all her senses into a
rude confusion, sending forth the use of them extravagantly.


Tra. Sir, I must not only approve, but applaud your skill. It Is love indeed,
And ^ am right glad that your opinion iumps with my own knowledge: for now I
doubt not of your speedy address to the cure.


Pa. It Is done in three words. The Party that she loves, must be the Doctor,
the Medicine, and the Cure.


Tra. Sir, the Gentl^man is below, he came with me, only I would not bring him
to her fight without your approbation, ^caring it might do hurt.


Pa. Pray call him up, on peril of my judgment. Ex. Tray. G^ue me your hand
Mrs. Constance. I have good news for you.


Con. It Is a long whayle ^ine I hear^ any.


Pa. The Gentleman, whom you love best, shall be your bedfellow.


Con. He is wed already Sir. Another wife would gar him be put down at
gallows: an ^ I would not ^ee sh^e for all the wordly good that ere I ^aw
with (...). And of my consci^nce I^e be none of his (...)


Pa. She pra^tl^s very prettily me thinks. (...) already? Sure Cupid shot you
with a f^or^ed arrow out o^ his Crosbow. But what will you say Lady, i^ by my
Ar^ I (...) this Gent^eman unmarried again, and a Suter unto y^u pr^sen^ly?


Con. Marry* shall I tell you what I Will say sir? That d^serues hanging worse
then the other ^at^er, you would poison his wife by your Art, wod ye? and make
your gown th^re the Hangmans ^ee the second time? It looks as it had been
once his already; and you like such a Doctor I mu^^ tell ye, by your leave.
God bl^sse me fro thee. Mrs. Traynwell where are you?


Pate. Out of her wits say they? I fear she is (...) then all of us, that
have to do with her. She knows my gown b^tter th^n I do: for I have had
but two ho^res acquaintance with it. It Is ^o longer since I hired it of the
hangmans Mercha^t a Broker. It might have been Lopus gown for ought I know.


Act. V. Scene. II.
Enter Traynwell and Lucklesse to them. Tray. They are fallen out I think.


Con. O Mrs. Traynwell, for dear Charities ^ake have me soone^ (...) this Man:
for I Will nere take any thing at him. He talks of poisoning.


Pa. By my faith you wrong me: Nor of any poisoning purpo^e. I was but putting
a case of --


Con. Pray put up your Pipes sir. I like not your Music: troth nor his
countenance nather. Sweet Mrs. Traynwell gar me be shut on him. Now all the
joys of Immortality light of ye sir.


To Lucklesse. Pa. Is that the Gent?


Tra. Yes sir. Pray observe. But how fell you out sir?


Pa. I must first ^alute him by your favo^r. Sir, all the accumul^tions of
honor shower down upon you.


Luc S^r. May you r^^pe the whole harvest of your fruitful wishes.


Con. Dear sir, keep^ further fro' him.


Pate. But one word sweet Lady; and you shall have the whole benefit of h^s
presence to your self.


Tra. ^e not afraid sweetheart, he dares not hurt sir Phillip.


Con. In ^roth he breathes to near him.


Tra (...) warrant y^u. What has he done to m^ue her thus? I know not what
thi^ (...) Doctor is. But M. Tridewell put me upon him; and his ^pproved
honesty has and must kill all m^s ^rust in me.


Pate. Your C^ach is ready at door you say.


Luc. Ye^ my most d^licate Doctor.


Pate. As you find her then after a few words away with her. I have (...) my
part sir. IN le hold the discreet ^ouernesse in talk in the nex^ room.


Con But one word call ye this?


Pate. I have done sweet soul. Lady I have instructed the gent. shall we l^au^
them?


Tr^. One word, by your leave first M. Doctor, and I Will attend you. Sir not
alone my Discretion, but my Reputation lies at stake: and I make no doubt of
your nobleness upon your Kin^mans word, my Complotter in this business.
Therefore while I hold argument with the Doctor (who shall by no means perceive
our deceit) slip you away with her in your Coach, where M. Tridewell* has
appointed, till the Eueni^g; and let me alone to scuffle with the old man the
while* And then I doubt not all our troblesome labors shall have a peaceable
end. I Will send old Mad-cap to your Lady in a Thunderclap. But nobl^ sir, your
reputation --


Luc. My life and honor be her Guard, and your security.


Tra. No more sir. I Will lay no coniurations upon so noble a spirit. Come Master
Doctor --


Soft Music. Ex. Tra. Pate. Luc. But do you love me Constance?


Con. O right weell sir.


Luc. And will you be my Woman?


Con. I is sure, i will nener be mine own els^.


Luc. But you will not go away with m^c now, if I request you?


Con. Any whither but to bed before we be married.


Luc. What from your Gouernesse, your Uncle, and all the World?


Con. And thank you too sir. And ta' me but fro' this ill looking Doctor; for
I shall be weell with you sir.


Luc. Come, since you trust me so well, we two will not part till we are
lawfully made one.


Con. Heaven bliss the hour you speak in, and all Saints be with^sses.

Ex.
Act. V. Sce. III.
Enter Squelch, meeting Trainewell, and Pate. Music continues. Squ Where Is
this Doctor? where is this melancholy Gentlewoman?


Tra. O me is he come?


Pa. Is this her Uncle?


Tra. Even he sir. Where Is my charge; Mistress Constance?


Pa. S^ue ye sir I Will go find her --

Ex.
Squ. Where Is my charge? I Will go find her! What Is the meaning?


Tra. She was here but now sir, while the Music played. And we withdrew our
sclues, thinking she might sleep sir.


Squ. There went a Coach away as I came in. Whole was it?


Tra. A C^ach sir? Alas I am afraid; my flesh trembles.


Squ. At what in your great Master the Devils name? Where Is my Ncece?


Tra. Sir here came in one Master Widgine, the Lady Luckt^s brother --


Squ. Well.


Tra. As acquainted with the Doctor sir --


Squ. Well, well.


Tra. And he saw her sir. But seemed to depart, when we withdrew our selves to
talk about the cure.


Squ. Very very well. While you were wisely talking about the cure, a Widgine
flies away with the Patient. Where Is this Doctor? Doctor I say. Doctor! He Is
run away too, my life on it. A mere plot, a Conspiracy; it is so directly, below
there. I can not see how it can be otherwise. Ent. Cleark. Saw you the Doctor?
Yes sir, he went now forth at the Watergate, and took boat in have.


Squ. Exceeding well* How came your Discretion acquainted with this Doctor?


Tra. Sir he was reported to me by very good Judgments, to be a rare
Practitioner.


Squ. A most rare fellow, and does admirable tricks, by slight of heels. But I
may perhaps outrun 'hem --

Ex.
Tra. My purge works as I wished. I am amused though at the flight of the
Doctor. But I have too many businesses to intertaine new thoughts.

Ex.
Act. V. Sce. V.
Enter Tried well, Fitchow. Fit. May I belceue it, Good sir? may I be so happy,
that my brother has her?


Tri. As I have truth in me, I am most credibly told so. Mary the worst is, her
Uncle is so mad at their escape, that he will never give consent to the match,
whereby her portion will be less.


Fit. Hang him Clod. My will shall be a portion su^ficient to my brother, I
care not, though he give her not a penny, so VVat has the Wench.


Tri. Make you noe more doubt of that, then I do Madame, who have upon the
report of it already, prepared the Learned of the Civil Law, those that you
nominated of your good acquaintance, and are forward to do you the best
office, who have appointed to meet before the Iu^ge of the Archdeaacous Court
p^esent^y, whither I have promised to bring, and will attend you.


Fit. But the other side must be summond by process.


Tri. Sir Phill^p has wa^ning already M^dame; and without needless process
will be there before you, and wait your coming. So that my self and his
servant, who have never been both absent from one of your companies, since
your Marriage, justly deposi^g you never did the reallest Rite of Marriage, the
bed o^lice, Madame; y^u both consenting, and d^siring a Divorce, It i^
inst^ncly g^au^^ed, without any proceedings i^ Law. So that all will be euded
in three whispers. Ods pity, look who here is.


Act. V. Sce. V.
Enter Sque^ch to Fitchow. Squ. O are you here my Lady Lu kiesse?


Fit. It Was time you found me sir; you might ha'mistaken my name else. F^r
within this heure, ^ might have retu^^'d the ancient title of your friend, and
Awdery F^tchow.


Squ. Slow wov, where is my N^^^^?


Fit. Where are your wits si^? you come upon me inde^d ^ What Niece? What Is the
matter?


Squ. My Niece Censtance, that your brother Widgi^e stole from the Doctor, and
is stowne away witha^. But he must not think to escape so? I may take him, and
his Duck too, in my D^coy, before they be coupled, as sure as your Ladyship or
your Fitchow ship, and they think your selves.


Fit. Sure the old Gentleman is fallen mad. What has happend?


Squ. The plot smells of your Ladyships policy; you^ Ladyships Lilly white fist
is t^ule in the business. But I will have a b^utat sisticuffs in Law with your
Ladyship: your great acquain^^nce, and alliance in the Whatshical. Court
No^^b^^ (...) ^our^^ (...) there must not carry it, my great Lady. Directly it
must not.


Fit. Your ^re an uncivil greasy Companion, to vpbraid and revile me thus in
my own house.


Tri. O good Madarne, hurt not your self with anger better laugh it out.


Fit. He makes me forget my self by his example. Sir you are a Commissioner
for the Peace I take it. Does it become a M^n of you^ place and gravity, to fly
out in these extremes? You spend too much breath in these loud noates, very
hurtful to the Lungs, If you will fall into a lower Key, and speak peaceably,
I will answer you.


Squ. I pray you, Forsooth, or sweet Madame, or what you please; Where is my
Niece?


Fit. Will you believe me sir? you may: For it is Truth, as I have any; And
before this worthy Gentleman; I never savv your Niece in my life; only I have
heard she is a pretty Gen^evvoman: likely to make a good Match, for which I
told my brother of her, and would have treated with you for her, could I have
spoken with you as I vvish'd by two or three Mess^ges. But vvhither my
brother has got her, or wh^r he, or she is of my own knowledge, I cannot
say directly.


Squ. She mocks me to my face all this while. Well good-Wise, Mi^ris, Madame
--


Fit. Well my Lord Innekee pers second Son: Does your Pro^ender prick you?


Squ. Prick Madame: I tell thee thou Thing, made up of Chippings, brok^n Bear,
Candle-ends, and sisting of Sea cole.


Fit. O^t you Curry-combe.


Tri. Forbear sweet Lady, let him be mad by himself.


Squ. I will be so revenged --


Fit. How pray?


Squ. He had been better to have killed a Man, ravished ^ Virgiue; nay, done
the most dangerous contempt that law ^^^ld devise to punish, then if I take him
to suffer under my revenge.


Fit. Ha, ha, ha.


Squ. I Will m^ster up my Constables, and send out a privy search immedia^ly. --

Ex.
Tri. What think you of your Brothers success, now Madame?


Fit. Much the better, that it vexes him so: Sciruy foul unouth'd fellow.


Tri. Look you now Madame. See who here come^.


Act. V. Sce. VII.
Enter Widgine, Holdup, Howdee. Wid. Sister fall down, and adore me for my
great at chieuement. H^msrey kneel down to her that she may dub thee for thy
sernice. Never did the best nosed Dogs, that ever were coach'd for their
goodness, hunt more truly, take more bravely, and carry away more cleanely,
then we have done this dainty piece of flesh here. Sister kiss her, and be
better acquainted: she is mine own flesh, I Will uphold it.


Tri. She is a Holdup her self, if I mistake not her name.


Fit. Being your flesh brother, her nearest affinity of blood runs in my
veins. Therefore with a sisters love I embrace you, and bid you welcome.


Hold. Mine Uncle will by right wood I fear me. But I Will near greet for that
sir, while I have your love.


Fit. I know it is she by her tongue, though I never heard her before. Nor
ever fear sweet sister, we shall be all friends shortly.


Hold. I would be glad and twere so.


Wid. Sister come hither. Now hear and admire my wit; as well as my Fortune.
Humfrey come and take thy share of my sisters wonder.


How. I hope I performed my duty.


Wid. Which we must not see unrewarded sister.


Fit. No: I mean to give him my Maid, and a hundred Marks with her, besides
all she has about her.


How. I am made for ever. I thank your languishing Ladyship.


Fit. Well said Howdee: for my Ladyship is eene at the last gasp. I am to be
Diuorc'd within this half hour. But your proceedings brother? How did she
receive you at first?


Wid. O at first, she was the prettiliest mad that ere you saw. You your self
can not devise to be so mad, as she was.


Fit. I thank you sir.


Wid. And all for sir Phillip, she would love none but sir Phillip, speak to
none but sir Phillip. I told her I was sir Phillip, (ah God a mercy Humfrey:
that was thy invention.) Then the little Vip^r hang upon me, not to be shak'd
off, til I promised her Marriage, and to father a Child, which, in her
distraction, she conceited she had by me. I promised her any thing; so took
her into an inner too me, to make all sure, as well within as without; and I so
phillipt her --


Fit. Enough brother, no more. I understand you.


Wid. But I must have more, and shall never have enough on it. It passes your
understanding and mine too, the delight of it. [Sing] Oh what a delight she
gave me. And how light I am after (...) Heigh. My pretty sweet Rascal.


Fit. Enough I say.


Wid. You do not love to hear on it, because you lack it. But you shall hear
the Miracle it wrought sister. The loss of her Maiden head recouerd her wits.
I made her right and straight in an instant. And now she loves me in my own
person; knows me for a Widgine, and will not give her Wat for the best sir
Philip of them all. And longs for nothing but the Priest and Bed time. Ha my
sweeter and sweeter I My Gouernour's gone sor a License.


Fit. So, ha you done now?


Wid. I Will undertake --


Fit. Yet again.


Wid. That Humfrey, and I with the tricks and trinkets, we have about us will
cure all the mad Maids of her standing in the Town. And do not think, but
much may be gotten to profess it.


Tri. You have made a large relation Master Widgine, and a pleasant, I doubt
not.


Wid. Oh I could live and dye in this discourse sir.


Tri. Lady do you think of the time?


Fit. I will instantly along with you. Hewdee come you with me. Brother, the
search has past this house already. You any go in with your Svveet-heart,
and stay here safely. Go in, and keep close, till I send to meet me at Supper.


Wid. In and in sister, and be close enough, sear not --

Ex.
Fit. Now sir when you please.


Tri. I am your seruent Lady --

Ex.
Act. V. Sce. VIII.
Enter Traynwell and Vexhem. Vex. Mistri^, I will go no further in this
business, then you have lim^^ed me in your directions: 'twill be revenge
enough for my disgrace to make him see his error.


Tra. Therefore be discreet and secret. The disguise he is in I have told you.
The place is this. At the door you shall leave me. The hour 7 a clock.


Vex. Mistress, I will not watch more truly at Midnight, then I will pray for
you for this Lisc^uery. I will instantly call my priuy-search, guard, and catch
a bird, of Justice in the lime-twigs of his own Warrant. --


Exenut. Act. V. Scene IX.
Enter Nonsense and Beanis. Nons. I tit not speak with Sir Paul then, it
seems, to know the reason why I am subdoodled thus, In I protest and vow a
kind of ^ooles Paradise.


Bea. Good sir bear your injury with a Man's patience. Sir Paul will not be
long absent. And till he comes, my Mistress entreates you (for your own good)
to take his part upon you, in giving entertainment to diverse of his friends,
who are invited hither to a Feast to night.


Non. H^ you any Whitpots?


Bea. Much better meat sir. But here is the strangeness of it; and the only
occasi^n that r^quires you aid in the entertainment. This great Supper or
^^ast (as I may properly call it) was appointed by Sir Poule himself, the
money to buy the Provision^d live^'d by his own hand, to his own Servant; the
Guests of h^s own election; vet he, out of the multiplicity of cross
effaires, that have happened this day, has quite forgot that there was any
such preparation, or any such m^eting inten^ed, as appears evidently by his
absence. But ^y Mistress has got all the meat privately made ready at the next
house, on purpose that h^sh u^d see nothing --


Non. To try is he would forget it or no?


B^a. Right sir. I have bidden all the Guests: and expect them immediately.


Non. But what must I say to 'hem?


Bea. Only sal^te 'hem, bid 'hem welcome; Tell'hem Sir Paul was hastily
called forth on his Majesty's affaites; Entreat their patience till his
return, which you know will be every sudden although you know not where he
is; and so forth, as occasion serves.


Ent. Bulsinch and Cleark. Bull. Your Master abroad and not within say you?


Clea. Yes. But good sir stay his coming, I pray you, for his good.


Bull. I partly apprehend you at full. Mistress Traynwell appointed me to come
too with all possible speed. M. Vonsens^ you are well apprehended.


Non. Only salute 'hem, bid' hem welcome. Tell'hem Sir Paul was hast^ly
called forth on his Majesty's affairs. Entreat their patience till his
return, which you know will be very sudden, although you know not where he
is. And so forth as occasion serves.


Bull. Love has made you a Courtier. M Nonsense


Non. No I protest and vow. I do but speak as they say. --


Bea. What have you said Sir?


Non. What you said I have an ill verbatim else.


Bea. I said but the meaning of what you should say, and put it in your own
words.


Non. No sir. I will take your own words for this matter.


Bea. I am beholden to you.


Clea. I am glad Fortune has sent one man of Civil government before the
Roarers come. Here comes some of 'hem already. I Will down and look to the rest
of the house.


Enter Lucklesse, Constance, disguised and Masqu'd. Luc. Save you sir. Are you
the Worshipful of the house?


Bull. I apprehend you sir. --


Luc. How sir? --


Draw. Bull. Mistake me not I beseech you, I apprehend you to be some great
stranger here: because you know the place better then the Master of it.


Luc. You do not mock me sir?


Bea. Sir, This is one of the Guests?


Non. Only salute 'hem. Bid 'hem vvelcome --


Luc. What Is this?


Non. Tell 'hem Sir Paul was hastily called forth on his Majesty's affairs
--


Luc. Is this a Parrat or a Popingay?


Non. Entreat their patience till his return, which you know.


Luc. Do you know what you say sir?


Non. Will be very sudden, although you know not where he is --


Luc. If I did I would not seek him here sir.


Non. And so forth as occasion serves.


Luc. This is some inchaun^ed P^ace, and the people are charmed. I have
mistaken the house sure.


Enter Tridewell and Fitch^w disguised and Masqu'd. Tri. Where Is this
hospitable Knight that invites Strangers. I mean mere Strangers, that he
knows not. Show me the Lad of bounty. I hunger not for his Sapper as I do to
salute him.


Luc. He will prove the greatest stranger here himself I think, for he is
not at home sir. I am a Guest as you are, and would be as glad to see him.


Tri. He dos not mean to ieare us dos he?


Bea. I bese^ch you mistake not so his purpose sir: which is fair vvelcome,
and good cheer to you all. Therefore Gentlemen and ladies, will it please you
to entertain one another a while. [Enter Cleark with Sack and I'obacco.] Look
ye. Here Is good Sack, and good I'obacco. And before the rest of the Guests
b^co^e, Sir Paul will be here himself.


Luc. This fellow speaks.


Enter Anv. widg. Holdup. and Howdoe disguised. Bull. As I am a Justice of Peace
I cannot apprekend, and yet me thinks I do. What sort of people these
Gentlemen may be. See: more I Is sir Paul turned swaggerer? Or is his house
abused by servants? I will not leave it, until they go out before me like a
layle delivery. They lo^ke like men betwixt a Repriue and Pardon. Friend: Are
these sir Paul's elected friends?


Bea. His protected friends sir.


Bull. Protected?


Bea. I sir. There is a fraternity of them. The brothers of the Protect.
There Is not a man of 'hem, but has all Mayors, Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Sergeants
at Mace, Marshalls men, Constables, and other his Majesty's Officers, in a
Combcase in his pocket. They are a Generation that never eat but in Parliament
time, and now every table is full of them.


Bull. I should wonder what they did here else. See. A roaring Doctor too, broke
out of the Kings Bench.


Enter Pate like a Doctor. Pa. By your leave Gallants. I perceive your Company
is not yet full.


Tri. Are you of the invited sir?


Pat. It is not to be doubted sir. Yet a Voluntary. But there are some without
that are more then invited, yet come against their wills.


Luc. How mean you M. Doctor?


Pa Brought sir by a Constable and Officers, to be examined. Where Is the jolly
Justice?


Tri. What are they can ye tell sir?


Pa. A Gentlewoman, and a Spaniard.


An. A Spaniard, Ha!


Pa. I, a Spaniard, Ha: if you will have it so:


Luc. If we had but a Justice among us to Examine 'hem, it might pass the time
well till sir Paul came.


Bea. Sir, here is a Justice, and for the same purpose too for ought we know,
that shall not resuse to do it, and in sir Paul's Gown and Cap too.


Luc. This is a witty fellow.


Bea. Sir, you cannot do a more acceptable office for your friend, then to
execute his place in his absence. Your anthority makes you capable of it; and I
do the rather persuade it, because the Gentlemen whom you wisely suspect for
loose person^, may see some example of Justice; which may prevent some present
evil in their stay here.


Bull. I apprehend you friend. Give me the Gown and Chair, and let the
Delinquents approach. Vmh, vmh.


Luc. It Is a Spaniard indeed.


Enter Vexhem, Squelch, like a Spaniard, Trayn. Cleark. Vex. An English
Spaniard sir, And therefore the verier knave: as will be proved I doubt not,
to his shame, and my renown in the Common (...). By your Worships leave.


Bull. What news b^ing ^ou M. Constable?


Vex. Spanish news sir. Wi^t please your Worship to examine the virtue of my
Warrant, and then these Persons aecordingly?


Squ. Very good! I am brought before my self to be examined, and before a
fine rabble too! how the devil brok this unknown N^tion into my house, or do
not I mistake it? My foolery has led me into a fine predicament. I will not yet
disclose my self: but look a little surther toward the event.


Bull. Are you a Spa^iard sir?


Squ. Such a one as you see Signior.


Bull. See Signior. He speaks nothing but Spanish. The question will be how we
shall understand this Examinant.


Squ. Hey day!


Bull. I do see Signior I thank the light, that you are a goodly man of outward
parts, and ezcept it were the black Knight himself, or him with the Fistula,
the proprest man I have seen of your Nation. They are a People of very spare
diet, I have ^eard, and therefore seldom fat. Su^e you you have had most of
your br^eding in this C^untrey, the diet whereof you like better then your own,
which makes you linger here, after all you Country men, upon ^ome vn^ouch plot.
And I shall wonder therefore how you can speak no English. Can you speak no
English at all sir? Answer me I pray.


Squ. Not an English word not I s^^. Alas I have not been sieve ^ayes in the
K^ngio^e.


Luc. This is exc^llent!


Tri. I, peace Y u'll mar all if you laugh.


Bull. (...), what shall we do then? Gentlemen, have any of you any Spanish,
to help me to understand this strange S^a^get?


T^i. Not a Riall sir not I.


Luc. Nor a Rialls worth amongst us of any language but sh^er^ English.


Bull. What S^iere of our Nation is next to Spain? Perhaps he may vnd^rst^nd
that Shi^r, English.


Tri. Devonshire or Corn^all sir.


N^n. Never credit me, but I will spowt some Cornish at him. Peden bras vidne
whee his cregas.


Squ. Am I transform' ^ utterly? Is my Language altered with my apparel, or
are you all mad? what unspeakable misery is this.


Bull. I see we shall never understand, nor do good on him, till he be
instructed in the English tongue.


Vex. And please your worship, the best University for this purpose will be
Bridewell. I am acquainted with the best Tutors there, Master Cleanewhip,
Master Dri^lash, and diverse others.


Squ. You o^licious Rascal, are you mad?


Vex. No such matter sir. But in my right mind, and Midlesex fear it not.


Bull. It must be so. His instruction will cost little there, if he be not too
old to learn. Therefore set him by, and let me fall upon the Gentlewoman.


Vex. Oh, he is rarely vexed.


Bull. Now Gentlewoman, will it please you to be vnmasqu'd.


Tra. Yes sir look you, I dare show my face.


Bull. Mistress Trainowell, as I apprehend.


Omnes. Mistress Trainewell.


Squ. Trainewell!


Tra. Even she Gentlemen, as I will more circumstantially reveal unto you
presently, after a word or two with my fellow prisoner, for which I crave your
favor.


Bull. With all my heart, so you can speak Spanish and make him understand you.


Tra. You see I am not the Woman you took me for: but one ordained for your
greater good. If you will give me my present demand. I will turn all your
disgrace into laughter; make you of worthier esteem now at the instant, then
ever you were, by the general approbation of these, and all that know you
beside. Your Niece to shall be restored to your own liking, and all shall be
as well as you can wish. Otherwise, if you have a mind to be everlastingly
shamed, by being perpetually laughed at, take your own course, I Will take mine.


Squ. I am astonished. What is your Demand?


Tra. Whereas your purpose was to make a Whore. Make me your honest Wife; no
more. Be sudden in your resolve, all will be naught else.


Squ. I am in a mischievous straight then. Redime to captum. Thy wit deserves
my love. I Will do it; here is my hand and faith, I Will do it. Tho^ art mine, and I am
thine directly.


Tra. Then ^earke you sir.


Tri Sir what will you say, if this Gentlewoman convert the Spaniard, turn him
true English subject, and present him to you with the oaths of Alegiance, and
S^premacie in his mouth presently?


Bull I will say, she ^e^erues ^or ever hereafter to hold her peace.


Tra. Now bear^ up sir. Look confidently, and say, you put on your Disguise
purp^sely to intertaine disguised Guests. Come auant with your Picca de goat,
and begin with the Justice here.


Squ. Thou have made me a M^n for ever, and I will make thee a Woman directly.
Gallants save you. See here the Metamor. phosis, that means to metamorphose
you all. Alas I know you for all your Disguises, and thought to intertaine you
in your k^nd.


Omnes. Sir P^ul Squelch!


Squ. I^^st out of you, my Usurper, and most Vpstartical Justice, whose o^lice
is your trade, and Clearke your Prentice, I will draw a man of little, or no
Moment: yet my friend, and Master Bulfinch, out of the Chair of Justice. ^his
my prognosticate the p^t^ing of my self, or many others out of Commission
within these few years; though I am no Prophet. Do I speak English now? Do
I know you now, or you me?


Bull. Question (...), we should know one another sir Paul: or else o^e of us
two were both very ignorant.


Squ. To proceed in my Metamorphosis. I will change you most confused Roarer,
into an accomplished Knight. And bid you welcome, noble sir Phillip Lucklesse.


Luc. I like the change well, and thank you sir.


Squ. Next sir of you Roarer, or Iieter, or whatsoever you are, I will make a
complete Gentleman, most answerable to you name Master Tridewell.


Tri. Very well sir.


Squ. But out of you Master Doctor, I will pick a certain Knane. W^ere is my
Niece slrah?


Pa. Which of your N^eces sir?


Squ. Have I so many sir? I mean my only one Constance, find her me, ^r I will
translate you out of an Aesculapian Cock into a Newg^^e ^ird immediately.


Wid. Sir if you will Metamorphose me out of a Batch^ lor, into a Bridegroom,
I Will show you your Niece.


Squ. This my Niece?


Vex. O have I found you Mistress? Sir this is the Gentlewoman I brought before
your worship to day.


Squ. Hold they peace; art in thy right mind?


Vex. As I am in my right mind and Midlesex, it is she sir. I had not matter
enough then to lay to her charge; for which I thank your worship I kissed
Newgate. But now I have sir; she has lest a Child upon our Parish, I am sure
got by an unknown father; and has been a loose Liuen, both at Duke Humfreyes,
and most of the winkd it houses about the Town these four years: which I can
sufficiently prove.


Squ. Hold thy peace Knave. I Will put these plums in thy mouth else


Gold Hold. Sir, my Child shall trouble your Parish no longer, here is a
Father, my troth plight Husband, sufficient to keep it and me, will thou not
Duck?


Wid. Duck? my name is Widgi^e, you mistake the man sure.


Hold. Sure I do not. This Gentleman, and this Gentlewoman, and this trusty
Servant of ours are my witnesses, I am your Wife sir.


Wid. O I am vn^one, quite cast away. Sister help me now with your Law wit,
or I perish for ever.


Fit. This is not to be endured: cheating, and vile abuse, This contract can
not be lawful. One person mistaken for another a lawful impediment to be
diuore'd for, though they were married.


Tri. I^ might do well if (as he con^esses himself) he had not made all too
sure, as well within as without.


Squ. Sir Phillip, while they wrangle out their cause, let us agree: Find you
but the means to make her lawfully your Wife, and here take her with my
faithful promise, of the equal half of any estate presently.


Luc. Sir Paul I thank you.


Fit. I say this is no lawful contract: And though we are legally diuorc'd,
yet neither he nor I may lawfully marry, while w^ both live, having been
lawfully married. And till you can disprove that, sir I Will forbid your Banes
good sir Phillip, and lay your hopes a cooling, friendly Master Tridewell, for
your love in managing this business.


Tri. Lady give me leave, if I have strayn'd a point of friendship, it was your
love gave the strenght to my wit. Fit. (...) love?


Tri. Your love indeed Lady. Which (and which Cupid pardon me for) now, that I
see I may enjoy, I am not so eagerly taken with, yet if you will --


Fit. Sir you cannot enjoy me, not he her, less you can disprove the
lawfulness of our former Marriage.


Tri To clear that point, do you know the Minister?


Fit. It Is not so long since, but I can remember his face.


Tri. Then to continue sir Paul's Metamorphosis? I Will draw him out of this
Doctor. Is not this he?


Discouers Pate like a Parson. Fit It is. But is not he a lawful Minister; I
would know that.


Pate. To clear that doubt there lies my Order of Priesthood.


Omnes. Who, Oliver! --


Throws off his Disguise. Pate. Even he, the Parson Nochurch, and this my
Patron, whom I must beseech together with the whole company, to preserve me out
of the high Commission: for look you, here is again your License.


Fit. Would you do this Master Tridewell?


Tri. Faith I foresaw an unto wardnesse in the Match: which if you repent the
breach of, there is your License; and the way to Church lies before you.


Fit. No sir. First get my brother free of his contract, and then a License
with your own name, and I Will wait on you to Church, as soon as you will.


Tri. O that is done already. What are ^ou agreed?


Wid. Most happily sir, sister alls well again. I have given her a hundred
pound to relinquish her right in me. Which before all these witnesses you do;
do you not?


Hol. Yes most freely.


Wid. Well then, I will not forswear to marry, But if ever I steal a Wife
again, let her be a witch, and may I ourn with her for company. Governor,
thou art out of countenance, and thou too honest Humfrey, me thinks. Come
bear up. I forgive. It Was your errors, not malice.


Ho^. Sir for my part, i will take my corporal oath --


Wid. It s^ll not need good Humfrey.


An. And for me sir -- wid. Nay, I dare not but beeleeue th^e before thou
speak Couernour: therefore prithee lets not talk o^'t our selves, but
quietly, and presently begin our travels, that we may hear no body else
talk on it.


Squ. Gentlemen and L^dies, I ^ee you all at peace^o well, that I wish no
further content to any, except Master Nonsense h^re.


Nons. Never credit me but I have had sport en^ugh'o conscience, and if I do
not make a Stage phyen't, when I come into Cornwall: I protest and vow then
say there was Nonsense in this.


Squ. I am glad you conclude so ^rendly with the rest. All the unquietness
will be in the Kitchen presently If your meat stay for you. Gallants. Knock
Within I was time to speak. They knock at Dresser already. Will ye in?

You ^re all Welcome: And I wish every Guest
as merry, as our Northern ^asses Feast.

FINIS*

