TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE ELIZABET, by the grace of God Queen of
England, France, and Irelande, defender of the faith. etc.
I Presented unto your Highness (most gracious Sovereign) the Concent of the
holy Story: endeuoryng there to show, that all the Book of truth breathed
from one spirit. That could not be declared, unless the times had a most exact
playnnes: which I recorded to be certainly chayned, even from the fall, to the
Redemption. For that, I laid down the pure words of the text: whereof an
angel told: That from the end of Iudahs captivity 490. years are pared out
unto our Lords death. Against this last part, a Learned man of Oxford long
disputed: not denying the words to have Gods authority in them, nor yet
differing from me for their beginning and end. but affirming, That the Angel
meant no certain time. And setting aside the Angels words, he affirms, That
from Olympiades 560. years precisely may be gathered by the Greek affairs:
And going on by the Jews common weal, makes a partitio^. He makes the
Temple (a mark most famous) the limit of both parts: as I had done, but not
in like time. From Zorobabel and Iosuahs return from Babel, he makes years
an hundredth and seven unto the buylding of the Temple. There I say that
ancient Ebrewes universally, ancient Greeks universally, and Latins most
generally old and late, keep them within 32. years, and that Scripture and
lives of all famous men agree with that. After the buylding of the Temple, are
by him to our Lords death 453. years: which I will grant him, and five more.
In this labor of his I blame his endeavor of two general errors: That he
disanulleth the propriety of the Angels words, and affirms, that the
returned from Babel lived 107. years to build the Temple. He read twelve
months, as his hearers triumphed. Some of his Lectures he sent me, by which I
might judge what matter could be in the rest. I could have wished that he
would either have spoken where I might reply, or have printed his opinions,
that rumors might not prevail above judgment. I have printed many several
works against him. The sum of them is this: That all his gaynsaying is
extremely erroneous: and that he has not blamed with any color of sound
learning, one word of my Book. Those small works of my Defenses for our
Religion, and common truth, oppugned by one pretending peculiar differing from
me: who for these two points have all Nations, Religions, and Studies, on my
side: Them I humbly commend to your Highness, that they may be censured by some
Learned, countenanced as truth requires, and considered according to the
honor of your gracious government. A private censure has passed betwixt us
all ready. For my Lord Archbishop of Canterburies grace, was chosen vmpier, and
examined both sides arguments. I hope I may with modesty plead his testimony,
though for my self, yet in a public cause: where it is good for all to know
the full strength of the truth. His Grace did wholly approve the Concent for
every whit: where his wisdom saw Heathen (that deceived Divines) confuted
most plentifully, by most ancient Heathen of their own kind, and universally
by all Jews. And touching former Christians following Gentiles on Daniel,
following Jews in Ezra, his Grace saw them helped from errors, by their own
grant: that when the D. and I join issue for the space betwixt the Alter and
Temple: Profane heathen have there no work: but old Divines Ebrew, Greek,
Latin, tell him, that he went very far, further then they would wish him.
And touching crossing the Angels propriety, I can not think that Europe
bears one learned Christian, or that Jury (which trembles at Gabriels
oration) has now one man, that holds the number uncertain. I think his
Grace will tell your Highness so much. And your Majesty's signification of your
Princely determination, would more break young brauing Students, whom reason
in such unexpected soyles can not bend. I greatly reverence my learned
adversary, and commend him, that he would not have all libraries set on
flame by fire of judgment in few words, without trial in one twelve months
fight. But I should more commend him now, if at the last he would tell, how
plain the Scripture lay always, though no heathen before settled Jubilees
aright with the Chronicle. His fame of Learning, and my more confident
resistance, makes many think that the Scripture is hard, where our long
labors differ. The fault is intolerable in the one of us two, either in him or
in me: and the faulty should be forced to yield, that none think amiss of
Gods word. I refuse not to abide all disgrace, if my travels be not found
true for the story, profitable for the quietness of the state, and fit for a
Prince, reigning in these west ends of the earth, the possession of Christ.
Our Marchantes that pass over all Nations, can not carry into the East more
noble merchandise from the West, then skill of teaching Greeks, upon what
occasion, ever hitherto they missed 1500. years in 4000. and marred all the
holy story, and lost religion: and caused the Christian Arabians to follow and
fail alike. And that point has been hence first opened, in that little work
to your Majesty, and in a further explication of it. Likewise, where by the
time and kindred of Christ, they may move any Jews: there, I trust, that I may
affirm, without chalenging more then due, that to your Highness first, both
points were declared in full and constant Concent. What the pains has been
to contriue unto agreement so many most intricate points, as for this harmony
of Scripture have been joined, from east writers of hard and diverse tongues,
and subtilties: not Ebrew only, but Syriaque and Chaldean, in sundry Dialectes
from Greeks and Latins of all sorts, avoiding the errors of all, bringing
nothing but matters of difficulty, and all judged faultlesse: any may judge,
that considers but the hardness of the least of these studies severally. The
pain is augmented by the greatness of the charges: not maintained by great
allowance of Divinity, but gotten through Ebrew skill, and spent on Divinity:
though it be a rule of God and man, that none war on their own charges. Yet
duty binds all men to further, as they can, celestial knowledge. But
pains in this sort, loses much of the due encoragement. And some increase of
griese I felt, that when I had a meaning to look to my self by other means
then Divinity: I was requested by one of your Majesty's honorable Counselors,
a Divine, to take rather your Highness preferment: the delay whereof has
hindered mine own course. But all this may soon be cured, when it is known to
your gracious care over Learning.

Your Majesty's most humble Subject Hugh Broughton.

An Epistle sent unto the Archb. of C. and D. Elmer then B. of London, chosen
vmpires touching the D. that read against the Concent of Scripture, and the
Author of that Concent.
MY duty remembed to your Grace and Lordshyp. It is known to all the Realm,
with what vehemency and care D.R. labored to prove, that a Concent of
Scripture for certainty of Chronicle could not be made. By reason of his
former credit, he has drawn many to deny that, which they always held: and
to be against them selves, to countenance him, and to disgrace me. I thought
small skill might serve in an Apology for all men: and was so bold as to
pronounce him more grosely deceived, then ever I knew any man. And content
could I have been, to have tried by disputation, or by printing: not minding
to leave off, until my book to her Majesty (which he laboreth wholly to
disgrace) stands by open judgment, or falls to my continual disgrace, and
last pains in study. When he had long read to prove that Mardochai was not of
Iechonias captivity, and had made many commend his cause (we both grant that
to end our strife) and they being called to read the text, loathed their own
inconstancy: Yet then this was told me, that some Oxforde men required
answer of me. Thereupon I wrote to D. Robinson, Provost of the Q. College,
certain Theses, which might end the cause: requesting his alowance, or
reiection: with this addition, that I thought it injurious that Oxforde men
should require me to defend that, which they ever held: unless they would
protest, that either their minds were altered, or that they were unable: and
of D. Reynoldes I wrote, that he was extremely culpable, in blaming me for
differing from him: where none ever was, nor wylbe of his judgment; and by his
own words he is utterly condemned. Upon this, D. Reynoldes comes to London
to me, showing that he was willing to take any judge: and both we agreed upon
your Grace, and you my L. B. of London, that we might have the cause fully
ended, without partiality to the credit of either, clearly to the glory of
God, and brightness of his truth: That whether soever hereafter should make any
stir in the cause, he should be openly culpable by all censures. My matter is
opened in my Book of Scripture Concent in Gabriels oration Dan. 9. in the
Preface, and at the year of the world 3470. My accusation is, that D. R.
unjustly blamed that, as all particulars depending thereupon: which tend
through the old Testament, yea from Moses to our Lord his ascension. To all
which courses, I blame him as injurious. Imoued him to send to your Grace and
Lordship, the book of his Lectures. I trow, reason will move him to do so much,
if he mean to defend him self. I have sent herewithall a brief in Theses
and short declarations, to give an insight to the matter: a copy whereof I
could wish D. R. if he would: as I would gladly give him any thing for a Book
of his whole Lectures against me. If these be not sufficient, I am ready by
Lecture, Disputation, or Printing, to open any point hid in my cause. Thus
requesting your Graces and Lordships free report to her Majesty, and my L.
Treasurer, touching my Book wherefore we strive: after your convenient
leisure: I humbly commend your Grace and Lordship to the spirit of truth.

London. Nou. 4. 1591.
To the worshypfull and learned, the Vicechauncelour, and others the governors
of learning-houses in the University of Oxeforde.
LFarned Fathers, you know that I put forth sundry defenses of my doctrine,
touching the harmony of Scripture, to clear my book which I wrote to her
Majesty: that I might prove my self not unadvised, in offering that doctrine
to her Highness: but careful of duty to the Church and state. And God is my
judge, that I had desire and hope therein, to have advanced not a little the
knowledge of Christ, the peace of the Church, and honor of all humane good
learning. My defenses I hope, prove my cause to be sound. And not only that,
but a more plain dealing used, then I have found from your Students. I will
touch what I wrote: and your men's injuries: and require your censure. First the
treatise of Mardochai, written without open noting any particular adversary,
proouing all Churches and Synagoges, and the native judgment of all plain
folk, to be of my side, might have quietly appeased all strife, or have driven
all you to have defended your own cause. Moreover I, though I stood in
possession of the ancient opinion, and by that only might disgrace the
replyer, consented to abide arbitrament, which commonly would part stakes.
Besides, I chayned holy testimonies for the service of Shemesh, unto that
blessed service of redemption, that the cause might match the Suns brightness
in the simplest sight: and the speech of every part appear of one tenor in
phrase: that he which would be tropique in one point, should be guilty of
threatening the like to all. Some learned strangers, thought that pains the
best of mine. But some said, that your D. disdayned to answer that: being
whole the express word of God. Such reverence holy Euthyphrones gave Gods
word. Besides, your D. affyrming, that there was not a Chronicle in the Bible,
disputed upon Abrabams times, and the Judges, to prove them uncertain. I
marueyled what he should mean to disturb the truth, in that most famous
place: where God upon Terahs death, bagan a new accumpt from Christ's promise.
The Sun differs not more from the dimmest Star, then that point differs
from obscurity. And the ancient Greeks saw it so wonderful a matter, that
Moses should tell of Terahs death, telling in the eight above only all their
years: that to hide the wonder, they put in eight times, and he dyed, S.
Stephen and Philo in Abraham's peregrination might have told your D. that
antiquity therein made no doubt. Neither did ever any English differ from me
for S. Stephens words. For the Judges times, my Book would have told him by
particular accomptes, where S. Paul brings 18. stories to one word: that no
Virginalles were better in tune, then that harmony of time: though your D.
would needs be busy with me for the seven years of Conquest, and the seven
Jubilees to Samuel: feauen Seauenties to Nebucadnezars war, the seauenty of
Captivity, and thence the seven Seauenties. But for Abraham's Promise, I most
labord to reform him: that he might not prevail to mar the two most
heavenly Promises, and noblest joints of all the Bible: that, and the other to
Daniel. In a disputation upon Melchizedek. I conveyed a redress of his
opinions: which because some little marked, afterward I graued in brass, by
reason of some Pictures, a view of the whole Bible, freendly amending his
breaches of all the buylding. This also being unregarded, directly do I reprove
your Students, as denying the Redemption by a strong consequent: who hold,
that it fell not out in the time properly told: whereas men and Angels will
hold, that otherwise it could not be from God: and the Jews seek no more
colorable defense then to prove, that the proper time cannot be proved to agree
with the prophecy. Therein also I found your Students enemies to Gods
truth, as before: and bitter, because I liken them to Nero, harping at their
own cities flames. Hearing of their rage against my cause, and me for that, I
wrote a smoth treatise of the whole time, with fuller handling of every joint,
as though I had no adversary: with a Preface, telling what some others thought
of him, whom yours do so much despise: thinking that among indifferent
Athenians Eschines must give leave to Demosthenes, extremely accused, to prove
how for all his times, others would have made him a garlande. Thus I have
told what, and why I have printed. Now for the next point, I think it not
amiss to call your Students dealinges to account, and to request, what
Christian defense they can make, that the pleasure which they took in speaking
against the truth, and the defender, may be bitterness to them in hearing a
recompense, I will not complain what hindrances and griefs they wrought me:
but call them to account barely, for bad dealing.

Choroebus harnes, in his lecture Cxvj. where al our nation in the Geneua bible
are of my mind: and from Choroebus his Olympiades are counted: and they should
be Choroebus harnes.

Cyrus first, and are complete at our Lords death, and means to find me
senseless: not opening to the world how through his. xii. months pains, he
confuteth himself. Quo quid sol vidit vnquam mir abisius?







Germany 1590. Inibis paruam gratiam a Christianis qui conatus es hanc
prophetiam Danielis labefactare. Praeterea qui istic mos est in vebi in
absentem: ille cui contradicis iam est in media Germania. Adhaec vis aduersari
omnib. Nos omnes sumus in eadem sententia.



Ebrewes al their troops, millions are against him) but old Greeks and
Latins are once with him, yet turned against him thus: 230. years Iudab was
under Persia, says antiquity. Part the time, say I, by the Jews common
weal: on part from Iudahs return, or the Persians Monarchy, unto the
building of the Temple by the 49000. returned. What does antiquity make that
time? 18. years: very well, I will grant that all, and 14. years more. Now
from thence to Alexander the great, the D. cannot complain that I make it
shorter then he does: and therein antiquity can help him nothing, where he
most justly does damn it as in particular other stories: antiquity damneth
the error of it self. Why may not I do so? Now if I prove that antiquity al
every one man that ever wrote upon some one sufficient point, is of my side:
what an injury is it to all the world, so to set a face upon defenses damnyng
of him, Why would not he plainly tell at the first thus: 1500. years
writers are with A. C. for the Temple, that 49000. men at the return should
build it, as all the Talmudistes hold at 18. after the return, and not 107.
But yet he will confute all ancient preuayling opinions. An orator of plain
dealing should not enter an action against Ctesipho, where Demosthenes comes
principal.

Ezra filius Saraiae: the term Filius, Son, deceived me: where by him it
should be Abnepos: the fist from him. I plead that I am sure so it is: if it
were not so, mark how he confuteth all the world: Hebrews, all the millions
that follow the Talmudistes in Aboth, and al their consentes in Seder Olam,
their common register, and in Rambam, in their succesions, and in Sepher
Mitzuoth gadoloth: namely after them I archi, Abrabbaneel, Kimchi. None are to
the contrary (but Zakuto forgetting himself, for one descent.) Jerome is of
the same mind: which thing your D. should have professed: So be our learned
men, Bullinger Pelican, Lauater, Lyra, and Stella, with the general opinion
of Rhomistes: and no Divine of England, to my knowledge, ever was of any other
mind. But contrary all held the fourth of Ezra a witty Book, wherein Ezra
(as borne where I set him) is a Prophet 30. after the burning of Jerusalem.
This was not fair play, to blame all in deed, and pretend nouelty in one. As
he talkyng of Ezra, said, that I should do well to confess my oversight: seeing
he, not I, is ouerscene, he should remember, Patere legem quam ipse tulenis:
And to tell plainly, how all be against him. If Mercerus were alive, who upon
Aggai makes Ezra son to Saraias, he would marvel why any should think
otherwise. I asked M. Fra. Iunius, whose son he thought Ezra? He answered,
who dare deny him to be son to Saraias. Now the confession of M. Iunius is
little less against your D. then his own. And yfall antiquity make Ezra live
50. years more then the Persians reign: your D. will confess, that by
antiquity my cause stands, and his falls.

Ezra is son to Saraias upon I. Chapter 6. 14. relied upon Filius Ezra 7. I. as I
took it: whom all, he confuted, and against the same his hearers triumphed,
when they sought only my disgrace. If none ever were of his mind for
uncertainty in Daniels 490. against me, nor for Ezra, why am I only blamed?
or what reverence of men, do his words bear? And this one point (where all the
world is on my side) Ebrewes al, Greeks al, Latins al, overthrows al his
Chronicle and strife: and as he ouerturned al religion, in framing an
uncertainty for the Angels number: So when he feigneth Ezra abnepotem Saraiae:
he might as well give a new Bible from his authority. S. Augustine said that
Ezra was borne in Captivity. And so he might: but begotten before, as
posthumus. And any time of the Captivity would serve my turn. But never any
was toward his mind.

Daniels 490. for a rare jewel, for the certain time of our Lord his death:
and likewise for Ezra, by one that brocheh a new opinion from his own
authority, pretending to confute one man, what will they say? Not Calvin only,
and other wholly my partners, nor Iunius and Scaliger, only his partners once,
but all the nation is of him confuted, and al nations of the earth. And I might
turn over the cause to others, whose hand was in it before mine.

Homer, would wyshe courage not to exceed safety. So for Mardochai al
Churches, and native judgment: for Daniel and Ezra, every several man is
against him. Now it wylbe an hard demand, whether it were better to have al
Universities with Helice and Bura, or pestered with Students, as M. Doctors
hearers, who triumph that manifold testimonies of all the world, brought to
prove the Suns service recorded unto the Redemption, have bin confuted among
them by their own authority and courage? The Son never saw the like
dealyng.



one Bacheler of D. meeting (1589) at Tocester with one H. T. of London, and a
Minister of Lancashire, who found comfort by my pains: that B. said, Qur D.
R. has confuted all that Book: yet he could tell no one thing, but said, that
he had that book, and could understand nothing. How divinely he pleaded
ignorance in his own language and profession, I let other judge: yet he would
be a Bacheler of divinity.

M. Koph told, that of my Apology all you D D. thought the same, How well,
others know. If untruly, you must blame him. Two of you, one in writing, the
other in speech sent me, tell the contrary, that no one argument can be
answered. If he have a desire to winn fame for resistyng the heart of Religion
Gabriels lamp of all Scripture, he must be censured as a Julian or Lucian. But
I have some better hope of goodness in the man, after that your D. publishes
his recantation. And I trust, he will regard the common truth, and Gods
honor, more then his own, Never any so disgraced Gabriel, as his lectures do.

Germany, by some of your young heads it was blazed over all London, Omnibus
and lippis notum and tonsoribus, that your Doctors learned reading drove me
away. A Damasell put in Bridewell for refusing our Churches assemblies, upon
mention of my judgment, could reply, that your D. drove me away. Yet I had
sent him word before by two of New College, that if he were not foylde, I
would never more handle pen: and a sharper warning by M. Kennel, by which he
made him make the time 490. years, just as I did, and dash all his former
pains. VVoulde any of you take patiently sch savage injuries, as to abide
opprobrious speches, where the confuter proves good, the cause of the confuted?

M. A. Cot. and others, said, that I had yielded unto your D. for Mardochaj:
that not he, but Kis was the captiued. Then one knowing the contrary, said. Are
not you ashamed to behe one so, that the last week openly read with clear
reasons to the contrary. Areye past shame? I hen said the M. of his art: You in
London speak ill of M. D. R. and why should not we of Oxford speak so of M.
B. If this must be so, I must request all the grave of our nation, to admit
never any Oxford tesimony against me.



Rabbines, and after for fear, breaking promise. If your D. did so, this much
I must tell him, That all who know both our studies, will say, that I have spent
more years, then he hours in the principal Rabbines. It may be found that
never any Rabbine was of his mind for the cause then in strife of Mardochaj,
nor against me. He deemed that he had the Chaldy Paraphrast: by which he was
most notably condemned: and thought that he had Aben Ezra, but was deceived. By
all arguments that can be brought forth from any Rabbine upon Scripture, or
either Talmuds, I trow he shall find his condemnation sure. Jupiter and Mercurj
might sooner make Amphitryo and Sosia believe others to be them selves: then he
make any from Rabbine records belecue Kis not Mardochaj to be of the Captiued.
Floutyng from your men I can not stay: but I can show to others, that they have
no more stay for truth in these studies, for the holy story, then Ulysses ship
had stay in a tempest, when he knew not where stood east or west. I cannot
abide to sloute, and I am sorry that your D. would be counted pleasant that
way. But for sad truth, the blind may see all kinds of study turned against
him, even such as in which he put al his trust and confidence.

Phlegon takes part with my side: in whom if he rest not, then I show that
Thallus, Castor, Phlegon, Timaeus, Philistus, Xenophon, Laertius, Africanus,
Clemens, Triclinius, Sosigenes, Pamphila, Apollodorus, Plutarch, and such,
differ so exceedingly one from an other, and from them selves, hundrethes of
years for famous matters, touching Olympiades, that one might wonder how your
D. could miss, to see that by them Cyrus might touch Judas Machabeus: Aggai
and Zachary go before Daniel and Ezekiel: and all heathen antiquities be
brought unto an infinite Chaos. Likewise he might have seen how by profane
Greeks the Persians might be said (in Clemens) to have reigned 500. years, or
bare ten years. He spent his time not in these studies. And I commend his
courage, that durst provoke one readier of youth in this tongue, then in any.
He little looked that 50. of 80. in Erat^sthenes account, cited by M. Joseph
Scal. should be cut off. For, twixt Cyrus and X erxes. He less looked to have
all the world with Jude to prove this. Likewise thence he marked not, that
Isocrates makes Athens principality 25. shorter then Lycurgus does: (Wherein I
could wyshe it to be no more shortened.) Nor marked how Athenianes, Andocides,
and Aeschines, reckon for those times 30. where Thucidides and Xenophon make
but 14. Likewise Aeschines scholershyp under Socrates, and his warfare under
Alcibiades, and death after great Alexanders (the doubtful point) recorded from
Demetrius Phalereus: this will make Lysander near Alexander, then Olympiades
account about 30. years, though some Olympiades prove the same: for K K.
Philip and Mausolus. The very same is helped by Plutarch and Vlpian, by Lysias:
for if Lysias were 63. before Athens fall, and a pleader for Iphicrates at
Philip Macedons time, the distance can not be about 50. but rather less then
half. The Olympique faith is feign to deny the orations to be from Lysias: as
though Plutarch and Vlpian knew not the style of Lysias. So if the Angel had
spoke nothing, cunnyng humanistes might have seen the same space from heathen.
Aelianus that makes Demetrius Phalereus to be servant to Conon and Timotheus
(Conons death being near Lysanders) and Phalereus seeing the 70. translaters:
this also would have troubled your D. hope of a longer count then the Angels
from Heathen. Isocrates again would resist him, that tells how Lacedemonan
ruled Greece not 34. years, but ten: though he touched not exactly Leuctra
fall. But Polybius who tells that by the 12. year they were at the loss of
it, galleth the Olympiques. Athenaeus troubles them somewhat, in whom Philip
reigns not 24. years, but 20. And Clemes more, in whom Alexander by some is
12. year, higher then by others: that is near Socrates. And again by
Phalereus the same is plain, out of Reinecius, for if he living so long after
great Alexander were scholefelow with Alcibiades brother, the space betwixt
Lysander and Alexander, can hardly come near half 70. The whole speeches in
the later Attique orators talk in the same tenor of Conon, and the equals,
as known well to some then alive. Thus Grecia is with S. Matthew and S. Luke,
in their ages: and not I, but your D.has the new opinion. For ten by him must
draw 527. years in their successions: the like where of since David's time,
that is 2500. years, the Sun never saw. I may not blame him again for
calling those ten men the glory of all the earth, and rare arguments for this
cause, Obscura sydera. But this I may tell, that a divine, M. I. I. bred at
Cambridge, there in judgment holden inferior to none of yours, seeing in the
country your Doctors book of Lectures, was grieved to seetherin for those ten
men these words: Autoris Concentus obscura sydera. The man him self told
me: And gave your divines this praise, that they were indifferent judges: and
said, that your D. was now out of his studies. That, all the world may see,
whom rancour blyndeth not. But how then will he be able to satisfy the Church,
pretending truth and antiquity, and defense of the settled opinion, disturbyng
all England, all Europe, and Asia. May not I require that he be called to
account, for what one syllable in my Book for this matter, differing from
others of our best he blames me, and puts me to private pains and charges,
for the desence of the public truth? If the young student delyght in
floutyng, let him see whose dealings deserves that: your Doctors, mine, or
his own?

A grave Preacher dwelling betwixt Algate and Bow, gave this censure: that your
D. and one other D. writing both contrary to them selves, and to the third
that held the true, beginning upon affection out-off their study, had made
many Athiestes. The man, if partiality might serve, is known otherwise bent.
Many have said since: What, shall we study the Bible, when so great Scholars
cannot agree? And a Preacher of your breed, now teaching in London, seeing
your D. confuted, said, For two pence halfepeny he would be of either opinion:
to such a pass come your Divines. They triumph at the first, as having carried
away Burlyspoyles, and ample laud: how one is by yours confuted, for
endeavoring to prove, that God draws us by the Suns Chronicle, unto the
Sons justice, contriuing all Libraries, all, plainly to this high point.
When the matter is detected, that he confuted the truth, himself, and all the
world: then a new pestiferous error is bred, that the matters are small:
though they be the harmony of all Scripture, and joy of Christianity. An other
B. of D. of yours near Lon. thanked God, that he never troubled his head with
these matters: That is, why God upon Terahs death, leaves to honor man with
the Suns ourneys, and tyeth all to the promise of Christ: and what wisdom
Gabriel promised to teach Daniel. Belike young divines are in deep mysteries,
that can despise such high points.

But here I must needs pardon your young Students; whereas Preachers abroad,
some not of your breed, fall to gross schism. A certain learned man was to
be preferred unto a charge, one that held my studies for the truth of the
frame of the Bible not unprofitable. An aged grave Gentleman liked well to
collate a place on him. Certain that would be counted Preachers, desirous of
that which they call reformation, above al holyer knowledge, come to the
Gentleman with greater heat then the Terentian Chremes came to Simo, charging
the Gentleman in his conscience, that the should not prefer him, for the
doctrine which he liked off. The gentleman asked an old great-learned man,
what he thought of the doctrine, and of the man. He showed how grossly the
Preachers were deceived. Because of their calling, I will not lyken them to
Alexander the Capper-smith: but I am sure that Paul would abandon them. Old M.
John More, preacher of Norwich, lately a neighbor of theirs, one in their
zeal, but seasoned better, no colder then they, and as great a student in the
text Hebrew and Greek, as they knew any: he was of an other spirit, and
disdayned not to tread in every step, where these men, like Paris of Homer
shrunk, as if they had trodden near a Serpent. I know it to be far from your
D. mind, to prick forward rumors in that kind. And I think that he is
resolved, how zeal (as Jews proved) running before knowledge, is the ruin of
Religion: and knows tradesinen, who be cunninger in the depht of the holy
book, then the common sort of teachers: whose zeal medleth not beyond their
own bounds. I would not be thought to think, that your D. could favor such
dealings: But because they will needs be shrowding under his wings, I thought
good to warn of that. This evil sown by mistaking your D. is like a
Grangraena further growing. A Cambridge man that lives in Essex a Scholmaster
and a Preacher, meeting with a Gentleman that knew from Genesis to the
Apocalypse, the frame of the Bible better the^ he, was counseled by that
Gentleman to make a declaratio of christianity, how in all ages it was clear
(before he traveled to stir the simple uncertainly) and to make the people
know the everlasting certainty of salvation, by Moses, the Prophets, the
Gospel, and the Epistles. He answered, that some books of Scripture could
never yet be understood: namely the Revelation. The Gentleman using an instance
from some for that, he said, that your D. had confuted that pains: though he
meddled not with one word. You may see what harm to himself, and to the
Church is wrought by his reading, being mistaken, and misreported. I could wish
that he would either revoke all his gain-sayinges: as I charge him, that they
be all injurious and erroneous: or print al his lectures, which I saw for the
one half, an years reading, that all might see what is in controversy.

Mark further infection of an other learned man: I know not whether he were
bred amongst you, a certain Gentleman, whom I never saw, writes to a friend
of his from Dunslei in Staffoideshyre, to a Londoner thus: Dec. 20. 1592. I
heard not long since, a learned man, yet ignorant, and over swift in
judgment, disprayse this Book (of Scripture Concent) as needelesse, and a
superfluous work: of whom I demanded, whether he did know it: or ever read
it. His answer was, no. How can you give judgment then, said I, of that you
know not. He answered, that he heard so. Thus leaving the counsel of S. John,
which bids us try spirits, whether they be of God or no: such fall into the
curse of the Lord, that call light darkness, and darkness light: that judge good
evil and evil good. Although he took himself learned, I am sure he was not
able of his own pregnant wit, so much as to read over the book in such order
as it requires, without an instructor: much less then to under stand the
same, and the drift therien. The Gentleman that wrote this, favors much your
students, and hearing of my just griefs, wrote a request to bear with the
losers. But when he perceived the strange dealinges of some from you, and savage
barbarousnes, he was of that mind, that pity may not mar the city. What
some Doctors of Cambridge thought, I recorded. One being at London upon your
Doctors first Antilogy, being asked of a Londoner, what he thought of the Book
which your D. confuted, said thus: The argument is as profitable, as could be
chosen for this age. Then said the Londoner: if it be so, Why did none of you
DD. or of the BB. take it in hand? Then said he: The man who took it in hand
knew, by reason of his studies in the tongues, longer then any others, that he
was ablest to perform it. Truly, I would not for any preferment, have
troubled her Majesty with accepting any work of mine, above all others in the
kind: in years the youngest of dealers in so weighty affairs, unless I had
thought my hours most of any in that study, and my self able to keep our
nation from all foil for accepting my pains. And I know that by that help,
an other may see more into Scripture by a learned guide in few months, then I
could before I found the order, in ten years. And acertaine Nobleman of my
age told me, that he learned more in two hours by that help, with open
speech upon it, then by all his former pains. I hope you will bear with me:
the cause is not now mine own. And I may give as good leave to disgrace the
cause, as the defender. Pericles or Nestor would do this unprovoked. Job.
Moses, and Paul, would in defense speak of them selves. And as I made the
cause from private by arbitrament to be public, so I will enterlace here the
testimony of a public person. The Archbishop of C^^terbury his grace, you
know, was by both sides chosen vmpire: you may soon know whether he thus
censured, That never any humane pains was of greater travel and dexterity,
then against. 1500. years errors, so to clear the holy story, as the book
of Concent has done. Of what spirit then shall we hold Students, that cannot
abide their own Religion to go clear forward, nor the public testimony,
which stands as the Princes own? I most humbly would entreat her Majesty
to command that a public testimony which might be known over the Realm,
may pass betwixt is. But now I desire your goodness to give your testimony,
either in print, or as you will: whether I hold not the truth, and have bin
more grossly iniuried* then ever any by any of a contrary religion. I hope all
will so conclude, who reverence learning, care for truth, honor Scripture,
and regard Religion.


