THE ANTIPODES: A COMEDY. Acted in the year 1638. by the Queens Majesty's
Servants, at Salisbury Court in Fleet Street.

The Author Richard Brom.

Hic totus volo rideat Libellus.

Mart. LONDON: Printed by I. Oaks, for Francis Constable, and are to be sold at
his shops in Kings-street at the sign of the Goat, and in Westminster Hall.
1640.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable WILLIAM Earl of Hertford, etc.
My Lord:
THe long experience, I have had of your Honors favorable intentions toward
me, has compelled me to this Presumption. But I hope your Goodness will be
pleased to pardon what your Benignity was the cause of, viz. the error of my
Dedication. Had your Candor not encouraged me, in this I had been innocent:
Yet ( I beseech you) think not, I intend it any other, then your Recreation at
your retirement from your weighty Employments; and to be the Declaration of
your gracious encouragements toward me, and the testimony of my Gratitude. If
the public view of the world entertayn it with no less welcome, then that
private one of the Stage already has given it, I shall be glad the World owes
you the Thanks: If it meet with too severe Construction, I hope your
Protection. What hazards soever it shall justle with, my desires are it may
pleasure your Lordship in the perusal, which is the only ambition he is
conscious of, who is

My Lord, Your Honor's humbly devoted: Richard Brom.

To censuring Critics, on the approved Comedy, The Antipodes.
IOnson's alive! the World admiring stands,
And to declare his welcome there, shake hands;
Apollo's Pensioners may wipe their eyes,
And stiflle their abortive Elegies:
Tailor his Goose-quill may abjure again,
And to make Paper dear, scribbling refrain;
For sure there is cause of neither. Ionson's ghost
Is not a Tenant in the Elizian Coast:
But vexed with too much scorn, at your dispraise,
Silently stole unto a grove of Bays;
Therefore bewail your errors, and entreat
He will return, unto the former seat,
Whence he was often pleased, to feed your ear
With the choice dainties of his Theater;
But I much fear, he will not be easily won
To leave his Bower, where grief, and he alone
Do spend their time, to see how vainly we
Accept old toys, for a new Comedy.
Therefore repair to him, and praise each line
Of his Vulpone, Sejanus, Cateline.
But stay, and let me tell you, where he is,
He sojournes in his Brome's Antipodes.
C. G.

The Prologue.
OPinion, which our Author cannot court,
(For the dear daintiness of it) has, of late,
From the old way of Plays possessed a Sort
Only to run to those, that carry state
In Scene magnificent and language high;
And Clothes worth all the rest, except the Action.
And such are only good those Leaders cry;
And into that belief draw on a Faction,
That must despise all sportive, merry Wit,
Because some such great Play had none in it.
But it is known (peace to their Memories)
The Poets late sublimed from our Age,
Who best could understand, and best devise
Works, that must ever live upon the Stage,
Did well approve, and lead this humble way,
Which we are bound to travail in to night;
And, though it be not traced so well, as They
Discovered it by true Phoebean light,
Pardon our just Ambition, yet that strive
To keep the weakest Branch of the Stage alive.
I mean the weakest in their great esteem,
That count all slight, that is under us, or nigh;
And only those for worthy Subjects deem,
Fetched, or reached at (at least) from far, or high:
When low and homebred Subjects have their use,
As well, as those, fetched from on high, or far;
And it is as hard a labor for the Muse
To moove the Earth, as to disl^dge a Star.
See, yet, those glorious Plays; and let their sight
Your Admiration moove; these your Delight.
To the Author on his Comedy, The Antipodes.
Steered, by the hand of Fate, ore swelling Seas,
Me thought I landed on the Antipodes;
Where I was straight a Stranger: For it is thus,
Their feet do tread against the tread of us.
My Scull mistook: thy Book, being in my hand,
Hurried my Soul to the Antipodian strand,
Where I did feast my Fancy, and mine Eyes
With such variety of Rarities,
That I perceive thy Muse frequents some shade,
Might be a Grove for a Pierian Maid.
Let Idiots prate; it boots not what they say.
The Antipodes to Wit and Learning may
Have ample Priv'ledge: For among that crew,
I know there is not a man can judge of You.
Rob. Chamberlain.

The Persons in the Play.
Blaze, an Herald Painter. Joylesse, an old Country Gentleman. Hughball, a
Doctor of Physic. Barbara, Wife to Blaze. Martha, Wife to Perigrine. Letoy, a
Phantasticke Lord. Quaylpipe, his Curate. Perigrine, son to Joylesse. Diana,
wife to Joylesse. By-play, a conceited servant to Letoy. Trulocke, a close
friend to Letoy. Followers of the Lord Letoyes, who are Actors in the By-play.
The Antipodes.
Act. 1.
Scene 1.
Blaze, Ioylesse. TO me, and to the City, Sir, you are welcome,
And so are all about you: we have long
Suffered in want of such fair Company.
But now that Times calamity has given way
(Thanks to high Providence) to your kinder visits,
We are (like half pined wretches, that have lain
Long on the plankes of sorrow, strictly tied
To a forced abstinence, from the sight of friends)
The sweetlier filled with joy.

Joy. Alas, I bring
Sorrow too much with me to fill one house,
In the sad number of my family.

Bla. Be comforted good Sir, my house, which now
You may be pleased to call your own, is large
Enough to hold you all; and for your sorrows,
You came to lose 'hem: And I hope the means
Is readily at hand: The Doctor's coming,
Who, as by Letters, I advertised you,
Is the most promising man to cure your Son,
The Kingdom yields; it will astonish you
To hear the mervailes he has done in cures
Of such distracted ones, as is your son,
And not so much by bodily Physic (no!
He sends few Recipes to the Apothecaries)
As medicine of the mind, which he infuses
So skilfully, yet by familiar ways,
That it begets both wonder and delight
In his observers, while the stupid patient
Finds health at unawares.

Joy. You speak well of him:
Yet I may fear, my sons long grown disease
Is such he has not met with.

Bla. Then i will tell you Sir,
He cured a Country gentleman, that fell mad
For spending of his land before he sold it:
That is, 'twas sold to pay his debts: All went
That way, for a dead horse, as one would say,
He had not money left to buy his dinner,
Upon that wholesale day. This was a cause,
Might make a gentleman mad you will say; and him
It did, as mad as land less Squire could be.
This Doctor by his art removed his madness,
And mingled so much wit among his brains,
That, by the overflowing of it merely,
He gets and spends five hundred pound a year now,
As merrily as any Gentleman
In Darby-shire; I name no man. But this
Was pretty well you will say.

Joy. My sonne's disease
Grows not that way.

Bla. There was a Lady mad,
I name no Lady: but stark mad she was,
As any in the Country, City, or almost
In Court could be.

Joy. How fell she mad?


Bla. With study;
Tedious and painful study: And for what
Now can you think?

Joy. For painting, or new fashions.
I cannot think for the Philosophers stone.

Bla. No, it was to find a way to love her husband,
Because she did not, and her friends rebuked her.

Joy Was that so hard to find, if she desired it.


Bla. She was seven years in search of it, and could not,
Though she consumed his whole estate by it.

Joy. It Was he was mad then.


Bla. No; he was not borne
With wit enough to loose, but mad was she
Until this Doctor took her into cure,
And now she lies as lovingly on a flockebed
With her own Knight, as she had done on down*
With many others, but I name no parties,
Yet this was well you will say.

Joy. Would all were well.


Bla. Then sir, of Officers, and men of place,
Whose senses were so numm'd, they understood not
Bribes from dew fees, and fell on premunires,
He has cured diverse, that can now distinguish,
And know both when, and how to take, of both;
And grow most safely rich by it, the other day
He set the brains of an Attorney right,
That were quite topsie turvy overturned
In a pitch ore the Bar; so that (poor man)
For many Moons, he knew not whether he
Went on his heeels or's head, till he was brought
To this rare Doctor, now he walkets again,
As upright in his calling, as the boldest
Amongst 'hem. This was well you will say.

Joy. It Is much.


Bla. And then for horn mad Citizens my neighbors,
He cures them by the dozens, and we live
As gently with our wives, as Rams with Ewes.

Joy. We do you say, were you one of his Patients.


Bla. 'Slid he has almost caught me; No Sir no,
I name no parties I, But wish you merry;
I strain to make you so, and could tell forty
Notable cures of his to pass the time
Until he comes.

Joy. But pray, has he the art
To cure a husbands Jealousy?

Bla. Mine sir he did: 'Sfoot I am caught again.


Joy. But still you name no Party, pray how long,
Good master Blaze, has this so famous doctor
Whom you so well set out, been a professor?

Bla. Never in public: Nor indures the name
Of Doctor, though I call him so, but lives
With an odd Lord in town, that looks like no Lord,
My Doctor goes more like a Lord then he. Ex. Doctor.
O welcome sir, I sent mine own wife for you:
Ha you brought her home again?

Act 1. Scen. 2.
Blaze, Doctor, Ioylesse. Doct. She Is in your house,
With Gentlewomen, who seem to lodge here.

Bla. Yes sir, this Gentleman's wife, and his sons wife:
They all ayle something, but his son (it is thought)
Is falling into madness, and is brought
Up by his careful father to the town here
To be your patient, speak with him about it.

Doct. How do you find him Sir? does his disease
Take him by fits; or is it constantly,
And at all times the same?

Joy. For the most part
It is only inclining still to worse,
As he grows more in days; by all the best
Conjectures we have met with in the country,
It Is found a most deep melancholy.

Doct. Of what ye^res is he?


Joy. Of five and twenty Sir.


Doct. Was it borne with him? is it natural,
Or accidental? have you or his mother
Been so at any time affected?

Joy. Never,
Not she unto her grave; nor I, till then,
Knew what a sadness meant; though since, I have
In my sons sad condition, and some crosses
In my late marriage, which at further time
I may acquaint you with.

Bla. the old man's jealous
Of his young wife; I find him by the question
He put me to ere while.

Doct. Is your son married?


Joy. Diverse years since; for we had hope a wife
Might have restrained his traveling thoughts, and so
Have been a means to cure him; but it failed us.

Doct. What has he in his younger years been most
Addicted to? what study? or what practice?

Joy. You have now, Sir, found the question, which I think
Will lead you to the ground of his distemper.

Doct. That Is the next way to the cure. Come quickly, quickly*


Joy. In tender years he always loved to read
Reports of travailes, and of voyages;
And when young boys, like him, would tire themselves
With sports, and pastimes, and restore their spirits
Again by meat and sleep; he would whole days
And nights (sometimes by stealth) be on such books
As might convey his fancy round the world.

Doct. Very good, on.


Joy. When he grew up toward twenty,
His mind was all on fire to be abroad;
Nothing but travail still was all his aim;
There was no voyage or foreign expedition
Be said to be in hand, but he made suit
To be made one in it His mother and
My self opposed him still in all, and strongly
Against his will, still held him in; and won
Him into marriage; hoping that would call
In his extravagant thoughts, but all prevailed not,
Nor stayed him (though at home) from travailing
So far beyond himself, that now too late,
I wish he had gone abroad to meet his fate.

Doct. Well sir, upon good terms I Will undertake
Your son: let us see him.

Joy. Yet there is more: his wife Sir.


Doct. I Will undertake her too. Is she mad too?


Bla. They Will have mad children then.


Doct. Hold you your peace.


Joy. Alas the danger is they will have none,
He takes no joy in her; and she no comfort
In him: for though they have bin three years wed,
They are yet ignorant of the marriage bed,

Doct. I shall find her the madder of the two then.


Joy. Indeed she is full of passion, which she utters
By the effects, as diversely, as several
Objects reflect upon her wandering fancy,
Sometimes in extreme weepings, and anon
In vehement laughter; now in sullen silence,
And presently in loudest exclamations.

Doct. Come let me see 'hem Sir, i will undertake
Her too: have you any more? how does your wife?

Joy. Some other time for her.


Doct. I Will undertake
Her too: and you your self Sir (by your favor*
And some few yellow spots, which I perceive
About your Temples) may require some Council.

Act 1. Scene 3.
Enter Barbara. Bla. So, he has found him.


Joy. But my son, my son sir?


Bla. Now Bab, what news?


Bar. There Is news too much within,
For any homebred Christian understanding.

Joy. How does my son?


Bar, He is in travail Sir.


Joy. His fits upon him?


Bar. Yes, pray Doctor Hughball
Play the Man-midwife, and deliver him
Of his huge Timpany of news; of Monsters,
Pigmies, and Giants, Apes, and Elephants,
Griffons, and Crocadiles; men upon women,
And women upon men; the strangest doings
As far beyond all Christendom, as it is to it.

Doct. How, how?


Bar. Beyond the Moon and Stars I think,
Or mount in Cornwall either.

Bla. How prettily like a fool she talks?
And she were not mine own wife, I could be
So taken with her.

Doct. It Is most wondrous strange.


Bar. He talks much of the Kingdom of Cathaya,
Of one great Caan, and goodman Prester John,
(What e're they be) and says that Caan's a Clown
Unto the John he speaks of* And that John
Dwells up almost at Paradise: But sure his mind
Is in a wilder nesse: For there he says
Are Geese that have two heads a piece, and Hens
That bear more wool upon their backs than sheep.

Doct. O Mandevile, lets to him Lead the way sir.


Bar. And men with heads like hounds.


Doct. Enough, enough.


Bar. You Will find enough within I warrant ye. Ex. 3.
And here comes the poor mad gentleman's wife, Ent. Mar.
Almost as mad as he: she haunts me all
About the house to impart something to me:
Poor heart I guess her grief, and pit^y her.
To keep a Maidenhead three years after Marriage,
Under wed-locke and key, insufferable! monstrous,
It turns into a wolf within the flesh,
Not to be fed with Chickens, and tame Pigeons.
J could wish maids be warned by it, not to marry
Before they have wit to lose their Maiden-heads,
For fear they match with men whose wits are past it.
What a sad look, and what a sigh was there?
Sweet Mistress Ioyl^sse, how is it with you now?

Mar. When J shall know Jle tell, pray tell me first,
How long have you been married?

Bar. Now she is on it. Three years forsooth.


Mar. And truly so have J, we shall agree J see.


Bar. If you will be merry.


Mar. No woman merrier, now J have met with one
Of my condition. Three years married say you, ha, ha, ha,

Bar. What ails she trow?


Mar. Three years married, Ha, ha, ha.


Bar. Is that a laughing matter?


Mar. It Is just my story. And you have had no child,
That Is still my story, Ha, ha, ha.

Bar. Nay I have had two children.


Mar. Are you sure on it,
Or does your husband only tell you so,
Take heed o'that, for husbands are deceitful.

Bar. But I am of the surer side, I am sure
I groaned for mine and bore 'hem. when at best,
He but believes he got 'hem.

Mar. Yet both he
And you may be deceived, for now I Will tell you,
My husband told me, faced me down and stood on it,
We had three sons, and all great travelers,
That one had shook the great Turk by the beard,
I never saw 'hem, nor am I such a fool
To think that children can be got and borne,
Trained up to men, and then sent out to travel,
And the poor mother never know nor feel
Any such matter; there is a dream indeed.

Bar. Now you speak reason, and it is nothing but
Your husbands madness that would put that dream
Into you.

Mar. He may put dreams into me, but
He nere put child nor any thing toward it yet
To me to making: something sure belongs weep.
To such a wor^^^ for I am past a child
My self to (...) they are found in parsley beds,
Strawberry banks or Rosemary bushes, though
I must confess I have sought and searched such places,
Because I would feign have had one.

Bar. Less poor fool.


Mar. Pray tell me, for I think no body hears us,
How came you by your babes? I cannot think
Your husband got them you.

Bar. Fool did I say?
She is a witch I think: why not my husband,
Pray can you charge me with another man?

Mar. Nor with him neither, be not angry pray now.
For were I now to dye, I cannot guess
What a man does in child-getting, I remember
A wanton maid once lay with me, and kissed
And clip't, and clapped me strangely, and then wished
That I had been a man to have got her with child:
What must I then have done, or (good now tell me)
What has your husband done to you?

Bar. Was ever
Such a poor piece of innocence, three years married?
Does not your husband use to lie with you?

Mar. Yes he does use to lie with me, but he does not
Lie with me to use me as she should I fear,
Nor do I know to teach him, will you tell me,
I Will lie with you and practice if you please.
Pray take me for a night or two: or take
My husband and instruct him, But one night,
Our country folks will say, you London wives
Do not lie every night with your own husbands.

Bar. Your country folks should have done well to have sent
Some news by you, but I trust none told you there,
We use to leave our fools to lie with madmen.

Mar. Nay now again you are angry.


Bar. No not I
But rather pity your simplicity.
Come I Will take charge and care of you.

Mar. I thank you.


Bar. And wage my skill, against my doctors art,
Sooner to ease you of these dangerous fits,
Then he shall rectify your husbands wits. Ex.

Mar. Indeed, indeed, I thank you.


Act. 1. Scene. 5.
Letoy, Blaze. Let. Why broughtst thou not mine Arms, and Pedigree
Home with thee Blaze, mine honest Heralds, Painter?

Bla. I have not yet my Lord, but all is in readiness,
According to the Heralds full directions.

Let. But has he gone to the root, has he derived me,
Ex origin, ab antiquo? has he fetched me
Far enough Blaze?

Bla. Full four descents beyond
The conquest my good Lord, and finds that one
Of your French ancestry came in with the conqueror.

Let. Iefrey Letoy, it was he, from whom the English
Letoy's have our descent; and here have took
Such footing, that we'll never out while France
Is France, and England England,
And the Sea passable to transport a fashion.
My ancestors and I have been beginners
Of all new fashions in the Court of England
From before Primo Ricardi Secundi
Until this day.

Bla. I cannot think my Lord
They Will follow you in this though.

Let. Mark the end,
I am without a precedent for my humor.
But is it spread, and talked of in the town?

Bla. It is my Lord, and laughed at by a many.
I am more beholding to them, then all the rest:
Their laughter makes me merry; others mirth,
And not mine own it is, that feeds me that
Battens me as poor men's cost does Usurers.
But tell me Blaze, what say they of me, ha?

Bla. They say my Lord you look more like a pedlar,
Then like a Lord, and live more like an Emperor.

Let Why there they have me right, let others shine
Abroad in cloth of bodkin, my broad cloth,
Pleases mine eye as well, my body better,
Besides I Am sure it is paid for (to their envy)
I buy with ready money: and at home here
With as good meat, as much magnificence,
As costly pleasures, and as rare delights,
Can satisfy my appetite and senses,
As they with all their public shows, and braveries.
They run at ring, and tilt against one another,
I and my men can play a match at football,
Wrestle a hansome fall, and pitch the bar,
And crack the cudgells, and a pate sometimes,
Twould do you good to see it.

Bla. More then to feel't.


Let. They hunt the Dear, the Hare, the Fox, the Otter,
Polcates, or Harlots, what they please, whilst I
And my mad Grigs, my men can run at base,
And breath our selves at Barly-breake, and dancing.

Bla. Yes my Lord in the country when you are there.


Let. And now I am here in the city, Sir, I hope
I please my self with more choice home delights,
Then most men of my rank.

Bla. I know my Lord
Your house in substance is an Amphitheater
Of exercise and pleasure.

Let. Sir, I have
For exercises, Fencing, Dancing, Vaulting,
And for delight, Music of all best kinds:
Stage Plays, and Masks, are nightly my pastimes.
And all within my self. My own men are
My Music, and my Actors. J keep not
A man or boy but is of quality:
The worst can sing or play his part of the Violls,
And act his part too in a Comedy,
For which I lay my bravery on their backs;
And where another Lord undoes his followers,
J maintain mine like Lords. And there is my bravery.
Hoboyes. A service as for dinner, pass over the Stage, borne by many
Servitors richly apparreld, doing honor to Letoy as they pass. Ex. Now tell me
Blaze, look these like Pedlers men?

Bla. Rather an Emperors my Lord.


Let. I tell thee,
These lads can act the Emperors lives all over,
And Shakespeares Chronicled histories, to boot,
And were that Caesar, or that English Earl,
That loved a Play and Player so well now living,
I would not be out-vyed in my delights.

Bla. My Lord it is well.


Let. I love the quality of Playing I, J love a Play withal
My heart, a good one; and a Player that is
A good one too, with all my heart: As for the Poets,
No men love them, I think, and therefore
I write all my plays my self, and make no doubt
Some of the Court will follow
Me in that too. Let my fine Lords
Talk of their Horse-tricks, and their Jockies, that
Can out-talke them. Let the Gallants boast
Their May-games, Play-games, and their Mistresses,
I love a Play in my plain clothes, I,
And laugh upon the Actors in their brave ones. Ent. Quailp.

Re. My Lord, your dinner stays prepared.


Let. Well, well,
Be you as ready with your grace as I Ex. Quail.
Am for my meat, and all is well. Blaze we have rambled
From the maine point this while, it seems by his letter,
My Doctor's busy at thy house. I know who is there,
Beside, give him this Ring, Tell him it wants
A finger: farewell good Blaze.

Bla. Tell him it wants a finger! My small wit,
Already finds what finger it must fit.

Act. 1. Scene 6.
Enter Doctor, Peregrine, a Book in his hand, Ioylesse, Diana Doct. Sir I
applaud your noble disposition,
And even adore the spirit of Travail in you,
And purpose to wait on it through the world,
In which I shall but tread again the steps
I heretofore have gone.

Per. All the world over have you bin already?


Doct. Over and under too.


Per. In the Antipodes?


Doct. Yes, through, and through:
No Isle nor Angle in that Nether world,
But I have made discovery of: Pray sir sit;
And sir be you attentive, I will warrant
His speedy cure without the help of Gallen,
Hippocrates, Avicen, or Dioscorides,

Dia. A rare man: Husband, truly I like his person
As well as his rare skill.

Joy. Into your chamber.
I do not like your liking of men's persons.

Doct. Nay Lady you may stay: Hear and admire,
If you so please: But make no interruptions.

Joy. And let no looser words, or wandering look
Bewray an intimation of the slight
Regard you bear your husband, lest I send you
Upon a further pilgrimage, than he
Feignes to convay my son.

Dia. O jealousy!


Doct. Do you think sir, to the Antipodes such a journey?


Per. I think there is none beyond it; and that Mandevile
Whose excellent work this is, was the only man
That e're came near it.

Doct. Mandevile went far.


Per. Beyond all English legs that I can read of.


Doct. What think you sir of Drake, our famous Countriman?


Per. Drake was a Dy'dapper to Mandevile,
Candish, and Hawkins, Furbisher, all our voyagers
Went short of Mandevile: But had he reached
To this place here -- yes here -- this wilderness,
And seen the trees of the Sun and Moon, that speak,
And told King Alexander of his death, he then
Had left a passage open for Travailers:
That now is kept and guarded by wild beasts,
Dragons, and Serpents, Elephants white and blue
Unicorns, and Lions of many colors,
And monsters more, as numberless, as namelesse.

Doct. Stay there,

Per. Read here else: can you read?
Is it not true?

Doct. No truer than I ha'seen't.


Dia. Have you bin there Sir, have you seen those trees?


Doct. And talked with 'hem* and tasted of their fruit.


Per. Read here again then: it is written here,
That you may live four or five hundred year.

Dia. Brought you none of that fruit home with you sir?


Joy. You would have some often would you, to have hope
T'out-live your husband by it.

Dia. Y'd have it for you,
In hope you might outlive your jealousy.

Doct Your patience both I pray; I know the grief
You both do labor with, and how to cure it.

Joy. Would I had given you half my land 'twere done.


Dia. Would I had given him half my love, to settle
The the other half free from encumbrances
Upon my husband.

Doct. Do not think it strange sir:
I Will make your eyes witnesses of more
Than J relate, if you will but travail with me*
You hear me not deny that all is true
That Mandevile delivers of his Travailes,
Yet J my self may be as well believed.

Per. Since you speak reverently of him, say on.


Doct. Of Europe i will not speak, it is too near home:
Who Is not familiar with the Spanish garb,
Th'Jtalian shrug, French cringe, and German hug?
Nor will J trouble you with my observations
Fetched from Arabia, Paphlagonia,
Mesopotamia, Mauritania,
Syria, Thessalia, Persia, India,
All still is too near home: though I have touched
The Clouds upon the Pyrenaean mountains,
And bin on Paphos isle, where I have kissed
The image of bright Venus: All is still
Too near home to be boasted.

Dia. That I like well in him too, he will not boast of kissing
A woman too near home.

Doct. These things in me are poor: they found
In a far travelers care,
Like the reports of those, that beggingly
Have put out, on returns from Edinburgh,
Paris, or Venice, or perhaps Madrid,
Whither a Millaner may with half a nose
Smell out his way: And is not near so difficult,
As for some man in debt, and unprotected
To walk from Charing-crosse to the old Exchange.
No, J will pitch no nearer than the Antipodes;
That which is farthest distant, foot to foot
Against our Region.

Dia. What with their heels upwards?
Bless us! how escape they breaking of their necks?

Doct. they walk upon firm earth, as we do here,
And have the Firmament over their heads,
As we have here

Dia. And yet just under us!
Where is hell then? if they whose feet are toward us,
At the lower part of the world have heaven too
Beyond their heads, where is hell?

Joy. You may find that
Without inquiry: Cease your idle questions.

Dia. Sure Hell's above ground then in jealous husbands*


Per. What people sir (J pray proceed) what people
Are they of the Antipodes? are they not such
As Mandevile writes of, without heads or necks,
Having their eyes placed on their shoulders, and
Their mouths amidst their breasts?

Dia. J so indeed,

Though heels go upwards, and their feet should slip,
They have no necks to break.

Doct. Silence sweet Lady.
Pray give the gentleman leave to understand me.
The people through the whole world of Antipodes,
In outward feature, language, and religion,
Resemble those to whom they are supposite:
They under Spain appear like Spaniards,
Under France Frenchmen, under England English
To the exterior show: but in their manners,
Their carriage, and condition of life
Extremely contrary. To come close to you,
What part of the world's Antipodes shall J now
Decipher to you, or would you travail to?

Per. The furthest off.


Doct. That is the Antipodes of England.
The people there are contrary to us.
As thus; here (heaven be praised) the Magistrates
Govern the people: there the people rule
The Magistrates.

Dia. There Is precious bribing then.

Joy. You Will hold your peace,

Doct. Nay Lady it is by Nature,
Here generally men govern the women.

Joy. I would they could else.


Dia. You will hold your peace.


Doct. But there the women overruled the men,
If some men fail here in their power, some women
Slip their holds there. As parents here, and masters,
Command, there they obey the child and servant.

Dia. But pray Sir, is it by nature or by art,
That wives oresway their husbands there?

Doct. By nature.


Dia. Then art's above nature, as they are under us.


Doct. In brief Sir, all
Degrees of people both in sex, and quality,
Deport themselves in life and conversation,
Quite contrary to us.

Dia. Why then the women
Do get the men with child* and put the poor fools
To grievous pain I warrant you in bearing.

Joy. Into your Chamber, get you in I charge you.


Doct. By no means, as you tender your sons good.
No Lady no; that were to make men women,
And women men. But there the maids do woe
The Batchelors, and it is most probable,
The wives lie uppermost.

Dia. That is a trim
Upside-downe Antipodian trick indeed.

Doct. And then at christenings and gossips feasts,
A woman is not seen, the men do all
The tittle-tattle duties, while the women
Hunt, Hawke, and take their pleasure.

Per. Have they good game I pray Sir?


Doct. Excellent,
But by the contraries to ours, for where
We Hawke at Pheasant, Partrich, Mallard, Heron,
With Goshawke, Tarsell, Falcon, Laneret;
Our Hawks, become their game, our game their Hawks,
And so the like in hunting. There the Dear
Pursue the Hounds, and (which you may think strange)
I have seen one Sheep worry a dozen Foxes,
By Moone-shine; in a morning before day,
They hunt, trayne-sents with Oxen, and plow with Dogs.

Per. Hugh, hugh, hugh.


Dia. Are not their Swannes all black, and Ravens white?


Doct. Yes indeed are they; and their Parrets teach
Their Mistresses to talk.

Dia. That Is very strange.


Doct. They keep their Cats in cages,
From Mice that would devour them else; and birds
Teach 'hem to whistle, and cry beware the Rats Pusse.
But these are frivolous nothings. I have known
Great Ladies ride great horses run at tilt;
At Ring, Races, and hunting matches, while
Their Lords at home have painted, pawned their Plate
And Jewels to feast their honorable servants.
And there the Merchants wives do deal abroad
Beyond seas, while their husbands cuckold them
At home.

Dia. Then there are cuckolds too it seems,
As well as here.

Joy, Then you conclude here are.


Dia. By hearesay Sir. I am not wise enough
To speak it on my knowledge yet.

Joy. Not yet!


Doct. Patience good Sir,

Per. Hugh, hugh, hugh.


Doct. What do you laugh, that there is cuckold-making
In the Antipodes, I tell you Sir,
It is not so abhorred here as it is held
In reputation there: all your old men
Do mary girls, and old women boys,
As generation were to be maintained
Only by cuckold making.

Joy. Monstrous.


Doct. Pray your Patience.
There Is no such honest men there in their world,
As are their Lawyers: they give away
Their practice; and t'enable 'hem to do so,
Being all handy-crafts, or Laboring men,
They work (poor hearts full hard) in the vacations,
To give their law for nothing in the term times.
No fees are taken: Which makes their divines,
Being generally covetous, the greatest wranglers
In Law suits of a kingdom, you have not there
A gentleman in debt, though citizens
Haunt them with cap in hand to take their wares.
On credit.

Dia. What fine sport would that be here now!


Doct. All wit and mirth and good society
Is there among the hirelings, clownes, and tradesmen,
And all their Poets are Puritanes.

Dia. Have they Poets.


Doct. And players too. But they are all the sobrest
Precisest people picked out of a nation.

Dia. I never saw a play.


Doct. Lady you shall.


Joy. She shall not.


Doct. She must if you can hope for any cure,
Be governed Sir: your jealousy will grow
A worse disease then your sons madness else,
You are content I take the course I told you of
To cure the gentleman.

Joy. I must be Sir.


Doct. Say Master Perigrine, will you travail now
With me to the Antipodes, or has not
The journey wearied you in the description.

Per. No I could hear you a whole fortnight, but A Bowl on the table.
Let Us loose no time, pray talk on as we pass.

Doct. First, Sir a health to auspicate our travailes,
And we will away.

Per. Gi' mee't. What Is he? One sent


Act. 1. Scene. 7.
Ent. Bla. I fear from my dead mother, to make stop
Of our intended voyage.
Doct. No Sir: drink.


Bla. My Lord, Sir understands the course you are in,
By your letters he tells me; and bad me gi' you
This Ring, which wants a finger here he says

Per. We Will not be stayed.


Doct. No Sir, he brings me word
The Mariner calls away; the wind and tide
Are fair, and they are ready to weigh anchor,
Hoyst sails, and only stay for us, pray drink Sir.

Per. A health then to the willing winds and seas,
And all that steer toward the Antipodes.

Joy. He has not drunk so deep a draught this twelvmonth.


Doct. It Is a deep draught indeed, and now it is down,
And carries him down to the Antipodes?
I mean but in a dream.

Joy. Alas I fear.
See he begins to sink.

Doct. Trust to my sk^ll,
Pray take an arm, and see him in his cabin.
Good Lady save my Ring that is fallen there.

Dia. In sooth a mervailous neat and costly one


Bla. So, so, the Ring has found a finger.


Doct. Come sir, aboard, aboard, aboard, aboard.


Bla. To bed, to bed, to bed: I know your voyage,
And my dear Lords dear plot, I understand,
Whose Ring has past here by your flight of hand.

Act 2. Scene 1.
Letoy, Doctor. TO night say thou my Hughball?

Doct. By all means,
And if your Play takes to my expectation,
As I not doubt my potion works to yours,
Your fancy and my cure shall be cried up
Miraculous. O you are the Lord of fancy.

Let. I Am not ambitious of that title Sir,
No, the Letoy's are of Antiquity,
Ages before the fancyes were begot,
And shall beget still new to the worlds end.
But are you confident of your potion doctor?
Sleeps the young man?

Doct. Yes* and has slept these twelve hours,
After a thousand mile an hour outright,
By sea and land; and shall awake anon
In the Antipodes.

Let. Well Sir my Actors
Are all in readiness; and I think all perfect,
But one, that never will be perfect in a thing
He studies; yet he makes such shifts extempore,
(Knowing the purpose what he is to speak to)
That he moves mirth in me 'bove all the rest.
For I am none of those Poeticke furies,
That threats the Actors life, in a whole play,
That adds a syllable, or takes away.
If he can frible through, and move delight
In others, I am pleased.

Doct. It is that mimick fellow which your Lordship
But lately entertained.

Let. The same.


Doct. He will be wondrous apt in my affair:
For I must take occasion to interchange,
Discourse with him sometimes amidst their Scenes,
T'informe my patient, my mad young travellor
In diverse matters.

Let. Do, put him to it: I use't my self sometimes.


Doct. I know it is your way.


Let. Well to the business.
Have wrought the jealous Gentleman, old Ioylesse,
To suffer his wife to see our Comedy.

Doct. She brings your Ring, my Lord, upon her finger,
And he brings her in's hand. I have instructed her
To spur his jealousy of of the legs.

Let. And I will help her in it.


Doct. the young distracted
Gentlewoman too, that is sick of her virginity,
Yet knows not what it is; and Blaze and's wife
Shall all be your guests to night, and not alone
Spectators, but (as we will carry it) Actor
To fill your Comicke Scenes with double mirth.

Let. Go fetch 'hem then, while I prepare my Actors. Ex. Doc.
Within there hoe?
Within. 1 This is my beard and hair.
2 My Lord appointed it for my part.
3 No, this is for you; and this is yours, this gray one.
4 Where be the foyles, and Targets for the women?
1 Here, cannot you see?

Let. What a rude coil is there? But yet it pleases me.
Within. 1 You must not wear that Cloak and Hat.
2 Who told you so? I must.
In my first Scene, and you must wear that robe.

Let. What a noise make those knaves? come in one of you:
Are you the first that answers to that name?

Act 2. Scene 2.
Enter Quaile-pipe, 3 Actors, and Byplay. Qua. My Lord.


Let. Why are not you ready yet?


Qua. I am not to put on my shape, before
I have spoke the Prologue. And for that my Lord
I yet want something.

Let. What I pray with your grave formality?


Qua. I want my Beaver-shooes, and Leather-Cap,
To speak the Prologue in; which were appointed
By your Lordships own direction.

Let. Well sir, well:
There they be for you; I must look to all.

Qua. Certes my Lord, it is a most apt conceit:
The Comedy being the world turned upside-downe,
That the presenter wear the Capital Beaver
Upon his feet, and on his head shooe-leather.

Let. Trouble not you your head with my conceit,
But mind your part Let me not see you act now,
In your Scholasticke way, you brought to town wi' ye*
With see saw sack a down, like a Sawyer;
Nor in a Comicke Scene, play Hercules furens,
Tearing your throat to split the Audients ears.
And you Sir, you had got a trick of late,
Of holding out your bum in a set speech;
Your fingers fibulating on your breast,
As if your Buttons, or your Band-strings were
Helps to your memory. Let me see you in it
No more I charge you. No, nor you sir, in
That over-action of the legs I told you of,
Your singles, and your doubles, Look you -- thus --
Like one of the dancing Masters of the Beare-garden;
And when you have spoke, at end of every speech,
Not minding the reply, you turn you round
As Tumblers do; when betwixt every feat.
They gather wind, by firking up their breeches.
I Will none of these, absurdities in my house.
But words and action married so together,
That shall strike harmony in the ears and eyes
Of the severest, if judicious Critics.

Qua. My Lord we are corrected.


Let. Go, be ready:
But you Sir are incorrigible, and
Take license to your self, to add unto
Your parts, your own free fancy; and sometimes
To alter, or diminish what the writer
With care and skill composed: and when you are
To speak to your coactors in the Scene,
You hold interloquutions with the Audients.

Bip. That is a way my Lord has bin allowed
On elder stages to move mirth and laughter.

Let. Yes in the days of Tarlton and Kempe,
Before the stage was purged from barbarism,
And brought to the perfection it now shines with.
Then fools and jesters spent their wits, because
The Poets were wise enough to save their own
For profitabler uses. Let that pass.
Tonight, i will give thee leave to try thy wit,
In answering my Doctor, and his Patient
He brings along with him to our Antipodes.

By. I heard of him my Lord: Blaze gave me light
Of the mad Patient; and that he never saw
A Play in's life: it will be possible
For him to think he is in the Antipodes
Indeed, when he is on the Stage among us.
When It has been thought by some that have their wits,
That all the Players in the Town were sunk past rising.

Let. Leave that sir to the event. See all be ready:
Your Music properties, and --

By. All my Lord,
Only we want a person for a Mute.

Let. Blaze when he comes shall serve. Go in. Ex. Byp.
My Guests J hear are coming.

Act 2. Scene 3.
Enter Blaze, Ioylesse, Diana, Martha Barb. Bla. My Lord, J am become your
honors usher,
To these your guests. The worthy Mr. Ioylesse,
With his fair wife, and daughter in law.

Let. They Are welcome,
And you in the first place sweet Mistress Ioylesse.
You wear my ring J see; you grace me in it.

Joy. His Ring! what Ring? how came she by it?


Blaz. Twill work.


Let. J sent it as a pledge of my affection to you:
For J before have seen you, and do languish,
Until J shall enjoy your love.

Joy. He courts her.


Let. Next Lady -- you -- J have a toy for you too.


Mar. My Child shall thank you for it, when I have one.
I take no joy in toys since I was married.

Let. Prettily answered! I make you no stranger
Kind Mistress Blaze.

Bar. Time was your honor used
Me strangely too, as you will do these I doubt not.

Let. Honest Blaze,
Prithee go in, there is an Actor wanting.

Bla. Is there a part for me? how shall I study't?


Let. Thou shall say nothing.


Bla. Then if I do not act
Nothing as well as the best of 'hem, let me be hist. Exit.

Joy. I say restore the Ring, and back with me.


Dia. To whom shall I restore it?


Joy. To the Lord that sent it.


Dia. Is he a Lord? I always thought and heard
In The Country, Lords were gallant Creatures. He
Looks like a thing not worth it: it is not his,
The Doctor gave it me, and I will keep it.

Let I use small verbal courtesy Mr. Ioylesse
(You see) but what I can in deed i will do.
You know the purpose of your coming, and
I can but give you welcome. If your son
Shall receive ease in it, be the comfort yours,
The credit often my Doctors. You are sad.

Joy. My Lord I would entreat we may return;
I fear my wife's not well.

Let. Return I pray slight not so my courtesy.


Dia. Besides sir I am well; and have a mind
(A thankful one) to taste my Lords free bounty.
I never saw a play, and would be loath
To lose my longing now.

Joy. The air of London
Has tainted her obedience already:
And should the Play but touch the vices of it,
She Would learn and practice 'hem. Let me beseech
Your Lord ships reacceptance of the un-
Merited favor that she wears here, and
Your leave for our departure.

Let. J will not
Be so dishonored; nor become so ill
A master of my house, to let a Lady
Leave it against her will; and from her longing;
J will be plain wi'yee therefore: If your haste
Must needs post you away, you may depart,
She shall not not till the morning for mine honor.

Joy. Indeed it is a high point of honor in
A Lord to keep a private Gentleman's wife
From him.

Dia. J love this plain Lord better than
All the brave gallant ones, that ere I dreamed on.

Let. It Is time we take our seats. So if you will stay.
Come sit with us, if not, you know your way.

Joy. Here are we fallen through the Doctors fingers.
Into the Lords hands. Fate deliver us. Ex. omnes.

Act. 2. Seen 4.
Enter in sea-gownes and Caps, Doctor, and Perigrine brought in a chair by 2
Sailers: Cloaks and Hats brought in. Doct. Now the last minute of his sleeping
fit
Determines. Raise him on his feet. So, so:
Rest him upon mine Arm. Remove that Chair,
Welcome a shore Sir in the Antipodes.

Per. Are we arrived so far?


Doct. And on firm land.
Sailers you may return now to your ship. Ex. Sail.

Per. What worlds of lands and Seas have I past over,
Neglecting to set down my observations,
A thousand thousand things remarkable
Have slipped my memory, as if all had been
Mere shadowy phantasmes, or Phantasticke dreams.

Doct. We'll write as we return Sir: and it is true*
You slept most part of the journey hitherward,
The air was so somniferous: And it was well
You escaped the Calenture by it.

Per. But how long do you think I slept?


Doct. Eight months, and some odd days,
Which was but as so many hours and minutes
Of ones own natural Country sleep.

Per. Eight Months --

Doct. It Was nothing for so young a Brain.
How think you one of the seven Christian Champions,
David by name, slept seven years in a Leek-bed.

Per. I think I have read it in their famous History.


Doct. But what chief thing of note now in our Travells
Can you call presently to mind? Speak like a Traveller.

Per. I do remember, as we past the Verge
Of The upper world, coming down, down-hill,
The setting Sun then bidding them good night,
Came gliding easily down by us; and struck
New day before us, lighting us our way;
But with such heat, that till he was got far
Before us, we even melted.

Doct. Well wrought potion. Very well observed sir.
But now we are come into a temperate clime
Of equal composition of elements
With that of London; and as well agreeable
Unto our nature, as you have found that air.

Per. I never was at London.


Doct. Cry you mercy.
This Sir is Anti London. That Is the' Antipodes
To the grand City of our Nation,
Just the same people, language, and Religion,
But contrary in Manners, as I have told you.

Per. I do remember that relation,
As if you had but given it me this morning.

Doct. Now cast your Sea weeds off, and do'n fresh garments.
Hark sir their Music.

Act 2. Scene 5.
Shift. Hoboyes. Enter Letoy, Ioylesse, Diana, Martha, Barara, in Masks, they
sit at the other end of the stage. Let. Here we may sit, and he not see us.


Doct. Now see one of the Natives of this Country,
Note his attire, his language, and behavior.

Enter Quailpipe, Prologue. Qua. Our far fetched Title over lands and seas,
Offers unto your view th'Antipodes.
But what Antipodes now shall you see?
Even those that foot to foot against London be,
Because no Traveller that knows that state,
Shall say we personate or imitate
Them in our actions: For nothing can
Almost be spoke, but some or other man,
Takes it unto himself; and says the stuff,
If it be vicious, or absurd enough.
Was woven upon his back. Far, far be all
That bring such prejudice mixed with their gall.
This play shall no Satyrick Timist be
To tax or touch at either him or thee,
That art notorious. It Is so far below
Things in our orb, that do among us flow,
That no degree, from Keyser to the Clown,
Shall say this vice or folly was mine own.

Let. This had bin well now, if you had not dreamt
Too long upon your sillables. Ex. Prol.

Dia. The Prologue call you this my Lord?


Bar. It Is my Lords Reader, and as good a lad
Out of his function, as I would desire
To mix withal in eivill conversation.

Let. Yes Lady, this was Prologue to the Play,
As this is to our sweet ensuing pleasures. Kiss.

Joy. Kissing indeed is Prologue to a Play,
Composed by th'Divell, and acted by the Children
Of his black Revells, may hell take ye for it.

Mar. Indeed I am weary, and would feign go home.


Bar. Indeed but you must stay; and see the play.


Mar. The Play: what play? It is no Childrens play,
Nor no Child-getting play, pray is it?

Bar. You Will see anon. O now the Actors enter. Flourish.


Act 2. Scene 6.
Enter two Sergeants, with swords drawn, running before a Gentleman. Gent. Why
do you not your office courteous friends?
Let me entreat you stay, and take me with you;
Lay but your hands on me: I shall not rest
until I be arrested. A sore shoulder-ache
Pains and torments me, till your virtuous hands
Do clap or stroke it.

1 Ser. You shall pardon us.


2 Ser. And I beseech you pardon our intent,
Which was indeed to have arrested you:
But sooner shall the Charter of the City
Be forfeited, then varlets (like our selves)
Shall wrong a Gentleman's peace. So fare you well sir. Ex.

Gent. O you are unkind.


Per. Pray what are those?


Doct. Two Catchpoles
Run from a Gentleman (it seems) that would
Have bin arrested.

Act 2. Scene 7.
Enter old Lady and By play, like a Servingman. La. Yonder Is your Master,
Go take him you in hand, while I fetch breath,

Bip. O are you here? my Lady, and my self
Have sought you sweetly.

Let. You, and your Lady, you
Should have said Puppy.

Byp. For we heard you were
To be arrested. Pray sir, who has bailed you?
I wonder who of all your bold acquaintance
That knows my Lady durst bail off her husband.

Gent. Indeed I was not touched.


Byp. Have you not made
An end by composition, and disburs'd
Some of my Ladies money for a peace
That shall beget an open war upon you?
Confess it if you have: for 'twill come out.
She Will have you up you know. I speak it for your good.

Gent. I know it, and i will entreat my Lady wife
To mend thy wages the other forty shillings
A year, for thy true care of me.

La. It Is well Sir,
But now (if thou have impudence so much,
As face to face, to speak unto a Lady
That is thy wife, and supreme head) tell me
At whose suit was it? or upon what action?
Debts I presume you have none: For who dares trust
A Ladies husband, who is but a Squire,
And under covert barn? it is some trespass --
Answer me not till I find out the truth.

Gent. The truth is --

La. Peace,
How dare thou speak the truth
Before thy wife? i will find it out my self.

Dia. In truth she handles him handsomely.


Joy. Do you like it?


Dia. Yes, and such wives are worthy to be liked,
For giving good example.

Let. Good! hold up
That humor by all means.

La. I think I have found it.
There was a certain Mercer sent you silks,
And cloth of gold to get his wife with child;
You slighted her, and answered not his hopes;
And now he lays to arrest you; is it not so?

Gent. Indeed my Lady wife it is so.


La For shame
Be not ungrateful to that honest man,
To take his wares, and scorn to lie with his wife.
Do It I command you; what did I marry you for?
The portion that you brought me was not so
Abundant, though it were five thousand pounds
(Considering too the Joincture that I made you)
That you should disobey me.

Dia. It seems the husbands
In the Antipodes bring portions, and
The wives make Joinctures.

Joy. Very well observed.


Dia. And wives, when they are old, and past childbearing,
Allow their youthful husbands other women.

Let. Right. And old men give their young wives like license.


Dia. That I like well. Why should not our old men,
Love their young wives as well?

Joy. Would you have it so?


Let. Peace master Ioylesse, you are too loud. Good still,


Byp. Do as my Lady bids, you got her woman
With child at half these words.

Gent. O, but another
Wife is another thing. Far be it from
A Gentleman's thought to do so, having a wife
And hand-mayd of his own that he likes better.

Byp. There said you well; but take heed I advise you
How you love your own wench, or your own wife
Better then other men's.

Dia. Good Antipodian counsel.


La. Go to that woman, if she prove with child,
I Will take it as mine own.

Gent. her husband would
Do so. But from my house I may not stray.

Mar. If it be me your wife commends you to,
You shall not need to stray from your own house.
I Will go home with you.

Bar. Precious! what do you mean?
Pray keep your seat: you will put the players out.

Joy. Here Is goodly stuff! She Is in the Antipodes too.


Per. And what are those?


Doct. All Antipodeans*
Attend good Sir.

La You know your charge, obey it.


Act. 2. Scene. 8.
Enter waiting woman great bellyed. Wom. What is his charge? or whom must he
obey?
Good madam with your wild authority;
You are his wife, it is true, and therein may
According to our law, rule, and controwle him.
But you must know withal, I am your servant,
And bound by the same law to govern you,
And be a stay to you in declining age,
To curb and qualify your headstrong will,
Which otherwise would ruin you. Moreover,
Though you are his wife, I am a breeding mother,
Of a dear child of his; and therein claim
More honor from him then you ought to challenge.

La. Insooth she speaks but reason.


Gent. Pray let us home then.


Wom. You have something there to look to, one would think,
If you had any care. How well you saw
Your father at School to day, and knowing how apt
He is to play the Trewant.

Gent. But is he not
Yet gone to school?

Wom. Stand by, and you shall see.


Act. 2. Scene. 9.
Enter three old men with sachells, etc. All. 3. Domine, domine duster. Three
knaves in a cluster, etc.


Gent. O this is gallant pastime Nay come on,
Is this your school? was that your lesson, ha?

1 Old. Pray now good son, indeed, indeed.


Gent. Indeed
You shall to school, away with him; and take
Their wagships with him; the whole cluster of 'hem.

2 Old. You shant send us now, so you shant.


3 Old. We be none of your father, so we beant.


Gent. Away with 'hem I say; and tell their Schoole-mistris,
What trewants they are, and bid her pay 'hem soundly.

All. 3. O, O, O.


Byp. Come, come, ye Gallows-clappers.


Dia. Alaffe, will no body beg pardon for
The poor old boys?

Doct. Sir, gentle Sir, a word with you.


Byp. To strangers Sir I can be gentle.


Let. Good,
Now mark that fellow, he speaks Extempore.

Dia. Extempore call you him? he is a dogged fellow
To the three poor old things there, fie upon him.

Per. Do men of such fair years here go to school?


Byp. They would dye dunces else.


Per. Have you no young men scholars, sir I pray;
When we have beard leffe doctors?

Doct. He has wiped my lips, you question very wisely Sir.


Byp. So sir have we; and many reverend teachers,
Grave counselors at law; perfect statesmen.
That never knew use of Rasor, which may live
For want of wit to loose their offices.
These were great scholars in their youth. But when
Age grows upon men here, their learning wastes,
And so decays; that if they live until
Threescore, their sons send them to school again.
They Would dye as speechless else as new born children.

Per. It Is a wise nation; and the piety
Of the young men most rare and commendable,
Yet give me as a stranger leave to beg
Their liberty this day; and what they loose by it,
My father when he goes to school, shall answer.

Joy. I am abused on that side too.


Bypt. It Is granted.
Hold up your heads and thank the gentleman
Like scholars, with your heels now.

All. 3. Gratias, Gratias, Gratias. -- Exit.

Dia. Well done son Peregrine, he is in's wits I hope.


Joy. If you lose yours the while, where is my advantage?


Dia. And trust me, it was well done too of Extempore
To let the poor old children loose. And now
I look well on him he is a proper man.

Joy. She Will fall in love with the Actor, and undo me.


Dia. Does not his Lady love him, sweet my Lord?


Let. Love; yes, and lie with him, as her husband does
With His maid. It is their law in the Antipodes.

Dia. But we have no such laws with us.


Joy. Do you approve of such a law?


Dia. No; not so much
In this case, where the man and wife do lie
With their inferior servants; But in the other,
Where the old Citizen would arrest the gallant
That took his wares and would not lie with his wife,
There it seems reasonable, very reasonable.

Joy. Does it?


Dia Mak't your own case, you are an old man,
I love a gentleman, you give him rich presents,
To get me a child (because you cannot) must not
We look to have our bargain?

Joy. Give me leave
Now to be gone my Lord, though I leave her
Behind me; she is mad, and not my wife,
And I may leave her.

Let. Come; you are moved I see,
I Will settle all; But first, prevail with you
To taste my wine and sweet meats. The Comedians
Shall pause the while. This you must not deny me. Exit.

Joy. I must not live here always, that is my comfort. Exit.


Per. I thank you Sir, for the poor men's release,
It was the first request that I have made
Since I came in these confines.

Byp. It Is our custom
To deny strangers nothing: yea, to offer
Of any thing we have, that may be useful,
In courtesy to strangers. Will you therefore
Be pleased to enter Sir this habitation,
And take such vyands, beverage, and repose
As may refresh you after tedious travailes?

Doct. Thou take him right: for I am sure he is hungry.


Per. All I have seen since my arrival, are
Wonders. But your humanity excells.

Byp. Virtue in the Antipodes only dwells.


Act 3. Scene 1.
Letoy, Ioylesse, Diana, Martha, Barbara. Let. YEt, Mr. Ioylesse, are you
pleased? you see
Here Is nothing but fair play, and all above board.

Joy. But it is late, and these long intermissions
By banqueting and Courtship twixt the Acts
Will keep back the Catastrophe of your play,
Until the morning light.

Let. All shall be short.


Joy. And then in midst of Scenes
You interrupt your Actors; and tie them
To lengthen time in silence, while you hold
Discourse, by th'by.

Let. Pox o'thy jealousy.
Because I give thy wife a look, or word
Sometimes! What if I kiss (thus) I Will not eat her.

Joy. So, so, his banquet works with him.


Let. And for my Actors, they shall speak, or not speak
As much, or more, or less, and when I please,
It is my way of pleasure, and i will use it.
So sit: They enter. Flourish.

Act 3. Scene 2.
Enter Lawyer, and Poet. Law. Your case is clear, I understand it fully,
And need no more instructions, this shall serve,
To firke your Adversary from Court to Court,
If he stand out upon rebellious Legs,
But till Octabis Michaelis next.
I Will bring him on submissive knees.

Dia. What Is he?


Let. A Lawyer, and his Clyent there, a Poet.


Dia. Goes Law so torn, and Poetry so brave?


Joy. Will you but give the Actors leave to speak,
They may have done the sooner?

Law Let me see,
This is your bill of Parcells.

Poet. Yes, of all
My several wares, according to the rates
Delivered unto my debtor,

Dia. Wares does he say?


Let. Yes, Poetry is good ware
In the Antipodes, though there be some ill payers,
As well as here; but Law there rights the Poets.

Law. Delivered too, and for the use of the right worshipful
Mr. Alderman Humblebee, as follows -- Imprimis -- Reads.
Umh, I cannot read your hand; your Character
Is bad, and your Orthography much worse.
Read it your self pray.

Dia Do Aldermen
Love Poetry in Antipodea London.

Let. Better than ours do Custards; but the worst
Pay-masters living there; worse than our gallants,
Partly for want of money, partly wit.

Dia. Can Aldermen want wit and money too?
That Is wonderful.

Poet. Imprimis sir here is
For three religious Madrigalls to be sung
By the holy Vestalls in Bridewell, for the
Conversion of our City wives and daughters,
Ten groats a piece, it was his own agreement.

Law. It Is very reasonable.


Poet. Item, twelve Hymns,
For the twelve Sessions, during his Shrievalty,
Sung by the Quire of Newgate, in the praise
Of City Clemency (for in that year
No guiltless person suffered by their judgment)
Ten groats a piece also.

Law. So, now it rises.


Dia. Why speaks your Poet so demurely?


Let. Oh --
It Is a precise tone he has got among
The sober sister-hood.

Dia. Oh I remember,
The Doctor said Poets were all Puritans
In the Antipodes: But where is the Doctor?
And where is your son my Ioylesse?

Let. Do not mind him.


Poet. Item,
A Disticke graven in his thumb-ring,
Of all the wise speeches and sayings of all
His Alder Predecessors, and his brethren
In two Kings reigns.

Law. There was a curious Piece.


Poet. Two pieces he promised to me for it.
Item, inscriptions in his Hall and Parlour,
His Gallery, and garden, round the walls,
Of his own public acts, between the time
He was a Common Council man and shriefe,
One thousand lines put into wholesome verse.

Law. Here Is a sum toward indeed* a thousand verses?


Poet. They come too, at the known rate of the City.
(That is to say at forty pence the score)
Eight pounds six shillings, eight pence.

Law. Well sir, on.


Poet. Item, an Elegy for Mistress Alderwoman
Upon the death of one of her Coach-mares,
She prized above her daughter, being crooked --

Dia. The more beast she.


Mar. Ha, ha, ha.


Bar. Enough, enough sweetheart.


Mar. It Is true, for I should weep for that poor daughter,
It Is like she will have no children, pray now look,
Am not I crooked too?

Bar. No, no, sit down.


Poet. Item, a love Epistle for the Aldermanikin his son,
And a Book of the godly life and death
Of Mistress Katherine Stubs, which I have turned
Into sweet meetre, for the virtuous youth,
To woe an ancient Lady widow with.

Law. Here Is a large sum in all, for which i will try,
His strength in law, till he peccavi cry,
When I shall sing, for all his present bigness,
Iamque opus exegi quod nec Iovis Ira, nec ignis*

Dia. The Lawyer speaks the Poets part.


Let. He thinks
The more; the Poets in the Antipodes,
Are slow of tongue, but nimble with the pen.

Poet. The counsel and the comfort you have given
Me, requires a double fee. Offers money.

Law. Will you abuse me therefore?
I take no fees double nor single I.
Retain your money, you retain not me else.
Away, away, you will hinder other Clyents.

Poet. Pray give me leave to send then to your wife.


Law. Not so much as a Poesy for her thimble,
For fear I spoil your cause,

Poet. You Have warned me sir. Exit.


Dia. What a poor honest Lawyer's this?


Let. They are all so
In the Antipodes.

Act 3. Scene 3.
Enter a spruce young Captain. Law. You Are welcome Captain.
In your two causes I have done my best.

Cap. And what is the issue pray sir?


Law. Truly sir,
Our best course is not to proceed to trial.

Cap. Your reason? I shall then recover nothing.


Law. Yes, more by composition, than the Court
Can lawfully adjudge you, as I have labored.
And sir, my course is, where I can compound
A difference, I Will not toss nor bandy it
Into the hazard of a judgment.

Dia. Still
An honest Lawyer, and tho poor, no marvel*

Let. A kiss for thy conceit.


Joy. A sweet occasion!


Cap. How have you done sir?


Law. First you understand
Your several actions, and your adversaries*
The first a Battery against a Coachman,
That beat you sorely*

Dia. What hard hearted fellow
Could beat so spruce a gentleman, and a captain.

Cap. By this fair hilt, he did sir, and so bruised
My arms, so crushed my ribs, and stich'd my sides,
That I have had no heart to draw my sword since;
And shall I put it up, and not his purse
Be made to pay for it?

Law. It is up already, sir,
If you can be advised, observe I pray,
Your other actions'gainst your feathermaker,
And that of trespass for th'incessant trouble
He puts you to by importunate requests,
To pay him no money, but take longer day.

Cap. Against all humane reason, for although
I have bought feathers of him these four years,
And never paid him a penny; yet he duns me
So desperately to keep my money still,
As if I ought him nothing; he haunts and breaks my sleeps.
I swear sir, by the motion of this I wear now, Shakes it.
I have had twenty better feathers of him, and as ill paid for*
Yet still he duns me to forbear my payment,
And to take longer day.
I have not said my prayers in
Mine own lodging sir this twelvemonths day,
For sight or thought of him; and how can you
Compound this action, or the other of
That Russian Coachman that durst lift a hand
Against a Commander.

Law. Very easily thus,
The Coachman's poor, and scarce his twelvemoneths wages
Though It be five marks a year will satisfy.

Cap. Pray name no sum in marks, I have had too many
Of's marks already.

Law. So you owe the other
A debt of twenty pound, the Coachman now
Shall for your satisfaction, beat you out
Of debt.

Cap. Beat me again?


Law. No sir he shall beat
For you your feather man till he take his money.

Cap. So I Will be satisfied, and help him to
More customers of my rank.

Law. Leave it to me then,
It shall be by posterity repeaten
That soldiers ought not to be dund or beaten,
Away and keep your money.

Capt. Thank you sir.


Dia. An honest lawyer, still how he considers
The weak estate of a young Gentleman
At arms -- But who comes here? a woman.

Act. 3. Sce. 4.
Enter Buffe Woman. Let. Yes; that has taken up the newest fashion
Of the towne-militasters.

Dia. Is it Buffe,
Or Calfe skin troe? she looks as she cold beat
Out a whole Tavern garrison before her
Of mill tasters call you 'em? if her husband
Be an old jealous man now, and can please her Lawyer reads on papers.
No better then most ancient husbands can,
I warrant she makes her self good upon him.

Joy. It Is very good, the play begins to please me.


Buff. I wayt to speak w'yee sir, but must I stand
Your constring and piercing of your scriblings.

Law. Cry mercy Lady.


Dia. Lady does he call her?


Law. Thus far I have proceeded in your cause
In The Marshalls court.

Buff. But shall I have the combat?


Law. Pray observe
The passages of my proceedings; and
The pro's and contras in the windings, workings
And carriage of the cause.

Buff. Fah on your passages,
Your windy workings, and your fislings at
The bar. Come me toth' point, is it decreed,
A combat?

Law. Well, it is; and here is your order.


Buff. Now thou have spoken like a lawyer,
And here is thy fee.

Law. By no means gentle Lady.


Buff. Take it, or I will beat thy carcass thinner
Then thou have worn thy gown here.

Law. Pardon me.


Buff. Must I then take you in hand?


Law. Hold, hold, I take it.


Dia. Alas poor man, he will take money yet,
Rather then blows, and so far he agrees
With our rich lawyers, that sometimes give blows
And shrewd ones for their money.

Buff. Now victory
Afford me fate, or bravely let me dye. Exit.

Let. Very well acted that.


Dia. Goes she to fight now?


Let. You shall see that anon --

Act. 3. Scene. 5.
Enter a Beggar, and a Gallant. Dia. What Is here, what is here?
A Courtier, or some gallant practicing
The beggars trade, who teaches him I think.

Let. You Are something near the subject.


Beg. Sir excuse me, I have
From time to time supplied you without hope,
Or purpose to receive least retribution
From you, no not so much as thanks or bare
Acknowledgement of the free benefits,
I have conferred upon you.

Gal. Yet good uncle.


Beg. Yet do you now when that my present store
Responds not my occasions* seek to oppress me
With vain petitionary breath, for what I may not
Give without fear of dangerous detriment?

Dia. In what a phrase the ragged Orator
Displayes himself.

Let. The Beggars are the
Most absolute Courtiers in the Antipodes.

Gal. If not a piece, yet spare me half a piece
For goodness sake good sir, did you but know
My instant want, and to what virtuous use,
I would distribute it, I know you would not
Hold back your charity.

Dia. And how feelingly
He begges; then as the beggars are the best
Courtiers, it seems the Courtiers are best beggars
In the Antipodes; how contrary in all
Are they to us?

Beg. Pray to what virtuous uses
Would you put money to now, if you had it?

Gal. I would bestow a crown in Ballads,
Love-pamphlets, and such poetical Rarities,
To send down to my Lady Grandmother.
She Is very old you know, and given much
To contemplation; I know she will send me for 'em,
In Puddings, Bacon, Sowse and Pot-Butter
Enough to keep my chamber all this winter.
So shall I save my fathers whole allowance
To lay upon my back, and not be forced
To shift out from my study for my victuals.

Dia Belike he is some student.


Beg. There Is a crown.


Gal. I would bestow another crown in
Hobby-horses, and Rattles for my Grandfather,
Whose legs and hearing fail him very much*
Then to preserve his sight a Jack-a-lent,
In a green sarsnet suite, he will make my father
To send me one of Scarlet, or he will cry
His eyes out for it.

Dia. Oh politic young student.


Beg. I have but just a fee left for my Lawyer;
If he exact not that, I Will give it thee.

Dia. He Will take no fee (that is sure enough young man)
Of beggars, I know that.

Let. You are deceived.


Dia. I Will speak to him my self else to remit it.


Joy. You will not sure, will you turn Actor too?
Pray do, be put in for a share amongst em?

Dia. How must I be put in?


Joy. The Players will quickly
Show you, if you perform your part; perhaps
They may want one to act the whore amongst 'em.

Let. Fie Master Ioylesse, you are too foul.


Joy. My Lord,
She is too fair it seems in your opinion,
For me, therefore if you can find it lawful,
Keep her; I will be gone.

Let. Now I protest
Sit and sit civilly, till the play be done,
I Will lock thee up else, as I am true Letoy.

Joy. Nay I have done -- Whistles Fortune my foe.

Law. Give me my fee, I cannot hear you else.


Beg. Sir I am poor, and all I get, is at
The hands of charitable givers; pray sir.

Law. You understand me sir, your cause is to be
Pleaded to day, or you are quite orethrowne in it.
The Judge by this time is about to sit.
Keep fast your money, and forgo your wit. Exit.

Beg. Then I must follow, and entreat him to it,
Poor men in law must not disdain to do it. Exit.

Gal. Do it then, I Will follow you and hear the cause. Exit.

Dia. True Antipodians still, for as with us,
The Gallants follow Lawyers, and the beggars them;
The Lawyer here is followed by the beggar,
While the gentleman follows him.

Let. The moral is, the Lawyers here prove beggars,
And beggars only thrive by going to law.

Dia. How takes the Lawyers then the beggars money?
And none else by their wills?

Let. They send it all
Up to our lawyers, to stop their mouths,
That curse poor Clyents that are put upon 'em.
In forma Pauperis.

Dia. In truth most charitable,
But sure that money's lost by the way sometimes.
Yet sweet my Lord, whom do these beggars beg of,
That they can get aforehand so for law?
Who are their benefactors?

Let. Usurers, Usurers.


Dia. Then they have Usurers in the Antipodes too?


Let. Yes Usury goes round the world, and will do,
Till the general conversion of the Jews.

Dia. But ours are not so charitable I fear.
Who be their Usurers?

Let. Soldiers, and Courtiers chiefly;
And some that pass for grave and pious Churchmen.

Dia. How finely contrary they are still to ours.


Act. 3. Scene. 5.
Enter Byplay. Let. Why do you not enter, what are you asleep? --

Byp. My Lord the mad young Gentleman. --

Joy. What of him?


Byp. He has got into our Tyring-house amongst us,
And taken a strict survey of all our properties,
Our statues and our images of Gods; our Planets and our constellations
Our Giants, Monsters, Furies, Beasts, and Bug-Beares,
Our Helmets Shields, and Vizors, Hairs, and Beards,
Our Pastbord March-paines, and our Wooden Pies.

Let. Sirrah be brief, be not you now as long in
Telling what he saw, as he surveying.

Byp. Whether he thought it was some enchanted Castle,
Or Temple, hung and pild with Monuments
Of uncouth, and of various aspects,
I dive not to his thoughts, wonder he did
A while it seemed, but yet undanted stood:
When on the sudden, with thrice knightly force,
And thrice, thrice, puissant arm he snatcheth down
The sword and shield that I played R^vis with,
Rusheth amongst the foresaid properties,
Kills Monster, after Monster; takes the Puppets
Prisoners, knocks down the Cyclops, tumbles all
Our jigambobs and trinckets to the wall.
Spying at last the Crown and royal Robes
Ith upper wardrobe, next to which by chance,
The devils vizors hung, and their flame painted
Skin coats; those he removed with greater fury,
And (having cut the infernal ugly faces,
All into mamocks) with a reverend hand,
He takes the imperial diadem and crowns
Himself King of the Antipodes, and believes
He has justly gaind the Kingdom by his conquest.

Let. Let him enjoy his fancy.


Byp. Doctor Hughball
Has soothed him in it, so that nothing can
Be said against it, he begins to govern
With purpose to reduce the manners
Of this country to his own, h'has constituted
The Doctor his chief officer; whose Secretary
I am to be, you will see a Court well orderd.

Let. I see the event already, by the aim Letoy wispers With Barbara.
The Doctor takes, proceed you with your play,
And let him see it in what state he pleases.

Byp. I go my Lord. Exit.


Dia. Trust me, this same Extempore,
( I know not's the other name) pleases me better
For absolute action then all the rest.

Joy. You were best beg him of his Lord.


Dia. Say you so?
He Is busy, or I Would move him,

Let. Prithee do so,
Good Mistres Blaze; go with her gentle Lady* to Marth.
Do as she bids you, you shall get a child by it.

Mar. I Will do as any body bids me for a child.


Joy. Diana yet be wise, bear not the name
Of sober chastity to play the beast in.

Dia. Think not your self, nor make your self a beast,
Before you are one, and when you appear so,
Then thank your self; your jealousy durst not trust me,
Behind you in the country, and since I Am here,
I Will see and know, and follow th'fashion; if
It be to cuckold you, I cannot help it.

Joy. I now could wish my son had been as far
In the Antipodes as he thinks himself,
Ere I had run this hazard.

Let. You Are instructed.


Bar. And I Will perform't I warrant you my Lord. Ex. Ba. Mar.


Dia. Why should you wish so? had you rather loose
Your son then please your wife? you show your love both ways.

Let. Now what is the matter?


Joy. Nothing, nothing. --

Let. Sit, the Actors enter. Flourish.


Act. 3. Scene 6.
Enter Byplay the Governor, Mace-bearer, Sword Bearer, Officer, the Mace and
Sword laid on the Table, the Governor sits. Dia. What Is he a King?


Let. No it is the City Governor,
And the chief Judge within their Corporation.

Joy. Here Is a City Enter Peregine and Doctor.
Like to be well governed then. --

Let. Yonder Is a king, do you know him?


Dia. It Is your son,
My Ioylesse, now you are pleased.

Joy. Would you were pleased,
To cease your huswifry in spinning out
The Play at length thus.

Doct. Here sir, you shall see
A point of Justice handled.

Byp. Officer.


Off. My Lord.


Byp. Call the defendant, and the Plaintiff in.


Sword. Their counsel and their witnesses.


Byp: How now!
How long ha you been free oath Poyntmakers,
Good master hilt and scaberd carrier;
(Which is in my hands now) do you give order
For counsel and for witnesses in a cause
Fit for my hearing, or for me to judge, haw?
I must be ruled and circumscribed by Lawyers must I,
And witnesses haw? no you shall know
I can give judgment, be it right or wrong,
Without their needless proving and defending:
So bid the Lawyers go and shake their ears,
If they have any, and the witnesses,
Preserve their breath to prophecy of dry summers.
Bring me the plaintiff, and defendant only:
But the defendant first, I will not hear
Any complaint before I understand
What the defendant can say for himself.

Per. I have not known such down right equity,
If he proceeds as he begins, i will grace him. --

Act. 3. Sce. 7
Enter Gentleman, and Officer. By. Now sir, are you the plaintiff or
defendant, haw?


Gent. Both as the case requires my Lord.


Byp. I cannot
Hear two at once, speak first as you are defendant.

Gent. Mine adversary does complain.


Byp. I will hear no
Complaint, I say speak your defense.

Gent. For silks and
Stuffes received by me.

Byp. A Mercer is he, haw?


Gent. Yes my good Lord, he does not now complain.


Byp. That I like well.


Gent. For money nor for wares
Again: but he complains.

By. Complains again? do you double with me, haw?


Gent. In his wives cause.


Byp. Of his wife, does he, haw? That I must confess
Is many a good man's case; you may proceed.

Gent. In money I tender him double satisfaction,
With his own wares again unblemished, undishonor'd.

Byp. That is unworne, unpawned.


Dia What an odd
Jeering Judge is this?

Gent. But unto me,
They were deliverd upon this condition,
That I should satisfy his wife.

Byp. Heel have
Your body for her then, unless I empt
My breast of mercy to appease her for you,
Call in the plaintiff; sir, stand you aside. Exit Officer.

Dia. Oh it is the flinching Gentleman that broake
With the kind citizens wife. J hope the Judge
Will make him an example.

Act. 3. Scene. 8.
Enter Citizen, and Officer. Byp. Come you forwards,
Yet nerer man, J know my face is terrible,
And that a Citizen had rather lose
His debt, then that a Judge should truly know
His dealings with a gentleman, yet speak,
Repeat without thy shop book now; and without
Fear, it may rise in judgment here against thee.
What is thy full demand? what satisfaction
Requirest thou of this gentleman?

Cit. And please you sir --

Sword. Sir! you forget your self.


By. It Was well said Sword Bearer,
Thou know thy place, which is to show correction.

Cit. My Lord an't please you, if it like your honor.


By. La! an intelligent Citizen, and may grow
In time himself to sit in place of worship.

Cit. I ask no satisfaction of the gentleman,
But to content my wife; what her demand is,
It Is best known to her self; please her, please me,
An't please you sir -- My Lord an't like your honor.
But before he has given her satisfaction,
I may not fall my suit, nor draw my action.

By. You may not.


Cit. No alack a day I may not,
Nor find content, nor peace at home, and't please you
(My Lord, an't like your honor I would say)
An't please you, what is a tradesman, that
Has a fair wife, without his wife, an't please you?
And she without content is no wife, considering
We tradesmen live by gentlemen, an't please you,
And our wives drive a half trade with us, if the gentlemen
Break with our wives, our wives are no wives to us,
And we but broken Tradesmen, an't please you.
And't like your honor, my good Lord, and't please you.

By. You argue honestly.


Cit. Yet gentlemen,
A lack a day, and please you, and like your honor,
Will not consider our necessities,
And our desire in general through the City,
To have our sons all gentlemen like them.

By. Nor though a gentleman consume
His whole estate among ye, yet his son
May live t'inherit it?

Cit. Right, right, and't please you:
Your honor my good Lord and't please you.

By. Well,
This has so little to be said against it,
That you say nothing. Gentlemen it seems
You Are obstinate, and will stand out --

Gent. My Lord,
Rather then not to stand out with all men's wives,
Except mine own, i will yield me into prison.

Cit. Alack a day.


Dia. If our young gentlemen,
Were like those of th'Antipodes, what decay
Of trade would here be, and how full the prisons?

Gent. I offer him any other satisfaction;
His wares again, or money twice the value.

By. That Is from the point.


Cit. I, I, alack a day,
Nor do I sue to have him up in prison,
Alack a day, what good (good gentleman)
Can I get by his body?

By. Peace, I should
Now give my sentence, and for your contempt,
(which is a great one, such as if let pass
Unpunished, may spread forth a dangerous
Example* to the breach of City custom,
By gentlemen's neglect of Tradesmens wives)
I should say for this contempt commit you
Prisoner from sight of any other woman,
Until you give this man's wife satisfaction,
And she release you; justice so would have it:
But as I am a Citizen by nature,
(For education made it so) i will use
Urbanity in your behalf toward you;
And as I am a gentleman by calling,
(For so my place must have it) i will perform
For you the office of a gentleman
Toward his wife, I therefore order thus;
That you bring me the wares here into Court,
(I have a chest shall hold 'hem, as mine own)
And you send me your wife, i will satisfy her
My self. I Will do it, and set all straight and right:
Justice is blind, but Judges have their sight.

Dia. And feeling too in the Antipodes*
Han't they my Lord?

Joy. What Is that to you my Lady?
Within. Dismiss the Court.

Let. Dismiss the Court, cannot you hear the prompter?
Have you lost your ears, Judge?

By. No: dismiss the Court,
Embrace you friends, and to shun further strife,
See you send me your stuff, and you your wife.

Per. Most admirable Justice.


Dia. Protest Extempore played the Judge; and I
Knew him not all this while.

Joy. What oversight
Was there?

Dia. He is a properer man methinks
Now, than he was before: sure I shall love him.

Joy. Sure, sure, you shall not, shall you?


Dia. And I warrant,
By his Judgment speech even now, he loves a woman well:
For ^e said, if you noted him, that he
Would satisfy the Citizens wife himself.
Methinks a gentlewoman might please him better.

Joy. How dare you talk so? Byplay kneeles, and kisses Peregrines hand.


Dia. What Is he a doing now troe?


Per. Kneel down
Again. Give me a sword some body.

Let The King's about to Knight him.


By. Let me pray
Your Majesty be pleased, yet to withold
That undeserved honor, till you first
Vouchsafe to grace the City with your presence,
Accept one of our Hall-feasts, and a freedom,
And freely use our purse for what great sums
Your Majesty will please.

Dia What subjects there are
In the Antipodes.

Let. None in the world so loving.


Per. Give me a sword, I say, must I call thrice?


Let. No, no, take mine my Liege.


Per. Yours! what are you?


Doct. A loyal Lord, one of your subjects too.


Per. He may be loyal; he is a wondrous plain one,

Joy. Pritheee Diana, yet lets slip away
Now while he is busy.

Dia. But where is your daughter in Law?


Joy. Gone home I warrant you with Mistress Blaze.
Let them be our example.

Dia. You are cosen'd.


Joy. You Are an impudent whore,

Dia. I know not what I may be
Made by your jealousy.

Per. I Will none of this,
Give me that Princely weapon.

Let. Give it him.


Sword. It is a property you know my Lord,
No blade, but a rich Scabbard with a Lath in it.

Let So is the sword of Justice for ought he knows.


Per. It is enchanted.


By. Yet on me let it fall,
Since it is your highness will, Scabbard and all.

Per. Rise up our trusty well beloved Knight.


By. Let me find favor in your gracious sight
To taste a banquet now, which is prepared,
And shall be by your followers quickly shared.

Per. My followers, where are they?


Let. Come Sirs quickly. Ent. 5. or 6. Courtiers.


Per. It Is well, lead on the way.


Dia. And must not we
Go to the Banquet too?

Let. He must not see
You yet; I have provided otherwise
For both you in my Chamber, and from thence
We Will at a window see the rest oth' Play,
Or if you needs sir will stay here, you may.

Joy. Was ever man betrayed thus into torment? Ex.


Act 4. Scene. 1.
Enter Doctor, and Peregrine. Doct. NOw sir be pleased to cloud your Princely
raiment
With this disguise. Great Kings have done the like,
To make discovery of passages Puts on a Cloak and Hat.
Among the people: thus you shall perceive
What to approve, and what correct among 'hem.

Per. And so i will cherish, or severely punish.


Enter an old woman reading: to her, a young Maid. Doct. Stand close sir, and
observe.


Old. Royal pastime, in a great match between the Tanners and the Butchers,
six dogs of a side, to play single at the game Bear, for fifty pound, and a
ten pound supper, for their dogs and themselves. Also you shall see two ten
dogge-courses at the Great Bear.


Maid. Fie Granny fie, can no persuasions,
Threatenings, nor blows prevail, but you will persist
In these profane and Diabolical courses,
To follow Bear baitings, when you can scarce
Spell out their Bills with spectacles?

Old. What though
My sight be gone beyond the reach of Spectacles,
In any print but this, and though I cannot,
(No, no, I cannot read your meditations) strikes down her book.
Yet I can see the Royal game played over and over,
And tell which dog does best, without my Spectacles.
And though I could not, yet I love the noise;
The noise revives me, and the Bear-garden scent
Refreshes much my smelling.

Maid. Let me entreat you
Forbear such beastly pastimes, they are Sathanicall.

Old. Take heed Child what you say, it is the Kings game.


Per. What is my game?


Doct. Bear-baiting sir she means.


Old. A Beare's a Princely beast, and one side Venison
(Writ a good Author once) you yet want years,
And are with Bawbles pleased, i will see the Bears. Exit.

Maid. And I must bear with it. she is full of wine,
And for the present wilful; but in due
Season i will humble her: but we are all
Too subject to infirmity.

Act 4. Scene 2.
Enter a young Gentleman, and an old Serving-man. Gent. Boy -- Boy.


Ser. Sir.


Gent. Here take my Cloak.


Per. Boy did he say?


Doct. Yes sir, old servants are
But Boys to Masters, be they nere so young.

Gent. It Is heavy, and I sweat.


Ser. Take mine, and keep you warm then,
I Will wear yours.

Gent. Out you Varlet,
Do thou obscure it, as thou meantst to pawn it?
Is this a Cloak unworthy of the light?
Publish it sirrah: -- oh presumptuous slave,
Display it on one arm -- oh ignorance!

Ser. Pray load your Ass your self, as you would have it*


Gent. Nay prithee be not angry: Thus, and now
Be sure you bear't at no such distance; but
As't may be known appendix to this book.

Per. This custom I have seen with us.


Doct. Yes, but
It was derived from the Antipodes.

Maid. It is a dainty creature, and my blood
Rebels against the spirit: I must speak to him.

Ser. Sir here is a Gentlewoman makes toward you.


Gent. Me? she is deceived, I am not for her mowing.


Maid. Fair sir, may you vouchsafe my company?


Gent. No truly, I am none of those you look for.
The way is broad enough, unhand me pray you.

Maid. Pray sir be kinder to a less that loves you.


Gent. Some such there are, but I am none of those.


Maid. Come, this is but a Copy of your Countenance.
I ha known you better than you think I do.

Gent. What ha you known me for?


Maid. I knew you once
For half a piece I take it.

Gent. You are deceived
The whole breadth of your nose, I scorn it.

Maid. Come be not coy, but send away your servant,
And let me gi' you a pint of wine.

Gent. Pray keep
Your courtesy, I can bestow the wine
Upon my self, if I were so disposed,
To drink in Tavernes; fah.

Maid. Let me bestow't
Upon you at your lodging then; and there
Be civilly merry.

Gent. Which if you do,
My wife shall thank you for it; but your better
Course is to seek one fitter for your turn,
You Will lose your aim in me; and I befriend you
To tell you so.

Maid. Gip gaffer Shotten, fagh,
Take that for your coy Counsel. Kicks.

Gent. Help, oh help.


Ser. What mean you gentlewoman?


Maid. That to you sir. Kicks.


Gent. O murder, murder.


Ser. Peace good Master,
And come away. Some Cowardly Jade I warrant,
That durst not strike a woman.

Act 4. Scene 3.
Enter Constable, and Watch. Con. What Is the matter?


Ser. But and we were your match. --

Watch. What would you do?
Come, come before the Constable: now if
You were her match, what would you do sir?

Maid. Do?
They have done too much already sir: a Virgin weeps.
Shall not pass shortly for these street-walkers,
If some judicious order be not taken.

Gent. Hear me the truth.


Con. Sir, speak to your companions,
I have a wife and daughters, and am bound,
By hourly precepts, to hear women first,
Be It truth, or no truth, therefore virgin speak,
And fear no bug bears, I will do thee justice.

Maid. Sir, they assayld me, and with violent hands,
When words could not prevail, they would have drawn me
Aside unto their lust till I cried murder.

Gent. Protest Sir, as I am a gentleman,
And as my man's a man she beat us both,
Till I cried murder.

Ser. That Is the woeful truth on it.


Con. You are a party, and no witness sir,
Besides you are two, and one is easier
To be believed: moreover as you have the odds
In number, what were justice, if it should not support
The weaker side? Away with them to the Counter.

Per. Call you this justice?


Doct. In the Antipodes.


Per. Here Is much to be reformed, young man thy virtue
Has won my favor, go, thou art at large.

Doct. Be gone.


Gent. He puts me out, my part is now
To bribe the Constable.

Doct. No matter go -- Exit. Gent. and Servant.

Per. And you sir, take that sober seeming wanton,
And clap her up, till I hear better of her,
I Will strip you of your office and your ears else.

Doct. At first show mercy.


Per. They are an ignorant nation,
And have my pity mingled with correction:
And therefore, damsel (for you are the first
Offender I have noted here, and this
Your first offense (for ought I know)

Maid. Yes truly.


Doct. That was well said.


Per. Go and transgress no more,
And as you find my mercy sweet, see that
You be not cruel to your grandmother,
When she returns from beare-baiting.

Doct. So all be gone. Ex.


Enter Buffe woman, her head and face bleeding, and many women, as from a
Pri^e. Per. And what are these?


Doct. A woman Fencer, that has played a Prize,
It seems, with Loss of blood.

Per. It does amaze me. They pass over.
What can her husband be, when she is a Fencer?

Doct. He keeps a School, and teaches needle-worke,
Or some such Arts which we call womanish.

Per. It Is most miraculous and wonderful.
Man scould within. Rogues, Varlets, Harlots, ha you done
Your worst, or would you drown me? would you take my life?
Women within. Ducke him again, ducke him again.

Per. What noise is this?


Doct. Some man it seems, that is duckt for scolding.


Per. A man for scolding?


Doct. You shall see.


Act. 4. Scene 4.
Enter women and man-scold. Wom. So, so,
Enough, enough, he will be quiet now.

Mansc. How know you that, you devil ridden witch you?
How, quiet; why quiet? has not the law* past on me,
Over, and over me, and must I be quiet?

1 Wom. Will you incur the law the second time?


Mansc. The laws the river, is it? yes it is a river,
Through which great men, and cunning, wade, or swim;
But mean and ignorant must drown in it; no
You hagges and hel-hounds, witches, bitches, all,
That were the law, the Judge, and Executioners,
To my vexation, I hope to see
More flames about your ears, then all the water
You cast me in can quench.

3 Wom. In with him again, he calls us names.


2 Wom. No, no: I charge ye no.


Mansc. Was ever harmless creature so abused?
To be drenched under water, to learn dumbness
Amongst the fishes, as I were forbidden
To use the natural members I was borne with,
And of them all, the chief that man takes pleasure in;
The tongue; Oh me accursed wretch. weeps.

Per. Is this a man?
I ask not by his beard, but by his tears.

1 Wom. This shower will spend the fury of his tongue,
And so the tempest's over.

2 Wom. I am sorry for it,
I would have had him duck'd once more;
But some body will shortly raise the storm
In him again I hope for us, to make
More holiday-sport of him. Exit.

Per. Sure these are dreams,
Nothing but dreams.

Doct. No, doubtless we are awake sir.


Per. Can men and women be so contrary
In all that we hold proper to each sex?

Doct. I Am glad he takes a taste of sense in that yet.


Per. 'Twill ask long time and study to reduce
Their manners to our government.

Doct. these are
Low things and easy to be qualified --
But see sir, here come Courtiers, note their manners.

Act. 4. Scene 5.
Enter a Courtier. 1 Cour. This was three shillings yesterday, how now!
All gone but this? six pence, for leather soles
To my new green silk stockings, and a groate
My ordinary in Pompions baked with Onions.

Per. Do such eat Pompions?


Doct. Yes: and Clownes Musk-Mellons.


1 Cour. Three pence I lost at Nyne-pines; but I got
Six tokens toward that at Pigeon holes --
'S nails where is the rest; is my poake bottom broake?

2 Cour. What Jack! A pox oretake thee not; how do? kick.


1 Cour. What with a vengeance aylst? do think my breech
Is made of Bell metal? take that. Box o'th ear.

2 Cour. In earnest?


1 Cour. Yes till more comes.


2 Cour. Pox rot your hold, let go my lock, do think
You Are currying of your Fathers horse again?

1 Cour. I Will teach you to abuse a man behind, They buffet.
Was troubled too much before.

Act 4. Sc. 6.
Ent. 3. Course. 3 Cour. Hay, there boys, there.
Good boys are good boys still. There Will, there Jack.
Not a blow, now he is down.

2 Cour. 'Twere base, I scorn't.


1 Cour. There Is as proud fall, as stand in Court or City.


3 Cour. That Is well said Will, troth I commend you both.
How fell you out? I hope in no great anger.

2 Cour. For mine own part I vow I was in jest.


1 Cour. But I have told you twice and once, Will, jest not
With me behind I never could endure
(Not of a Boy) to put up things behind:
And that my Tutor knew; I had bin a Scholar else.
Besides you know my sword was nock'd in the fashion,
Just here behind, for my backe-guard and all;
And yet you would do it.
I had a liefe you would take a knife --

3 Cour. Come, come,
You Are friends. Shake hands i will give you half a dozen
At the next Alehouse, to set all right and straight.
And a new song; a dainty one; here it is. a Ballad.

1 Cour. O thou art happy that can read --
I would buy Ballads too, had I thy learning.

3 Cour. Come, we burn daylight, and the Ale may sour. Ex.


Per. Call you these Courtiers? They are rude silken Clowns;
As course within, as watermen or Car-men.

Act 4. Scen 7.
Doct. Then look on these: Here are of those conditions En. carman, and
waterman.

Wat. Sir, I am your servant.


Car. I am much obliged
Sir, by the plenteous favors your humanity
And noble virtue have conferred upon me,
To answer with my service your deservings.

Wat. You speak what I should say. Be therefore pleased
T'unload, and lay the wait of your commands
Upon my care to serve you.

Car. Still your Courtesies,
Like waves of a Springtide, ore-flow the Banks
Of your abundant store; and from your Channel,
Or stream of fair affections, you cast forth
Those sweet refreshings on me (that were else
But sterile earth) which cause a gratitude
To grow upon me, humble, yet ambitious
In my Devoire, to do you best of service.

Wat. I shall no more extend my utmost labor,
With Oar and Sail to gain the livelihood
Of wise and children, then to set a shore
You, and your faithful honourers at the haven
Of your best wishes.

Car. Sir, I am no less
Ambitious, to be made the happy means.
With whip and whistle, to draw up or drive
All your detractors to the Gallows.

Act 4. Scene 8.
Enter Sedan-man. Wat. See,
Our noble friend.

Sed. Right happily encountered --
I am the just admirer of your virtues.

2. We are, in all, your servants.


Sed. I was in quest,
Of such elect society, to spend
A dinnertime withal.

2. Sir we are for you.


Sed. Three are the golden Number in a Tavern;
And at the next of best, with the best meat,
And wine the house affoords (if you so please)
We will be competently merry. I
Have received, lately, Letters from beyond Seas,
Importing much of the occurrences,
And passages of foreign States. The knowledge
Of all I shall impart to you.

Wat. And I
Have all the new advertisements from both
Our Universities, of what has past
The most remarkably of late.

Car. And from
The Court I have the news at full,
Of all that was observable this Progress.

Per. From Court?


Doct. Yes sir: They know not there, they have
A new King here at home.

Sed. It Is excellent!
We want but now, the newes-collecting Gallant
To fetch his Dinner, and Materials
For his this weeks dispatches.

Wat. I dare think
The meat and news being hot upon the Table,
He Will smell his way to it.

Sed. Please you to know yours, sir?


Car. Sir, after you.


Sed. Excuse me.


Wat. By no means sir.


Car. Sweet Sir lead on.


Sed. It shall be as your servant
Then, to prepare your dinner.

Wat: Pardon me.


Car. Insooth i will follow you.


Wat* Yet it is my obedience Ex.

Per: Are these but laboring men, and the other Courtiers?


Doct: It Is common here sir, for your watermen
To write most learnedly, when your Courtier
Has scarce ability to read.

Per. Before I reign
A Month among them, they shall change their notes,
Or i will ordain a course to change their Coats.
I shall have much to do in reformation.

Doct: Patience and Counsel will go through it sir.


Per: What if I craved? a Counsel from New England?
The old will spare me none.

Doct: Is this man mad?
My cure goes fairly on. Do you marvel that
Poor men outshine the Courtiers? Look you sir,
A sicke-man giving counsel to a Physician:
And there is a Puritan Tradesman, teaching a
Great Traveller to lie: That Ballad-woman
Gives light to the most learned Antiquary
In all the Kingdom.

Bal: Buy new Ballads, come.


Doct. A natural fool, there, giving grave instructions Those persons pass
over the Stage in Couples, according as he describes them.
T'a Lord Ambassador ^ That Is a Schismatic,
Teaching a Scrivener to keep his cares:
A parish Clearke, there, gives the Rudiments
Of Military Discipline to a General:
And there is a Basket maker confuting Bellarmine.

Act 4. Se. 9.
Ent. Byplay like a Statesman. 3. or 4. Projectors with bundles of papers. Per:
Will you make me mad?


Doct. We are saild, I hope,
Beyond the line of madness. Now sir, see
A Statesman studious for the Commonwealth,
Solicited by Projectors of the Country.

Byp. Your Projects are all good I like them well.
Especially these two; This for the increase of wool:
And this for the destroying of Mice: They Are good,
And grounded on great reason. As for yours,
For putting down the infinite use of Iacks,
(Whereby the education of young children,
In turning spits, is greatly hindered)
It may be looked into: And yours against
The multiplicity of pocket-watches,
(Whereby much neighbourly familiarity,
By asking, what de'yee guess it is a Clock?
Is lost) when every puny Clerk can carry
The time oth' day in's Breeches; This, and these
Hereafter may be look into: For present;
This for the increase of Wool; that is to say,
By fleying of live horses, and new covering them
With Sheeps-skins, I do like exceedingly.
And this for keeping of tame Owls in Cities,
To kill up Rats and Mice, whereby all Cats
May be destroyed, as an especial means
To prevent witchcraft and contagion.

Per. Here Is a wise business!


Pro. Will you honor now,
Be pleased to take into consideration
The poor men's suits for Briefes, to get relief
By common charity throughout the Kingdom,
Toward recovery of their lost estates.

Byp: What are they? let me hear.


Pro: First, here is a Gamster, that sold house and land,
To the known value of five thousand pounds,
And by misfortune of the Dice lost all,
To his extreme undoing; having neither
A wife or child to succor him.

Byp: A Batchelour!


Pro: Yes, my good Lord.


Byp: And young, and healthful?


Pro: Yes.


Byp. Alas it is lamentable: he deserves much pity.


Per: How Is this?


Doct. Observe him further, pray sir.


Pro: Then, here is a Bawd, of sixty odd years standing.


Byp: How old was she when she set up?


Pro: But four
And twenty, my good Lord. She was both ware
And Merchant; Flesh and Butcher, (as they say)
For the first twelve years of her housekeeping:
She Is now upon fourscore, and has made markets
Of twice four thousand choice virginities;
And twice their number of indifferent gear.
(No risse raffe was she ever known to cope for)
Her life is certifi'd here by the Justices,
Adjacent to her dwelling --

Byp. She is decai'd.


Pro. Quite trade-fallen, my good Lord, now in her dotage;
And desperately undone by riot.

Byp. 'Lasse good woman,

Pro. She has consumed in prodigal feasts and Fiddlers,
And lavish lendings to debauched Comrades,
That sucked her purse, in Jewels, Plate, and money,
To the full value of six thousand pounds.

Byp. She shall have a Collection, and deserves it.


Per. It Is monstrous, this.


Pro. Then here are diverse more,
Of Pandars, Cheaters, house-and highway Robbers,
That have got great estates in youth and strength,
And wasted all as fast in wine and Harlots.
Till age o'retooke 'hem, and disabled them,
For getting more

Byp. For such the Law provides
Relief within those Counties, where they practiced.

Per. Ha! what for thieves?


Doct. Yes, their Law punishes
The robbed, and not the thief, for surer warning,
And the more safe prevention. I have seen
Folks whipped for losing of their goods and money,
And the picke-pockets cherished.

Byp. The weal public,
As it severely punishes their neglect,
Undone by fire ruins, shipwreck, and the like,
With whips, with brands, and loss of careless ears,
Imprisonment, banishment, and sometimes death;
And carefully maintains houses of Correction
For decayed Scholars, and maimed Soldiers;
So does it find relief. and almes-houses,
For such as lived by Rapine and by Cosenage.

Per. Still worse and worse! abominable! horrid!


Pro. Yet here is one, my Lord, 'bove all the rest,
Whose services have generally bin known,
Though now he be a spectacle of pity:

Byp. Who Is that?


Pro. The captain of the Cut-purses, my Lord;
That was the best at's art that ever was,
Is fallen to great decay, by the dead palsy
In both his hands, and craves a large collection.

Byp. I Will get it him.


Per. You shall not get it him.
Do you provide whips, brands; and ordain death,
For men that suffer under fire, or shipwreck,
The loss of all their honest gotten wealth:
And find relief for Cheaters, Bawdes, and Thieves?
I Will hang ye all.

Byp. Mercy great King.


Omnes. O mercy.


Byp. Let not our ignorance suffer in your wrath,
Before we understand your highness Laws,
We went by custom, and the warrant, which
We had in your late Predecessors reign;
But let us know your pleasure, you shall find
The State and Commonwealth in all obedient,
To alter Custom, Law, Religion, all,
To be conformable to your commands.

Per. It Is a fair protestation: And my mercy
Meets your submission. See you merit it
In your conformity.

Byp. Great Sir we shall.
In sign whereof we lacerate these papers. Letoy, Diana, Ioylesse, appear
above.
And lay our necks beneath your Kingly feet.

Per. Stand up you have our favor.


Dia. And mine too?
Never was such an actor as Extempore!

Joy. You were best to fly out of the window to him.


Dia. Me thinks I am even light enough to do it.


Joy. I could find in my heart to Quoit thee at him.


Dia. So he would catch me in his arms I cared not.


Let. Peace both of you, or you will spoil all.


Byp. your Grace
Abounds -- abounds -- your Grace -- I say abounds.

Let. Pox o'your mumbling chops; is your brain dry?
Do you pump?

Dia. He has done much my Lord, and may
Hold out a little.

Let. Would you could hold your peace*
So long.

Dia. Do you sneap me too my Lord.


Joy. Ha, ha, ha.


Let. Blockehead.


Joy. I hope his hotter zeal to's actors
Will drive out my wives love-heat.

Dia. I had
No need to come hither to be sneape.

Let. Hoyday! The rest will all be lost, we now give over
The play, and do all by Extempore,
For your sons good, to sooth him into's wits.
If you will mar all, you may. Come nearer cocks-combe,
Ha you forgotten (puppy) my instructions
Touching his subjects, and his marriage?

Byp. I have all now my Lord.


Per. What voice was that?


Byp. A voice out of the clouds, that does applaud
Your highness welcome to your subjects loves.

Let. So, now he is in. Sit still, I must go down
And set out things in order. Ex.

Byp. A voice that does inform me of the tidings
Spread through your kingdom, of your great arrival;
And of the general joy your people bring
To celebrate the welcome of their king. Showts within.
Hark how the country shouts with joyful votes,
Rending the air with music of their throats. drum and trumpets
Hark how the soldier, with his martial noise,
Threatens your foes, to fill your Crown with joys.
Hark how the City, with loud harmony, Haughboyes.
Chaunts a free welcome to your majesty.
Hark how the Court prepares your grace to meet Soft music.
With solemn music, state and beauty sweet.

Act 4 Sce. 10.
The soft music playing. Ent. by two and two, diverse Courtiers, Martha after
them, like a Queen between two boys in robes. Her train borne up by Barbara,
all the Lords kneel, and kiss Perigrines hand, Martha approaching, be starts
back, but is drawn on by Byplay and the Doctor. Letoy enters and mingles with
the rest, and seems to instruct them all. Dia. O here is a stately show! look
master Ioylesse:
Your daughter in law presented like a queen
Unto your son, I warrant now he will love her.

Joy. A queen?


Dia. Yes, yes, and mistress Blaze is made
The mother of her maids, if she have any:
Perhaps the Antipodian Court has none.
See, see, with what a Majesty he receives 'hem.

SONG.
HEalth, wealth, and joy our wishes bring,
All in a welcome to our king:
May no delight be found,
Wherewith he be not crowned,
Apollo with the Muses,
Who Arts divine infuses,
With their choice Chyrlouds deck his head;
Love and the graces make his bed:
And to crown all, let Hymen to his side,
Plant a delicious, chaste, and fruitful Bride.
Byp. Now Sir be happy in a marriage choice,
That shall secure your title of a king.
See sir, your state presents to you the daughter,
The only child and heir apparent of
Our late deposed and deceased Sovereign,
Who with his dying breath bequeathed her to you.

Per. A Crown secures not an unlawful marriage.
I have a wife already.

Doct. No: you had sir,
But she is deceast.

Per. How know you that?


Doct. By sure advertisment; and that her fleeting spirit
Is flowne into, and animates this Princess.

Per. Indeed she is wondrous like her.


Doct. Be not sl^cke
To Embrace and kiss her Sir. He kisses her and retires.

Mar. He kisses sweetly;
And that is more then ere my husband did.
But more belongs then kissing to child-getting;
And he is so like my husband, if you note him,
That I shall but lose time and wishes by him,
No, no, I Will none of him.

Bar. I Will warrant you he shall fulfill your wishes.


Mar. O but try him you first: and then tell me.


Bar. There Is a new way indeed to chose a husband!
Yet twere a good one to bar fool getting.

Doct. Why do you stand aloof Sir?


Per. Mandivell writes
Of people near the Antipodes, called Gadlibriens:
Where on the wedding-night the husband hires
Another man to couple with his bride,
To clear the dangerous passage of a Maidenhead.

Doct. 'Slid he falls back again to Mandevile madness.


Per. She may be of that Serpentine generation,
That stings often times to death (as Mandevile writes)

Doct. She Is no Gadlibrien, Sir, upon my knowledge.
You may as safely lodge with her, as with
A maid of our own nation. Besides,
You shall have ample counsel: for the present,
Receive her, and entreat her to your Chapel.

Byp. For safety of your Kingdom, you must do it. Haughtboies Exit in state as
Letoy directs. Manet Letoy.


Let. So, so, so, so, this yet may prove a cure.


Dia. See my Lord now is acting by himself.


Let. And Letoy's wit cried up triumphant hoe.
Come master Ioylesse and your wife, come down
Quickly, your parts are next, I had almost
Forgot to send my chaplain after them.
You Domine where are you?

Act. 4. Sce. 11.
Enter Quailpipe in a fantastical shape. Qua. Here my Lord.


Let. What in that shape?


Chap. It Is for my part my Lord,
Which is not all performed.

Let. It is sir, and the Play for this time. We
Have other work in hand.

Quai. Then have you lost
Action ( I dare be bold to speak it) that
Most of my coat could hardly imitate.

Let. Go shift your coat sir, or for expedition,
Cover it with your own, due to your function.
Follyes, as well as vices, may be hid so:
Your virtue is the same; dispatch, and do
As Doctor Hughball shall direct you, go.
Now Master Ioylesse, do you note the progress
And the fair issue likely to ensue
In your sons cure? observe the Doctors art.
First, he has shifted your sons known disease
Of madness into folly; and has wrought him
As far short of a competent reason, as
He was of late beyond it, as a man
Infected by some foul disease is drawn
By physic into an Anatomy,
Before flesh fit for health can grow to rear him,
So is a madman made a fool, before
Art can take hold of him to wind him up
Into his proper Center, or the Medium
From which he flew beyond himself. The Doctor
Assures me now, by what he has collected
As well from learned authors as his practice,
That his much troubled and confused brain
Will by the real knowledge of a woman,
Now opportunely taken, be by degrees
Settled and rectified, with the helps beside
Of rest and diet, which he will administer.

Act. 4. Sce. 12.
Exit. Qua. Enter Ioylesse, Diana. Dia. But it is the real knowledge of the woman
(Carnal I think you mean) that carries it.

Let. Right, right.


Dia. Nay right or wrong, I could even wish
If he were not my husbands son, the Doctor
Had made my self his Recipe, to be the means
Of such a Cure.

Joy. How, how?


Dia. Perhaps that course might cure your madness too*
Of jealousy, and set all right on all sides.
Sure, if I could but make him such a fool,
He would forgo his madness, and be brought
To christian Sense again.

Joy. Heaven grant me patience,
And send us to my Country home again.

Dia. Besides, the young man's wife's as mad as he,
What wise work will they make!

Let. The better, fear't not,
Bab Blaze shall give her Counsel; and the youth
Will give her royal satisfaction,
Now, in this Kingly humor, I have a way
To cure your husbands jealousy my self.

Dia. Then I am friends again: Even now I was not
When you sneapt me my Lord.

Let. That you must pardon:
Come Mr. Ioylesse. The new married pair
Are toward bed by this time* we will not trouble them
But keep a house-side to our selfs. Your lodging
Is decently appointed.

Joy. Sure your Lordship
Means not to make your house our prison.

Let. By
My Lordship but I will for this one night.
See sir, the Keys are in my hand. You Are up,
As I am true Letoy. Consider, Sir,
The strict necessity that ties you to it,
As you expect a cure upon your son --
Come Lady, see your Chamber.

Dia. I do wait
Upon your Lordship.

Joy. I both wait, and watch,
Never was man so mastered by his match. Ex. omn.

Act 5. Scene 1.
Ioylesse: with a light in his hand. Joy. DIana! ho! where are you? she is lost.
Here is no further passage. All Is made fast.
This was the Bawdy way, by which she escaped
My narrow watching. Have you privy posternes
Behind the hangings in your strangers Chambers?
She Is lost from me, for ever. Why then seek I?
O my dull eyes, to let her slip so from ye,
To let her have her lustful will upon me!
Is this the Hospitality of Lords?
Why, rather, if he did intend my shame,
And her dishonor, did he not betray me
From her out of his house, to travail in
The bare suspicion of their filthiness;
But hold me a nose-witnesse to its rankness?
No: This is sure the Lordlier way; and makes
The act more glorious in my sufferings. O --
May my hot curses on their melting pleasures,
Cement them so together in their lust,
That they may never part, but grow one monster.

Act 5. Scene 2.
Enter Barbara. Bar. Good gentleman! he is at his prayers now,
For his mad sons good night-worke with his bride.
Well fare your heart Sir; you have prayed to purpose;
But not all night I hope. Yet sure he has,
He looks so wild for lack of sleep. You Are happy sir.
Your prayers are heard, no doubt, for I Am persuaded
You have a child got you to night.

Joy. Is It gone
So far do you think?

Bar. I cannot say how far*
Not fathom deep I think. But to the scantling
Of a Child-getting, I dare well imagine.
For which, as you have prayed, forget not sir
To thank the Lord oth' house.

Joy. For getting me
A child? why I am none of his great Lordships tenants,
Nor of his followers, to keep his Bastards.
Pray stay a little.

Bar. I should go tell my Lord
The news: he longs to know how things do pass.

Joy. Tell him I take it well; and thank him.
I did before despair of Children I.
But i will go wi'yee, and thank him.

Bar. Sure his joy
Has madded him: Here Is more work for the Doctor.

Joy. But tell me first: were you their Bawd that speak this?


Bar. What mean you with that Dagger?


Joy. Nothing I,
Bu^ play with it. Did you see the passages
Of things? I ask, were you their Bawd?

Bar. Their Bawd?
I trust she is no Bawd, that sees, and helps
(If need require) an ignorant lawful pair
To do their best.

Joy. Lords actions all are lawful.
And how? and how?

Bar. These old folks love to hear.
I Will tell you sir -- and yet I will not neither.

Joy. Nay, pray thee out with it.


Bar. Sir, they went to bed.


Joy. To bed! well on.


Bar. On? they were off sir yet;
And yet a good while after. They were both
So simple, that they knew not what, not how.
For she is sir, a pure maid.

Joy. Who do thou speak of?


Bar. I Will speak no more, less you can look more tamely.


Joy. Go bring me to' hem then. Bawd will you go?


Bar. Ah --

Act 5. Scene 3.
Enter Byplay and holds Ioylesse. Byp. What aile you sir: why Bawd? whose Bawd
is she?


Joy. Your Lords Bawd, and my wives.


Byp. You are jealous mad.
Suppose your wife be missing at your Chamber,
And my Lord too at his, they may be honest:
If not, what is that to her, or you I pray,
Here in my Lords own house?

Joy. Brave, brave, and monstrous!


Byp. She has not seen them. I heard all your talk.
The Child she intimated, is your grandchild
In posse sir, and of your sons begetting.

Bar. I, i will be sworn I meant, and said so too?

Joy. Where is my wife?


Byp. I can give no account,
If she be with my Lord I dare not trouble hem.
Nor must you offer at it: no nor stab your self. Byp. takes away his dagger.
But come with me: we counsel, or, at least,
Govern you better: She may be, perhaps,
About the Bride-chamber, to hear some sport;
For you can make her none; 'lasse good old man.

Joy. J'me most insufferably abused.


Byp. Unless
The killing of your self may do it; and that
J would forbear, because perhaps 'twould please her.

Joy. Jf fire, or water, poison, cord, or steel,
Or any means be found to do it: i will do it;
Not to please her, but rid me of my torment. Ex. Joy, and Byp.

Byp. J have more care and charge of you than so.


Bar. What an old desperate man is this, to make
Away your self for fear of being a Cuckold!
If every man that is, or that but knows
Himself to be oth' order, should do so,
How many desolate widows would here be,
They are not all of that mind. Here Is my husband.

Act 5. Scene 4.
Ent. Blaze with a habit in his hand. Bla. Bab! art thou here?


Bar. Look well. How think thou Tony?
Have not thou neither slept to night?

Bla. Yes, yes.
I lay with the Butler. Who was thy bedfellow?

Bar. You know I was appointed to sit up.


Bla. Yes, with the Doctor in the Bride-chamber.
But had you two no waggery? Ha!

Bar. Why how now Tony?


Bla. Nay facks I am not jealous*
Thou know I was cured long since, and how.
I jealous! I an ass. A man sha' n't ask
His wife shortly, how such a gentleman does?
Or how such a gentleman did? or which did best?
But she must think him jealous.

Bar. You need not: for
If I were now to dye on it, nor the Doctor,
Nor I came in a bed to night: I mean
Within a bed.

Bla. Within, or without, or over, or under,
I have no time to think of such poor things.

Bar. What Is that thou carriest Tony?


Bla. O ho Bab.
This is a shape.

Bar. A shape? what shape I prithee Tony?


Bla. Thou Wilt see me in it anon; but shall not know me
From the starkst fool in the Town. And I must dance
Naked in it Bab.

Bar. Will here be Dancing Tony?


Bla. Yes Bab. My Lord gave order for it last night.
It should have bin in the Play: But because that
Was broke off, he will have it today.

Bar. O Tony.
I did not see thee act in the Play.

Bla. O, but
I did though Bab, two Mutes.

Bar. What in those Breeches?


Bla. Fie fool, thou understandst not what a Mute is.
A Mute is a dumb Speaker in the Play.

Bar. Dumb Speaker! that is a Bull. Thou were the Bull
Then, in the Play. Would I had seen thee rore.

Bla. That Is a Bull too, as wise as you are Bab.
A Mute is one that acts speakingly,
And yet says nothing. I did two of them.
The Sage Man-midwife, and the Basket-maker.

Bar. Well Tony, I will see thee in this thing.
And it is a pretty thing.

Bla. Prithee good Bab,
Come in, and help me on with it in our Tyring-house.
And help the Gentlemen, my fellow dancers,
And thou shall then see all our things, and all
Our properties and practice to the Music.

Bar. O Tony come, I long to be at that. Exeunt.


Act. 5. Scene 2.
Letoy, and Diana. Dia. My Lord, your strength and violence prevail not.
There is a Providence above my virtue,
That guards me from the fury of your lust.

Let. Yet, yet, I prithee yield. Is it my person
That thou despisest? See, here is wealthy treasure, a table set forth, covered
with treasure.
Jewels, that Cleopatra would have left
Her Marcus for.

Dia. My Lord it is possible,
That she who leaves a husband, may be bought
Out of a second friendship.

Let. Had stout Tarquin
Made such an offer, he had done no Rape,
For Lucrece had consented, saved her own,
And all those lives that followed in her cause.

Dia. Yet then she had been a loser.


Let. Would have gold?
Mammon, nor Pluto's self should over-bid me,
For il'd give all. First, let me rain a shower,
To outvie that which overwhelmed Danae;
And after that another; a full river
Shall from my chests perpetually flow
Into thy store.

Dia. I have not much loved wealth,
But have not loathed the sight of it, till now,
That you have soyld it with that foul opinion
Of being the price of virtue. Though the Metal
Be pure, and innocent in it self; such use
Of it is odious, indeed damnable,
Both to the seller, and the purchaser:
Pity it should be so abused. It bears
A stamp upon it, which but to clip is treason.
It Is ill used there, where Law the life controules;
Worse, where it is made a salary for souls.

Let. Deny'st thou wealth? will thou have pleasure then
Given, and taken freely, without all condition?
I Will give thee such, as shall (if not exceed)
Be at the least, comparative with those,
Which Jupiter got the Demy-gods with; and
Juno was mad she mist.

Dia. My Lord, you may
Gloss over and gild the vice, which you call pleasure,
With god like attributes; when it is, at best
A sensuality, so far below
Dishonorable, that it is mere beastly;
Which reason ought to abhor; and I detest it,
More than your former hated offers.

Let. Lastly.
Will thou have honor! I Will come closer to thee;
(For now the Flames of Love grow higher in me,
And I must perish in them, or enjoy thee)
Suppose I find by Power, or Law, or both,
A means to make thee mine, by freeing
Thee from thy present husband.

Dia. Hold, stay there.
Now should I utter volumes of persuasions;
Lay the whole world of Riches, pleasures, honors,
Before me in full grant, that one, last word
Husband, and from your own mouth spoke, confutes
And vilifies even all. The very name
Of husband, rightly weighed, and well remembered,
Without more Law or discipline, is enough
To govern woman-kinde in due obedience;
Master all loose affections, and remove
Those Idols, which too much, too many love;
And you have set before me, to beguile
Me of the faith I owe him. But, remember
You grant I have a husband; urge no more,
I seek his love. It Is fit he loves no whore.

Let. This is not yet the way. You have seen Lady,
My ardent love, which you do seem to slight,
Though to my death, pretending zeal to your husband.
My person, nor my proffers are so despicable,
But that they might (had I not vowed affection
Entirely to your self) have met with th'embraces
Of greater persons, no less fair, that can
Too, (if they please) put on Formality,
And talk in as divine a strain, as you.
This is not earnest, make my word but good,
Now with a smile, i will give thee a thousand pound.
Look of my face -- Come -- prithee look and laugh not --
Yes, laugh, and dare -- Dimple this cheek a little;
I Will nip it else.

Dia. I pray forbear my Lord:
I Am past a child, and will be made no wanton.

Let. How can this be? so young? so vigorous?
And so devoted to an old man's bed!

Dia. That is already answered. He Is my husband.
You are old too my Lord.

Let. Yes, but of better metal:
A jealous old man too, whose disposition
Of injury to beauty, and young blood,
Cannot but kindle fire of just revenge
In you, if you be woman, to requite
With your own pleasure his unnatural spite.
You cannot be worse to him than he thinks you,
Considering all the open scorns and jeeres
You cast upon him, to a flat defiance;
Then the affronts I gave, to choke his anger:
And lastly your stolen absence from his chamber:
All which confirms (we have as good as told him)
That he is a Cuckold, yet you trifle time,
As 'twere not worth the doing.

Dia. Are you a Lord?
Dare you boast honor, and be so ignoble?
Did not you warrant me upon that pawn
(Which can take up no money) your blanck honor,
That you would cure his jealousy, which affects him
Like a sharp sore, if I to ripen it
Would set that counterfeit face of scorn upon him,
Only in show of disobedience, which
You won me to, upon your protestation,
To render me unstained to his opinion,
And quit me of his jealousy for ever.

Let. No: not unstained by your leave, if you call
Unchastity a stain. But for his yellows,
Let me but lie with you, and let him know it,
His jealousy is gone, all doubts are cleard,
And for his love and good opinion,
He shall not dare deny't. Come; be wise,
And this is all: all is as good as done
To him already: let't be so with us;
And trust to me, my power, and your own,
To make all good with him -- If not: Now mark,
To be revengd for my lost hopes (which yet
I pray thee save) I Will put thee in his hands,
Now in his heat of fury; and not spare
To boast thou art my Prostitute; and thrust ye
Out of my gates, to try't out by your selves.

Dia. this you may do, and yet be still a Lord;
This can I bear, and still be the same woman!
I am not troubled now, your wooing oratory,
Your violent hands (made stronger by your lust)
Your tempting gifts, and larger promises
Of honor and advancements were all frivolous;
But this last way of threats, ridiculous,
To a safe mind, that bears no guilty grudge:
My peace dwells here, while yonder sits my judge.
And in that faith i will dye.

Act. 5. Sce.
Ent, Ioylesse and Byplay. Let. She is invincible!
Come i will relate you to your husband.

Joy. No,
I Will meet her with more joy then I received
Upon our marriage-day. My better soul.
Let me again embrace thee.

Byp. Take your dudgeon Sir,
I ha done you simple service.

Joy. O my Lord,
My Lord, you have cured my jealousy, I thank you;
And more, your man for the discovery;
But most the constant means, my virtuous wife,
Your medicine my sweet Lord.

Let. she has taken all
I mean to give her sir Now sirrah, speak.

Byp. I brought you to the stand from whence you saw
How the game went.

Joy. Oh my dear, dear Diana.


Byp. I seemd to do it against my will, by which I gained
Your bribe of twenty pieces.

Joy. Much good do thee.


Byp. But I assure you, my Lord give me order,
To place you there, after it seems he had
Well put her to it within.

Joy. Stay, stay, stay, stay;
Why may not this be then a counterfeit action,
Or a false mist to blind me with more error?
The ill I feared may have been done before,
And all this but deceit to dawbe it ore.

Dia. Do you fall back again?


Joy. Shugh, give me leave.


Byp. I must take charge I see of the dagger again.


Let. Come Ioylesse, I have pity on thee; Hear me.
I swear upon mine honor she is chaste.

Joy. Honor! in oath of glass!


Let. I prithee Hear me.
I tried and tempted her for mine own ends,
More then for thine.

Joy. That Is easily believed.


Let. And had she yielded, I not only had
Rejected her (for it was never my purpose,
(Heaven I call thee to witness) to commit
A sin with her) but laid a punishment
Upon her, greater then thou could inflict.

Joy. But how can this appear?


Let. Do you know your father Lady?


Dia. I hope I am so wise a child.


Let. Go call
In my friend Truelocke,

Byp. Take your dagger Sir,
Now I dare trust you.

Let. Sirrah, dare you fool.
When I am serious? send in master Truelocke. Exit Byp.

Dia. That is my fathers name.


Joy, Can he be here?


Let. Sir, I am neither conjurer nor witch,
But a great Fortune Tellers, that you will find,
You are happy in a wife sir, happier -- yes
Happier by a hundred thousand pound,
Then you were yesterday --

Joy. So, so, now he is mad.


Let. I mean in possibilities: provided that
You use her well, and never more be jealous.

Joy. Must it come that way.


Let. Look you this way sir,
When I speak to you, i will cross your fortune else,
As I am true Letoy.

Joy. Mad, mad, he is mad,
Would we were quickly out on's fingers yet.

Let. When saw you your wives father? answer me?


Joy. He came for London four days before us.


Act. 5. Sc. 6.
Let. It Is possible he is here then, do you know him

Dia. O I am happy in his sight. Dear sir. Enter Truelocke. she kneeles.


Let. It Is but so much knee-labour lost, stand up,
Stand up, and mind me.

True. You are well met, son Ioylesse.


Joy. How have you been conceald, and this house?
Here Is mystery in this.

True. My good Lords pleasure.


Let. know sir, that J sent for him, and for you,
Jnstructing your friend Blaze my instrument,
To draw you to my Doctor with your son,
Your wife J knew must follow, what my end
Was in it shall quickly be discovered to you,
In a few words, of your supposed father.

Dia. Supposed father!


Let. Yes, come master Truelocke,
My constant friend of thirty years acquaintance,
Freely declare with your best knowledge now,
Whose child this is.

True. Your honor does as freely
Release me of my vow, then in the secret
I lockd up in this breast these seaventeene years
Since she was three days old.

Let. True, master Truelocke,
I do release you of your vow: Now speak.

True. Now she is yours my Lord; your only daughter,
And know you master Ioylesse, for some reason
Known to my Lord; and large reward to me,
She has been from the third day of her life
Reputed mine; and that so covertly,
That not her Lady mother, nor my wife
Knew to their deaths, the change of my dead infant,
Nor this sweet Lady* it is most true we had
A trusty Nurses help and secrecy,
Well paid for, in the carriage of our plot.

Let. Now shall you know what moved me sir. I was
A thing beyond a madman, like your self,
Jealous; and had that strong distrust, and fancied
Such proofs unto my self against my wife,
That I conceived the child was not mine own,
And scorned to father it; yet I gave to breed her
And marry her as the daughter of this gentleman
(Two thousand pound I guess you had with her)
But since your match, my wife upon her deathbed,
So cleared her self of all my foul suspicions,
(Blessed be her memory) that J then resolved
By some quaint way (for J am still Letoy)
To see and try her thoroughly; and so much
To make her mine, as I should find her worthy.
And now thou art my daughter, and mine heir.
Provided still (for I am still Letoy)
You honorably love her, and defy
The Cuckold-making fiend foul jealousy.

Joy. My Lord, it is not her birth and fortune, which
Do jointly claim a privilege to live
Above my reach of jealousy, shall restrain
That passion in me, but her well tried virtue:
Jn the true faith of which J am confirmd,
And thoroughly cured.

Let. As J am true Letoy
Well said. J hope thy son is cured by this too.
Now Mistress Blaze! here is a woman now!
J cured her husbands jealousy, and twenty more
Jth' Town, by means I and my Doctor wrought.

Acts 5. Sce. 7.
Enter Barbara. Bar. Truly my Lord, my husband has taken bread
And drunk upon it, that under heaven he thinks,
You were the means to make me an honest woman,
Or (at the least) him a contented man.

Let. Ha done, ha done.


Bar. Yes, I believe you have done
And if your husband, Lady, be cured, as he should be;
And as all foolish jealous husbands ought to be,
I know what was done first, if my Lord took
That course with you as me --

Let. Prithee wha^ camst thou for?


Bar. My Lord to tell you, (As the Doctor tells me)
The Bride and Bridegroom, Both, are coming on,
The sweetliest to their wits again.

Let. I told you.


Bar. Now you are a happy man sir; and I hope a quiet man.


Joy. Full of content and joy.


Bar. Content! So was my husband, when he knew
The worst he could by his wife. Now you will live quiet Lady.

Let. Why flyest thou off, thus woman, from the subject
Thou were upon?

Bar. I beg your Honors pardon.
And now i will tell you. Be it by skill or chance,
Or both, was never such a Cure, as is
Upon that couple: now they strive which most
Shall love the other.

Let. Are they up, and ready?


Bar. Up! up, and ready to lie down again:
There is no ho with them;
They have bin in the Antipodes to some purpose;
And, now, are risen, and returned themselves:
He Is her dear Per, and she is his sweet Mat.
His Kingship and her Queenship are forgotten.
And all their melancholy and his Travailes past,
And but supposed their dreams.

Let. It Is excellent.


Bar. Now sir, the Doctor, (for he is become
An utter stranger to your son; and so
Are all about em) craves your presence,
And such as he is acquainted with.

Let. Go sir.
And go you daughter.

Bar. Daughter! that is the true trick of all old whore-masters, to call their
wenches daughters.


Let. Has he known you friend Trulock too?


True. Yes from his childhood.


Let Go, then, and possess him (Now, he is sensible) how things have gone;
what Art, what means, what friends have bin employed in his rare cure; and
win him, by degrees, to Sense of where he is; bring him to me; and I have yet
an entertainment for him, Of better Settle-braine, then Drunkards porridge, To
set him right. As I am true Letoy, I have one Toy left. Go, and go you, why
stayst thou? Exe. Joy.


Bar. If I had been a Gentlewoman borne,
I should have bin your daughter too my Lord.

Let. But never as she is.
You Will know anon.

Bar. Neat city-wives flesh, yet may be as good,
As your course country gentlewomans blood. Exit Bar.

Let. Go with thy flesh to Turn-bull shambles? Hoe
Within there.

Act. 5. Sce. 8.
Ent. Quailpipe. Qua. Here my Lord.


Let. The music, songs,
And dance I gave command for, are they ready?

Qua. All my good Lord: and (in good sooth) I cannot enough applaude your
honors quaint conceit in the design; so apt, so regular, so pregnant, so
acute, and so (withal) poetice legitimate, as I may say justly with Plautus --


Let. Prithee say no more, but see upon my signal given, they act as well as I
designed.


Qua. Nay not so well my exact Lord, but as they may, they shall. Exit.


Let. I know no flatterer in my house but this,
But for his custom I must bear with him.
'Sprecious they come already. Now begin.

Act 5. Sce. 9.
A solemn lesson upon the Recorders. Ent. Truelocke, Ioylesse and Diana,
Peregrine and Martha, Doctor, and Barbara, Letoy meets them. Truelocke presents
Peregrine and Martha to him, he salutes them. They seem to make some short
discourse. Then Letoy appoints them to sit Peregrine seems something amazed.
The Music ceases. Let. Again you are welcome sir and welcome all.


Per. I am what you are pleased to make me; but withal, so ignorant of mine
own condition; whether I sleep, or wake, or talk, or dream; whether I be,
or be not; or if I am, whether I do, or do not any thing: for I have had (if
I now wake) such dreams, and been so far transported in a long and tedious
voyage of sleep, that I may fear my manners can acquire no welcome, where men
understand themselves.


Let. This is Music, Sir, you are welcome; and I give full power Unto your
father, and my daughter here, your mother to make you welcome. Ioylesse
whispers Peregrine.


Per. How! your daughter sir?


Doct. My Lord you will put him back again, if you trouble his brain with new
discoveries.


Let. Fetch him you on again then: pray are you Letoy or I?


Joy. Indeed it is so son.


Doct. I fear your show will but perplex him too.


Let. I care not sir, i will have it to delay your cure a while, that he recover
soundly. Come sit again, again you are most welcome.


Act 5. Sce. 10.
A most untunable flourish. Ent. Discord attended by Folly, Jealousy,
Melancholy and madness. There Is an unwelcome guest; uncivil Discord that
trains into my house her followers, Folly, and Jealousy, Melancholy, and
madness.


Bar. My husband presents jealousy in the black and yellow jaundied suit
there, half like man, and the other half like woman with one horn, and
asse-eare upon his head.


Let. Peace woman, mark what they do: but but by the way, conceive me this,
but show sir, and devise.


Per. I ^^inke so.


Let. How goes he back again, now doctor? sheugh.


Discord. Song in untunable notes.
COme forth my darlings, you that breed
The common strifes that discord feed:
Come in the first place, my dear folly;
Jealousy next, then Melancholy.
And last come Madness, thou art he
That bearst the effects of all those three,
Lend me your aids, so discord shaki you crown,
And make this place a kingdom of our own.
Act 5. Scene 11.
They dance. After a while they are broke off by a flourish, and the approach
of Harmony followed by Mercury, Cupid, Bacchus and Apollo. Discord and her
faction fall down. Let. See Harmony approaches, leading on,
Against Discords factions fear great deities;
Mercury, Cupid, Bacchus, and Apollo.
Wit against Folly, Love against Jealousy,
Wine against Melancholy, and against Madness, Health.
Observe the matter and the Method.

Per. Yes.


Let. And how upon the approach of Harmony,
Discord and her disorders are confounded.

Harmony. Song.
COme Wit, come Love, come Wine, come Health,
Mayntainers of my Commonwealth,
It Is you make Harmony complete,
And from the Spheres (her proper seat)
You give her power to reign on earth,
Where Discord claims a right by birth.
Then let us revell it while we are here,
And keep possession of this Hemisphere.
After a strain or two, Discord cheares up her faction. They all rise, and
mingle in the dance with Harmony and the rest. Dance. Let. Note there how
Discord cheares up her disorders,
To mingle in defiance with the Virtues:
But soon they vanish; and the mansion quit Ex Discord.
Unto the Gods of health, love, wine and wit,
Who triumph in their habitation new,
Which they have taken, and assign to you;
In which they now salute you -- Bids you be Salute Exe.
Of cheer; and for it, lays the charge on me.
And unto me you are welcome, welcome all.
Meat, wine, and mirth shall flow, and what I see,
Yet wanting in your cure, supplied shall be.

Per. Indeed I find me well.


Mar. And so shall I,
After a few such nights more.

Bar. Are you there?
Good Madam, pardon errors of my tongue.

Dia. I am too happy made to think of wrong.


Let. We will want nothing for you that may please,
Though we dive for it toth' Antipodes.

The Epilogue.
Doct. WHether my cure be perfect yet or no,
It lies not in my doctor-ship to know.
Your approbation may more raise the man,
Then all the College of physicians can;
And more health from your fair hands may be won,
Then by the streakings of the seventh son.

Per. And from our Travailes in the Antipodes.
We are not yet arrived from off the Seas:
But on the waves ^f desprate fears we roame
Until your gentler hands do waft us home.

Courteous Reader,
You shall find in this Book more then was presented upon the Stage, and left
out of the Presentation, for superfluous length (as some of the Playe^s
pretended) I thought good al should be inserted according to the allowed
Original; and as it was, at first, intended for the Cockpit Stage, in the
right of my most deserving Friend Mr. William Beeston, unto whom it properly
appertained; and so J leave it to thy perusal, as it was generally applauded,
and well acted at Salisbury Court.

Farewell, Ri. Brom.

FINIS.

