A PETITION TO THE KING.

FOR AVTHORITY AND ALLOWANCE to expound the Apocalypse in Hebrew and Greek, To
show Jews and Gentiles: that Rome in Csars and Pope, is therein still damned.

And for translaters to set over all into other large-vsed tongues.

1611.

TO THE KINGS MAJESTY.
SInce the time that the Jesuits, my liege L. are busy with our K. I held it
my duty to show readynes to combat with them. And because the Apocalypse
reveals perpetual wrath of God upon Rome for killing of Christ as was told by
Balaam, Numb. 24. I made two English Commentaries upon that book: one brief, to
show the harmony of the visions: the other large: showing how God in one word
lappeth the whole tenor of Romes badnes. Because it is not fit for me to
steal a victory: I would make two Co^mentaryes moo: in tongues which the Pope
is bound to understand: one in Ebrew upon an Ebrew translation: an other in
Greek upon John's own style. The Hebrew would yield this commodity. The
Apocalypse in two sorts draws all the law to it. It shows Christ from all
the law and prophets: and the curse of Rome from all the old cursed since the
serpent deceived Eve. This cannot be so well done in any tongue as in Ebrew: as
John translateth Ebrew most strictly: and this would win millions of Jews,
which groan to be taught. Sr John Fortescue of honorable memory, receiving the
Hebrew books which I printed upon mine own charges, told the messenger
co^fidently, that he would obteyn of the K. a very great stipend to go forward.
But the very aged honorable gentleman was prevented by death: that the K.
might show himself willing of himself: in his enemies cause: that the Pope may
be known of all Jews that he is the tail of the old Dragon. So both Jews and
Papists shall be together here benefited. Yea and Turks too. Of which argument I
may here lay down part of a letter of the Lieger at Constantinople, written to
M. Richard Stapers merchant. These be his words. There is a Jew taking himself
learned, and hearing of the good fame of M. H. Broughton, has invited him to
make proof of his learning, by the due answer expected by the Jew from the said
Broughton. And therefore I require your worship; though as I hear, he be not
in London, yet to cause the same to be sent unto him, and to procure answer:
and if it were possible to cause him to come hither: being, as I hear, little
esteemed there. I assure your worship it might turn to the benefit of
Christendom.

Yours Barton.




I was at Basil when the Jews letter, and the Ambassadors came to my hand:
and I printed the Jews letter: and others in Ebrew to Archb. Whitgift, and in
Greek to the rest of the Bishops. And when they despised the cause: they and
the like sped never the better: and upon mine own charges I printed, and
scattered books. I wish your Majesty's charges to clear all the Bible so. And
this much for Hebrew handling of the Apocalypse. Now for Greek. The Caesar's
wickedness should be told briefly: whereby they are so hateful to God: from
Greeks, best in their own tongue: and the Popes continual treachery to
overthrow the East Empire, ever since great Constantine left hated Rome: and I
would expound in Greek all the Apocalypse for Graecia: and chose out of their
Commentaries all that is good. A Greek Bishop told me they have 30. which he
will help me too, by the Patriarch. We have but two printed. I request your
Majesty's authority and allowance for this pains: even to hire also others to
turn all to other tongues. This summer might at Basil, where plenty is of Ebrew
Printers, serve me for to expound in Ebrew, the Apocalypse: and the next, for
the Greek: and the rest of my life should open the consent of all the Bible
showing Christ, in Adams tongue: which work would force Academiques to better
agreement: as that little which I have done in Ebrew, is welcome to all sorts.
This I dare promise your M. by Gods help, that you shall never repent of
liberality this way: and I most humbly request your royal wisdom to regard
aright this most weighty cause.

Your Majesty's humble subject, H. BROVGHTON.


