A REPLY UPON THERE. R. F. TH. WINTON FOR HEADS OF HIS DIVINITY IN HIS SERMON
AND SVRVEY: How he taught a perfect truth, that our Lord went hence to
Paradise* But adding that he went thence to Hades, and striving to prove that,
he injurieth all learning and Christianity*

TO THE MOST NOBLE HENRY PRINCE OF GREAT BRITANY.

1605.

TO THE MOST NOBLE, HENRY PRINCE OF GREAT BRITANIE, Grace and truth.
IN handling the LORds prayer (most noble Prince) at O^landes August 13. 1603.
When I came to speak of the Kingdom to come, the matter called me to handle
these words: Lord remember thou me when thou come to thy Kingdom: and
these: This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, From which both I affirmed
that the thief beleved rightly, as all the Scribes and Pharisees, that the
souls of the just, of Abel, and all that died since, went hence to that place
which Divines call Heaven. And I affirmed from Eccles. 3. and from the 12. and
2. Cor. 10. that the souls of all men ascend unto God: unto judgment: to
receive according to the actions done by the body good or evil. And this I
added from Apoc. 14 That the wicked are tormented before the throne of God and
the Lamb. This belonging directly to the doctrine of the Kingdom, I was to
show how the Creed strove not with this: if the English had rightly
expressed the Greek: he went unto the souls departed: as this, he arose from
the dead, or from Hades, makes the former words plain. About this doctrine D.
Bilson B. of Vv. has dealt not well. A survey of whose dealings your G.
shall see: that knovving how he is damned of himself, you may vvish him to
recant. First he agrees with the truth in most strong sort: that, we have no
warrant by scripture to deny that our Lord went hence to Paradise. His words
are printed in Copies about ten thousand: that all may know how D. Bilson in
his further pains confuteth the Bishop of winchester. He that will do any
thing in Divinity without vvarrant of Scripture shall anger God. Therefore D.
Bilson is inexcusable when he goes against that. An other article the right
reverend father has for Christianity, and the ground of our redemption: more
ridiculous then any thing in Machmads Alkoran: worthy to be written in great
letters, that any running by may see to what strange co^ceites he would dravv
the holy Prophets, Apostles, and Fathers, and all Britanie. In his Sermon thus
the right reverend father vvritteth: fol. 154. The sense of the Creed may and
must be ^s^at Chri H^f^er his body was buried, in soul descended into that
place, which the Scripture proprely calls Hades hell, This fevv words are
enough to shame all our nation for ever: touching judgment in Divinity: since
Publiq authority has commended his work. Homer that expresses all the
Heathen vanities durst never bring this Divinity but only in a dream. In him
and in Iliade or story of Ilion, called also Troy: book 23. v. 71. the soul of
Patrocles killed says to Achilles his Prince in a dream, requesting to to be
buried, because the souls in Hades would not suffer his soul till then to
come to Hades:

Oh bury me: that I may quickly pass through the gates of Hades.

They who sweat to make the Gospel of salvation in sadness more ridiculous
then Heathen fables, should look for the extraordinary hand of God to send them
to Hades quickly. What man that were not brainsik would think that the Cred
should tell how our Lord in body crucified, dead and buried, should in soul
be vnrecorded, vvhither the soul went, or vvher it should be till the body
was buried. A Defender in title, a betrayer in truth, of our religion in
Britanie, should b^ told that better lerning would beseme a man, a D. in D. a
R. R. F.

All Jews would by this, and well might hold us the vilest that ever were
since Cains birth, if they could convict us to be of such a religion: and all
Christendom would hate us, as traitors to the Christian faith. He that takes
upon him to defend the common opinion: and once grants all that the
disputation required: and inventeth of his own brain that which none hold,
injurieth all the state: and giving a Patroclean dream for the marravv of
salvation, should have upon stuburne continuance in error the heavy Anathema
maran Atha. The curse: Our Lord himself comes to revenge him, pronounced
against him. God commands that* 1 Cor. 16. And every commandment of God
should be of as great reverence as his word in sayng: Let light be: and it
was.

An other condemnation of himself the right revere^d father has in his survey
fol. 543. Thus he says: That Christ after death went to the place where the
faithful were, the fa^h^rs affirm. The^, if Abraham's Bosom be the place
where the faithful were, and they wear in Hades, by the Grek fathers
infinitely using the phrase of the Creed: The Hades of the Creed and Abraham's
bosom is all one. It is strange that a reasonable creature should make a book
against himself. A further condemnation of himself he finds from Luc. 16. The
holy Evangelist most eloquent in the Greek tongue, and vvriting to an heathen
Prince Theophilus Asiarches one of the Lords of Asia brings Abraham talking
with the Epicure in Hades.

Now heathen place all souls in Hades, and Theophilus would so understand S.
Luke: that Abraham should be there. And disputers together be always holden
to be in the same world. The right re^erend father would prove that Hades is
Hell, from this place: which most mightily proves the clean contrary; that
the faithful Abraham who went hence to heaven, Eb. 11. and there abides
till the resurrection, was in Hades. So the term is general for the world
of Souls. And auctours whom he cites would have taught him so much:
Chrysostom in a Greek Homily, not yet printed: of Lazarus and the Epicure. In
Photij ^io. ^otheca.
Theophylact citing many Divines: upon Luc. 16. Tertullian Ambrose,
Chrisologus cited by him self, on that place: and Josephus cited also by
himself, expressly places Abraham's bosom in Hades. And that work is so
agreeable to the common judgment of Graecia, that the work is fathered upon
Irenaeus the ancient Bishop nere the Apostles,, and upon sundry others of fame.
And vvheras the Doctor would have Hell lovv in the earth: and must grant that
Abraham is in Heaven: so the spech should be ridiculous: that in a Dialoge one
should talk with one above his head of such infinite millions of miles
distance. And the spech of lifting up the eyes argues equal height: So Lot
lifted up his eyes and saw the Land about fair, Genesis 13.10. So God said to
Abraham lift up thy^e ey^s and behold the place where thou art. Genesis 13.14. The
third day Abraham lifted up his eyes and beho^d the p^a^e ^f which God spoke to
him etc. So Abraham l^fted up h^s eyes and saw three men, Genesis 18. So Abraham
l^fted up his eyes: and behold a ram was in a thicket fast b^ the horns. So
Isaak did l^ft up his e^es: and behold Camel were coming Genesis 24.63. And in the
next verse. Rebecca lifted up her eyes, and saw Isaak. And in Jacobs story six
times that phrase comes. This spech being so usual, no D. should bring
strangenes upon it: But D. Bilson does and trobleth the simple: and disputes
against himself. For the use of the phrase still argues vevving in equal
soil. An other term chasma trobleth the right reverend father. A deep gulf
he does expound it: from his own authority. Hiatus, or gaping, were fit*
when a man gapeth, men consider not how deep the mouth ^s: but how vvide.
In Zach. 14. ^n the lxx. mount olevet shall be parted into a great chasma: half
^astvvard, and half vvestvvard. There the blind may see, that no^ ^he depth, but
the vvidenes comes to be considered. So Babish ^he D. is in all his vvritting.
And ^is unspeakable blindness appea^eth in this: He rejects heathen Greek
with odious terms: and ^reameth that the Apostles had ^ peculiar Greek of
their own; ^et every whit of the N. Testament is penned in Greek as heathen
or Jews before understood the phrases: and the heathen had held the Apostles
wicked Sophisters, if heathen terms had not been in heathen sense: or in
schole poinctes, such as Pharisees would grant plain. All trades have
peculiarity in general words, dravving them to particular understanding. But
then all of the faculty take them alike. Four Greeks are in the New testament:
These fovvr Greeks the Apostles have. The heathen, used as heathen meant in
speech to them: or, heathen terms used as the Greek translaters of the old
testament used them: or heathen terms applied in new sort to Ebrevv, plain by
it self: or heathen Greek applied unto Thalmudik or Jews Doctors phrases.
Further comes none by the Apostles. The Devils language goes further in
Abissos: to the wicked Cabalistes manner in Zohar upon Genesis 1. Darkness was
upon the face of the Pit. There they say that resembled Gehenna: and call the
deep Gehenna. For all these poinctes D. Bilson shows himself a Babe: and
sometimes goes beyond all. Hades nether by heathen, nor lxx., nor Apostles,
nor Thalmud is ever Hell. yet his headstro^g unlearned head will have it so:
Halting before Creples: and hoping by much babbling to be heard. The lxx. take
Abissus for the grave Ps. 71.22. Thou did make me alive again and did
bring me again from the Abissos of the earth. S. Paul. Romans 10. follows the
very same phrase for the resurrection of the Lord* say not in thine heart: who
can go up into heaven? I mean, to bring Christ down: or who can go down to
the pit; I mean to bring Christ from the dead? But if thou confess with thy
mouth: that Jesus is the ETERNAL: and believe in thine heart that God has
brought him from the dead: thou shall be saved. S. Paul alluding to Moses David
and Jonas spak to Jews how in two poinctes Divinity stood and tells what
Moses and all the Prophets taught: even the incarnation and resurrection: and
expounds him self: speaking of Jews rejected* shows their stubburnesse:
that having but two poincts of difference, the incarnation and the
resurrection, both proved most strongly, rebel against the light. And here D.
Bilso^ leaving all heathen, the lxx. all the Prophets Ebrevv, all Thalmudiques
can run to the Devils Luc. 8. for a phrase.

VVheras when S. Paul vvrote to the Romans, none in the world had used
Abissus for Hell: saving the Deuels in S. Lukes Gospel written The (...). in
Euang.
but seven years before: and Jews of whom he spoke never cared for S. Luke:
and denying both the incarnation and resurrection, would not hear of further
matter never taught in Judah: and that, spoken in terms meaning to all Jews
clean an other matter. Hence all that have eyes to see may behold how blind D.
Bilson is: which has nether Grammar nor Divinity: nor love to the truth. He
cites Oecumenius there: and omitteth his words that make this plain: and
dissembleth the best learned Chrysostom. This cauterized conscience should be
reproved sharply.

Now the third kind of Grek, the Apostles following the Ebrevv, Deuteronomy. 30. D.
Bilson little considered, how the going up to heaven, and going down to
Abissus is of our minds, not of our Lords actions. The chaldy exposition, of
heard terms in Moses, makes that plain. The work is called Thargum
Ierusalemi. And thus it speabeth. The law is not in the heavens to cause spech
oh that we had one like Moses the Prophet, that might go up into the heavens,
and bring it unto us, and preach unto us the commandments, that we might do
them: and the Law is not beyond the great sea, to cause speech: oh that we had
one Like Jonas the Prophet that might go down into the great sea and bring it
us, and preach the commandments that we might do them. Thus the Chaldy
shows that for our action of the mind this was spoken: as forbidding blame
of hardenes in the Law. And the Rabbis which have in fragmentes yet the
flowers of all the N. Test. they seem to have turned these words of old, unto
the Gospel: by this spech of Jonas in the wales belly. The later Rabines
compiled most ancient. And for this cause S. Paul might take Abissus both for
the grave, as Oecumenius does, and allude unto the sea: as Chrysostom takes
the word. So it may be easily seen how for the Apostles translation of
Ebrevv, D. Bilson sees nothing. So had the sorrows of death, act. 2. are from
Ps. 18.5. and Ps. 116.3. a speech known to all Jews: for the natural
sorrows, that alvvayes comes when the body is vvounded, that the soul
cannot tarry in it. And vvheras S. Peter act. 2. was to show that the
disciples did not steal the body of Jesus our savior, but God omnipotent
raised it up: disannulling the sores that were done by nails and spear: D.
Bilso^ would have the term death here to be the second death: and that S.
Peter should by term of death in a just soul mean the second death: to make
the holy Apostle the foolishest and the vvickeddest that ever spak with
tongue. He had the resurrection of the body to speak of, and vvher the
governors were Sadducees and believed not that souls were immortal,
vvisdome would that his tongue should give no cause of further pleading, till
the resurrection of the body was granted. And though the Pharisees held
souls to be immortal, yet they believed not that Messiah should arise from
death: and if S. Peter should have gone to further matter never heard, that a
just soul should go to hell, vvherof no cause of spech was ever before moved*
he had be^ held not a teacher but a betrayer of Christianity. Moreover the
term of Second Death, which D. Bilson would have meant by Peter's term of
death, is nether Ethnice, nor in the lxx. nor has any Ebrevv in the Bible for
it. Therefore it should not well be used before Sadducees, and the common
multitude of the world. and never any used Death for the second death in spech
of the Godly. And to say that our Lords souls tasted the second death, that is
the highest degree of blasphemy against our Lord. The fourth use of heathen
Grek comes in this king: Rabinique, and schole spech in use, though the tetmes
come from heathen. Chalcedon Apoc. 21. for Nophec, the Carbuncle, Ex. 28. is
Greek in sound: but not as Pliny takes the Chalcedon, but as Thargum
Ierusalemy does upon Ex. 28. So, Take the beam out of thine eye: Barbmel upon
Hoseas. and Mat. 7.80. for a Camel or Elephant to go through the ey of a
neddle: that is a Jewish proverb. for promising a thing impossible as in this:
Are you from Phumbadita, (a town of Jews upon Euphrates called also
aelgaber), vvher an Elepha^t is trust thtough the vvole of a nedle. And the
Gospel has that for the impossibility for a rich man to go into the kingdom
of heaven. So these speches the world to come, Paradise, Gehenna, eating and
drinking in the kingdom of of heaven, the kingdom of the Messiah: these be
Thalmudiqs in meaning: and used in the N T. So, S. Paul. 2. These. cites Esa.
11. in the Rabbines meaning upon Es. there, extant yet in Jonathan Ben Vziel*
That the spirit of Christ his mouth shall kill the wicked Romulus or Roman.
The Greek fathers as Chrysostom upon 2. These. 2. and Oecumenius upon Apoc. 18.
savv that from Rome the power should arise that by learning should be
over^hrovven. Arias savv the blovv and left out RomuIus. So when by S. Paul
Abraham is in heaven: Heb. 11. with the people of God and in eternal joy, and
equal to Angels: by the Greek Philo. in Abels offering fol. 88. and by Rabbi
Azarias translating him to Ebrevv in Maor Einaim fol. 34. to show the
Perpetual judgment of the Jews: and the same in Paradise as all the just:
by all Rabbines; and in Hades by S. Luke Chapter 16. These three, Heaven, Paradise,
and Hades in the Godly differ not one whit. Iustine Martyr is cited by D.
Bilson: Question 75. to make Paradise out of Hades: but Iustine in Monarchia
shows fol: 167. in Steph. edition, that he is sophistically cited. And so
any, not partial, would judge from the words cited. In the same kind is the
term of the Second death, used: and only by Thalmudiques as I touched: and by
them it must be expounded. Onkelos has it: Deuteronomy. 33. and Jonathan, Es. 22. and
Rabbines infinitely: and used in Ap. twice, and in their sense: for a misery
to the soul in the perpetual hatred of God. And by Rabbinnes this phrase
should be expounded: and a reason rendered why the Rabbines inve^ted new
terms for the place of souls. In all these kinds D. Bilson shows him self
most unlearned. Heathen Greek he casts of: Because the Poets were wicked:
as though only they used Hades and not all sorts of Greeks: and as though
all the world was not Godless when the Apostles first called them with
speeches from Homer, Hesiode, Epimerides, Aratus, Menander, Aeschylus,
Pindarus, Sophocles, Euripides, Aristophanes, Hypocrates, Plato, Demosthenes,
Aristotle, and all noble Greeks, in some noble word. Of this I have compiled
a Dictionary for all the words of the N. Testament, for your G. which I left
at Francfurt: and go to print it: if I can find any Printer: of Characters
pleasant in Ebrvv and Greek, and at leisure for this work. And as he
despised heathen Greek, so the Greek tongue gave him such a blovv as will
make him ridiculous to all Greeks while the world stands: in sayng that
our Lord went from Paradis to Hades: as from England or Scotland to great
Britany, from Winchester, to England, from Paul's to London. while there be
men in the world that know Greek and his words they will think him a
simple Grecian. And vvher he forgeth new Greek for the Apostles, he does
them little honor. They were sent to teach the wicked world, and of
necessity must speak in terms, meaning as others before spoke: and the heathen
would have otherwise held them wicked sophisters and not holy teachers. So
Doctor Bilsons Doctrine beseems not a Bishop, and a Christian. The despising
of Rabbines because they be wicked is no vvittier. The wicked enemies
testimony is the strongest of all humane. And for many parts of the new
Testament, in speeches and stories plain to them, but strongue to heathen, they
are our best assistance. As for this Remember thou me when thou come to they
kingdom and this day shall thou be with me in Paradise: The Rabines would all
swear that these words were plain: that they held the souls of the just,
to go hence to Gods joy and Paradise to be the name of it, and not then first
opened: but opened first to Abel the just, they would never turn our Lords
words to Sophistry: that the sad thief seeking, grace when the humane soul
of Christ should be in his kingdom and our Lord should say nothing to that:
but preach of his Godhead upon the cross, vvher he most hid it: and should
leave the thief, and his mother and S. John and all the troops uncertain, what
should become of his most holy soul: specially when the night before he told
them, I DO GO UNTO THE FATHER. The deadliest enemy and most impudent would be
ashamed so to wrest words. Though shifters who knevv not Paradise to have
received all the just hence, took strange license, a Doctor and a Bishop
borne in the light of all learning should blush to follovv them. Whosoever
utters a devilish fansy, though he can cite an auctour, should pay for it, as
the principal auctour. God forbids errors. And in the truth, the enemies
testimony, as Epimenides, Aratus, and Menander have Gods vvarrant. All the
Scribes and Pharisees believed, that every just soul went hence to Paradise:
as was touched: and the sage Doctors even in the first chapter of the Elder
Thalmud, begin the kingdom of Messiah in the world to come: as S. Paul Fb. 2.
speaks of it: after the common agreement of the Doctors the^ alive. And if
Christ his own soul should not be the noblest in that journey: all the New
Testament speeches were disturbed. And many most sure rules for the just are
in the Law that they go hence into Gods joy or heavenly city. Enoch was
taken up. Genesis 6. into Paradise Eb, 11. in the Arabiq translation. Sem,
Abraham, Moses, Iosuah, David, Daniel, were of equal piety: therefore their
souls were taken up hence to glory. And this stands sure for all that keep
Gods covenant: I will walk amongst you: Leu. 26. vvherof a Rabbin or Ebrevv
Doctor R. B^chay vvritteth thus: you must not understand that of promises
corporal, but of the promises touching the soul in the world to come. And
our Doctors gather this hence, THE BLESSED GOD VVIL CARRY THE JUST PEOPLE INTO
PARADISE AND HIS GLORY SHALL BE AMONGST THEM. This divinity is often confirmed
in the New Testament, as in John 17. I will that they be vvher I am 8. 2.
Cor. 5. We know that if this earhtly tabernacle of ours be dissolved, we
have a building from God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens. Thus the New Testament speaks most agreably to the Rabbines speech:
as it has but two poinctes differing from them, the incarnation and
resurrection. if the Jews can be persuaded of those two, they will admire
all the rest as eloquently agreing with the pure and the best of their
doctrine. A Rabbin at Basil 1598. made this known to the Scholars there: who
being taught in longue speech, how the Apostles excelled in all Thalmud skill,
when the party was gone to Zurick desired the Professors to write to them of
Zurick, to request him to return. But the party could not: yet left in print
that which might move him: and moved one Jew that now is in Cambridge, as
Merchants of Stood say he confessed there, to be a Christian: by the
CNOstantinopolitans Jews petition of instruction from England, and by answer
to him. And all would admire the New Testament: being expounded according to
their speech to vvho^ the books were written. But when Latins which were
rude in the Greek and Hebrew of the Apostles age, must be cited, by Doctors
as rude, darkness and confusion will take all. D. Bilson ignorance thus
appears. He took in hand to defend Ar. Whitgift: that our Lord his soul
went hence to Hell: and not hence to heaven. All sides agree that no further
journey was taken out of the body but the return from Hades to it. So he took
in hand to defend D. Whitgift. But he betrayed him to his eternal shame: in
that he imprisonned many, persecuted more, and urged some to death upon
consequentes for denying that our Lord went hence to Hell. D. Bilson yet
betrayeth him: to smart for his heretical disturba^ce of the Church: and
ioineth against Whitgift with the adversary: that our Lord went hence to
Paradise. This matter is past all denial: that D. Bilson betrayeth
Canterburies cause: to show it to have been heretical and Sathanean: that the
Prince might call him to heavy judgment.

And while D. Bilson is of any auctority, D. Bancroft following D. Wh. must
needs be holden an heretic. But this only is not D. Bilsons vvisdome. more
he has. VVheras he brings scripture for himself and his adversary, and must
plead that King Edward the sixth was of his mind, and Q. E. and the King your
graces father; seeing he says as does his adversary, and, by D. Bilson, God
and the Princes say the same, it is evident that if he rage against any one for
saying that our Lord went hence to Paradise, by scripture, by our Princes
faith, by D. Bilsons faith, he rages against God, against the Princes and his
own soul. But all this does D. Bilson. His words shallbe commended
plentifully to all posterity. Thus they stand in his sermon book fol. 419.
speaking to M. Jacob. Tell then your abettour that all the realm will take
him not only for a rayler against all honesty, but a liar against all duty that
voucheth so confidently: King Edward the sixth and his subjects held that
Christ his soul never went to Gehenna: and the realm knovveth the Qu. oath,
as also the Qu. aduentureth her eternal state. These be not states to come
within his unclean mouth. He may do well to remember who they be of whom
it is written* They despise government: and speak ill of them that be in
authority, as raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame. Thus the
wise Doctor, and right reverend father blasphemeth God and the King: rauing
against that which he himself proves true, by all strength that scripture and
God has. But the right reverend father is not con^ent with all this madness,
to betray D. Wh. and D. Bancroft* and to prove his adversaries cause, by
scripture and Princes consent, and to rave against all: but he will have all
Graecianes that ever have been to hold him vvitlesse. That our Lord should go
from Paradise to Hades. So he has gone from winchester to England. Graecians
would tell him he might as well say the one as the other. VVher Hades is
general: and by circumstances of difference is sometime heaven, sometime Hell.
And if he care not for profane Graecians orators and Philosophers, from whom
a Greek oration was printed at Francfurt against him, and an other at
Hannavv, Greek Divines shall as generally damn him: as void of faith herein,
none of them ever believed that any soul went from Paradise to Hades, or yet
to Gehenna.

But the extremity of his error for which all Christendom should reprove him
stands in these words, for the meaning of the Creed. They shall be written
in gteat letters that one running by may read what fabulous Divinity D. Bilson
brings, for the chief sentence of all our salvation, and rebelling against
the most clear light of our hope, Fol. 154. of his Sermon book thus he
dreameth. THE SENSE OF THE CREED MAY AND MVST BE THAT CHRIST AFTER HIS BODY
WAS BVRIED IN SOVLE DESCENDED TO THAT PLACE WHICH THE SCRIPTVRE PROPERLY
CALLS HADES HELL. These vvodes are past denial: while his copies continue:
and I mean to help him with some thousa^des moo: that if he will needs vvin
the spurs the rovvelles may stick in his side. If Paganes, Machmadistes, and
Jews should hear D. Bilso^ make a sermon with these words before D.
Bancrofts G. with his approbation, they would and well might say, that the
foolishest of all Homers fables had as good Christianity, as his G. that
suffered this to be printed, and the others Lp. that no more honored the Lord,
that (as we say) bought him with his most precious blood. No Christian ever
thought that a man's soul went not to Hades till his body was buried, nor any
in Homers Fables being avvaked: only Achilles in a dream of his knight
Patrocles killed by Hector, thus hard Patrocles soul complain, that the body
being unburied it could not go to Hades. Iliad 23.

Slepest Achilles; thou have forgotten me: thou never did so while I lived:
only since I died. Bury me quicly, that I may pass the gates of Hades. The
souls the forms of the dead keep me alouff: and suffer me not to passover
the Ocean: but I wander fondly by the soul of broadga^ed Hades.

Thus the right reverend father may see, that his Lp. has no fellovv for
Divinity but his abettours, and Achilles dreams. The burgesses of the
Parliament are very patient that lent him the title and revenues of a Lord after
this Patroclean Divinity. He that spoke and the world was made, will send
him to Hell for ever and ever: or teach him to reverence better these words
Eb. 9. when Christ came an high sacrificer of the good to come, by a greater
and more perfect tabernacle not made with hands, I mean, not of this
building, nor by the blood of goatbuckes and oxen, but by his own blood he
went once for all into the sanctuary, having found eternal redemption. These
words shall make him confess, not only so far as he has confession made,
that our Lord his most holy soul went hence to Paradise to the hand of God,
to the sanctuary, to the third heaven: but also, that our redemption was then
found: and no addition must be joined thereunto. And this tends to the same
purpose, following there: that Christ by his eternal spirit offered him self in
his blood without blemish unto God: that death being performed the called may
enjoy the promese of eternal redemption. As Aharons sons adding to their
office were killed for strange fire: so D. Bilson for his dream, that our Lord
went not to God till the body was buried, (by all Greeks to Cateltheineis
Hadou is to go hence to God, for 3000. years use) should think that he must
go into a fire which he has kindled. These words tell the same that S.
Paul before told. For abolishing of sin by sacrificing of himself he appeared
before God. All sage know that from the body immediately upon these words the
soul was to appear before God: and to rest in that payment. And I think
never any that took Hades in the Creed for the place that received our Lords
soul, took it for any other then that which received it leaving this
world. And D. Bilson will be the first and the last of all not follovving
Homerique and Jews fables, and heathen in Plato and Phlegon and such that
said, the soul went not to Hades till the Body was buried. This also might
break the heart of D. Bilson, if he regarded the only reverend father, the Lord,
the great, and the fearful: Eb. 10. By Gods will we are sanctified: which
stay upon the offering of the body of Jesus Christ, once for all. And again:
cap. 10. Having therefore brethren confidence for entrance into the sanctuary by
the blood of Jesus, the way which he dedicated holy and lively by the veil,
that is his flesh, and an high sacrificer over the house of God, let us come
with a right heart and fulness of faith. etc. S^. Paul and the Jews to whom
he wrote knevv that as the high sacrificer might not go from the inner
tabernacle to Gehenna, before he returned to the tabernacle of this world: So
our Lord might not go from heaven to Gehenna: nor at all any more to Gehenna,
then the high sacrificer might carry the holy blood thither. But D. Bilson
will be vviser then Moses and the Prophets: and of further reach then the
Evangelistes: and more practique then all the Apostles: and Greeker then Prince
Theophilus and all the Asiarchae, for whom S. Luke vvrote: and as good a
dreamer, when he should not sleep, as Homers Achilles. And thus all his acts
may be set in one view. He took in hand to defend D D. Wh. and B. G G. That
our Lord went hence to Hell. Then he betrayeth: and brings all the auctority
of Scripture against them: only with swelling Titanean fables what he can
challenge, and verbis sesquipedalibus he makes the wise men fond. Secondly, he
flees to his adversary and carries the victory to him from God, from K. E. and
from Qu. E. and from K. I. and from the right honorable the B. of. W. that is
from his own soul and from all the Phalanx of their army. After this, to
make stationers beleve he had not betrayed Cant: and London: he rages against
him self: and against God and the Princes and their faithful, pretending to
rage only against one of that consort: hoping fools would not see, how
raving against one he blasphemeth all that be of that mind. Yet all that have
their eyes in their head must see and say: that D. Bilson blasphemeth God, the
Princes, and the B. of Winchester. Though the King see him not, he that has
his eyes like a flame of fire will teach him as Alexand. the coppersmith, not
to blaspheme.

Then he betrayeth also all that ever spoke Greek: that our Lord should go
from Paradise to Hades. So all Divines of every vving, Gentiles and Jews will
marveyl at going from Paradise to Gehenna. So he betrayeth all Philosophers,
who thought all souls went presently hence to Hades, to God: to a state
unchangeable. Plat. Leg. 12. after all this he passes all waking fablers,
that a soul should not go to Hades till the body was buried: that all men
should presently bury their dead. Thus he dreameth that all men and God him
self should be mocked. And his headstrong dulnes will needs have Hades to be
Hell, thouh his own auctour Andreas in Ap. 20. say: Hades is the place that
receaveth our souls. And Suidas say: To desce^d is to leave this world. So
the Bible for Divinity, the Thalmudiques for Ebrevv, Greek orators
Philosophers and Divines for Greek: his own side betrayed the other side made
victours by him, and confirmed, all loguiques that ever vvrote, all common wit
for souls passages all these are nothing with D. Bilson: as though he were a
Samson vnpolled and all against him had but Palastean bands* neither does he
see what house he would pull down to dash out all his vvittes. And this
much for the right reverend fathers crossing of my doctrine for the Kingdom of
heaven, and his passage hence to Heavens: by Eb. 9. to Hades, by the Creed.

Also for Christ his kingdom on eart^ I shevved how of Nathan David's son
Joseph was King of the Jews by right: and Mary Nathans daughter. And that
Salomons house was utterly extinct in Iechonias. This D. Bilson crosses,
whom to reprove I printed in Ebrvv and english David's family. So I hope all
i^ defended: and I fear no blamer.

Your graces most humble Hugh Broughton.


