A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLS-CROSSE, May 30. 1626. WHEREIN MAY BE seen whom we
are to repute Heretics, and Schismatics; what sleights they use to deceive:
Gods just judgments on them: and how we may escape those nets which they lay
for us. ALSO Good Council to the Magistrate, Minister, and Subjects, necessary
for these times.

By MATTHEW BROOKS.

IAM. 1.16. Do not err my beloved brethren.

LONDON, Printed by William Jones dwelling in Red-crosse street. 1626.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ALAN COTTON Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of London;
And to the Right Worshipful the Sheriffs, and all the Aldermen of the same,
All blessiings of this life, and of the life to come.
Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful,
THis poor Discourse desired of many of my friends, to be seen in Print,
petitioneth for your favorable acceptance: and coming naked, hops to be
welcomed for Gods sake. Your godly hatred of superstition, and sinister
practices in Religion, (as also the love which you bear to the truth of
Christ, and to those who endeavor to the uttermost of the graces which God has
given them, to set forth the same in his Church, for the manifestation of his
glory) may sufficiently persuade you to give it entertainment.

It is a discovery of the wyles of Heretics and Schismatics, by which they
deceive the hearts of the simple, and reap to themselves no small advantage.
Therefore though neither sumptuously Apparrelled in the robes of Learning and
Eloquence, to add grace unto it; Nor credited by the authority of the Author
(which two things are wont to find many friends, and do buy the good liking
of men) it may recompense you the loss of time in reading it. (But I hope you
will not deem so small a hindrance at any thing, especially where an adventure
is made for a necessary gain.)

The Author for his part has to say for himself, that his respect of you all
augmented by that Reverend regard which every one of you has ever had to
Works of this nature (or rather generally to all the labors of Christ his
Harvest men) has emboldened him to present you with these his first fruits, a
little handful of Goats hair, and yet useful for that Tabernacle which the
Lord wills to be made.

And he does beg that you will be pleased to accept of this, according to the
syncerity of his affection, protesting that if herein he has done you the
least service, he shall bless God for it, and remain

Your Honors and worships in all Christian duties, MATTHEW BROOKS.

To the Reader.
IF among the iniquities of these days, dangerous and detestable opinions in
matters of Religion be the chiefest, (for the more holy the band is, the more
impious the breaking of it.) Behold the cause of (almost all Errors, and
perverse conceits of that nature) the admiration of men's persons or writings.
For jurare in verba Magistri, is both old and usual. But my request unto all
those who desire to make profession of the name of Christ in sincerity, and
truth, is that they would constantly set up St. Augustines resolution, Ad
Hieron: Epist. 19. Alios ita lego, vt quantalibet Sanctitate, doctrinaque
praepolleant, non ideo verum putem, quia ipsi ita senserunt, Sed quia mihi vel
per illos authors canonicos, vel probabili ratione, quod a vero non abhorreat,
persuadere potuerunt. I do so read other men's Works, that notwithstanding
their sanctity and Learning, I am not of their mind, unless the truth of
their opinions may appear unto me, either by the Canonical Scriptures, or by
probable reason. By this means they shall not rashly embrace strange doctrine,
like that foolish Satyr, who fell to kissing of fire at the first sight.

For this cause I have in this short Sermon acquainted thee with the nature and
practices of Heretics and Schismatickes, Gods judgments on them, and how thou
ought to bear thy self toward them, least suddenly they stabbe thy heart.
If thou will read it, it will do thee no hurt, and if thou will make use of
it, it may do thee some good. Howsoever, it is my good will, receive it
therefore as willingly.

(Donec quid grandius aetas
Postera, forsque ferat melior:)
And I will pray God to add a blessing to all thy labors. Vale. M. B.

A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLS-CROSSE, May 30. 1626.
ROMANS 16. VER. 17.18. Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause
deuisions and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and
avoid them.

For they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly,
and by good words, and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple.


THE Church of God militant upon earth, upon diverse reasons, is diversely
compared in the Scriptures: Cant. 6.9. 1 Timothy 3.15. Ephesians. 1.23.
as where it is called A Dove for the innocence thereof: The house of God,
because by his Word and graces, he does dwell in it, the body of Christ,
because Christ is the head thereof, giving life, and governing it, as well
generally, as in every particular member: Psalm. 147.12.
but where it is called Jerusalem, it cannot but mind me, how fitly it may be
compared to Jerusalem besieged by the Romans. Joseph. de bello Iudaico. lib. 7.
For as the foreign enemy did straightly beg(...)t the City without: and the
seditious tearming themselves, the zealous did most miserably vex it within:
So Gods Church is affronted by a double enemy, the one external, shooting
against it the arrows of blasphemous speeches, out of the bow of impiety;
slinging the huge stones of all manner of slanders and reproaches, out of the
Engine of maliciousness; battering the Walls of it, with the ram of
persecutions; wherein all glorious Martyrs, who by the effusion of their blood
defend the Gospel, stand like pillars, or rather more strongly than those
mighty Towers of Herod, which the enemies themselves admired: But the other
enemies are within the City, and they are ambitious of honor, who will be
counted zealous for the defense of it, notwithstanding they cast fire on it of
all sides, like as the Spaniards, Martin. Fumet. Hist. Hungar.
of Aldens company, in the Wars of Hungaria, fired the Castle of Lippa, which
they pretended to defend.

Certainly, these zealous enemies are more dangerous to the poor Citizens than
the other, for as Cyprian says, Cypr. lib. de vnitat Ecclesiae.
Facilior cautio est, vbi manifestior formido est; where the danger is more
manifest, apparent, and exposed to our view, there to avoid it is no difficult
matter, and therefore the Citizens of this besieged Jerusalem had need of
circumspect providence, as well to resist the one, as to suppress the other. I
say not what directions the Apostle, almost throughout this whole Epistle, has
given to the Romans, but to close up all, and least they might less regard the
seditious within, in the very end of his Epistle, he presents them in their
colors, that so be might leave his exhortation as it were freshly imprinted in
their memories. Now I beseech you brethren.

Which words are the vade vale, to the whole matter of the whole Epistle, and
as distinguished by two verses, so distinguished by two parts, for in the
former verse he does Orare, he does entreat them to mark, and to avoid
those that cause divisions and offenses: in the latter he does Narrare, he does
show the cause or reason why they should so do.

His request or entreaty has three parts, Verse 7.
the first is humilis introductio; a humble Introduction to the matter, wherein
we are to observe the form and manner of his speech, having two branches,
first the style of the Saints, brethren: secondly, his request made to them as
brethren. I beseech you. The second part of his entreaty is, docta descriptio,
a learned description of all such persons, from their unquiet minds; they are
not content to go to hell alone, but they tro(...) the Church; first with
unsavory doctrine, cau^^^g diusions; Secondly, with lewd manners causing
offenses, the impiety whereof is demonstrated a Contrario, by the contrary
laid against it. Such divisions and offenses, are contrary to the doctrine
which ye have learned. The last is Pia admonitio, godly counsel how we
should deal with them. And this conteyneth two precepts, first to mark them,
secondly to avoid them: thus far goes his request or entreaty, ver. 17.

The Narration contains an Aetiologie, that is an exposition of the cause or
reason why such men are to be avoided, which is threefold; the first is drawn
from the scope of their profession set down 1. Negatiuely, they serve not the
Lord Jesus Christ. 2. Affirmatively; but they serve their own belly. The
second is from the plausiblenesse of their behavior: they use first good
words, wherein we note their divine* like conference. Secondly fair speeches,
wherein we observe their moral eloquence. The third is from the effect of
their practice, which is to deceive, and seduce, what? the Heart, and of whom?
of the simple.

Of these particulars I intend an orderly discourse; first, craving your
patience to hear those persons named, against whose poison, so skillful a
Physician, as St. Paul was, thought good to confect so strong a potion; they
are in the common language of the Church, Heretics and Schismatickes, with
which names, and the reasons of them, and the difference betwixt them, I shall
briefly make you acquainted.

The enemies of the Church, her doctrine are Heretics.
First then Heretics, have their name from the word (...) which signifies
choosing, for that they make choice of a peculiar religion fitting their own
fancy, as in old time the Philosophers made choice of such a sect as they
liked best.

It cannot be denied, but that in the Scriptures this word is sometimes taken
in the best sense, importing no more but doctrine, as where it is said (...),
Acts 28.22.
etc. for as concerning this sect (or heresy) we know that every where it is
spoken against. Sometimes it is taken in the worst sense purporting the
doctrine of devils, maintained against the principles of religion. A man that
is an Heretic, after the first, Tit. 3.10.
and second admonition reject: but the use of the Church, (since Heretics
after the Resurrection, and more especially within the first five hundred
years, sprang up thickly among the people of God, as tares among Wheat,
swarming in the light of the Gospel, like Locusts of Egypt, and men, rejecting
the true way of Gods worship, made choice of peculiar manners of worships,
according to their several fancies,) has brought to pass, that this word is
only taken in the worst sense, so that from the word it self, it is easy to
define an heretic; What an Heretic is*
He is one that professes the name of Christ, and who maintains obstinately
any one, or more opinions, repugnant to the grounds of our Christian faith:
whereby he is distinguished, first from all licentious Christians, who, though
by their evil lives, they deny even that blessed name by which they are
redeemed, yet must we not call them heretics, for that they maintain no
opinion, that it is lawful so to do. Secondly, he is distinguished from Jews
and Turks, who deny the divinity of Christ; because they profess not
themselves to be Christians. Lastly, he is distinguished from such erring
Christians, who for want of a sound Judgment, misconceiue the very grounds of
Religion, as the Corithians did, for these you cannot call Heretics, if they
will yield unto wholesome doctrine, and do not with obstinate minds, maintain
their damnable opinions, so that in an Heretic three things concur. First,
he is a professor of Christian religion. Secondly, he is an obstinate defender
of his opinion. Lastly, his opinion is, repugnant to the fundamental points of
our Christian faith. And least any man should think this to be a small matter,
let him note that an Heretic is worse than a murderer, by how much the soul
is more noble than the body, for he is a killer, and a destroyer of the souls
of men; he is worse than an Infidel, for as one of the Fathers observes, he
is desertor fidei and oppugnator eius, a forsaker of the faith, and an oppugner
of it, which an Infidel cannot be, for he may be oppugnator eius, a resister
of it, but he cannot be desertor, a forsaker of it, because he never had it. In
a word, he is worse than a Schismaticke, because whereas the Schismaticke
quatenus, a Schismaticke breaks only the bond of love, whereby we are tied
one to another, the Heretic cuts the very throat of faith, wherewith we are
united to God himself.

Gods judgments upon Heretics.
Then stand amazed at Gods dreadful judgments, poured on such persons in this
life, like plagues on the Aegiptians, and fore-running their plagues eternal
in the life to come. Arius who denied the consubstantiality of the Son of
God, burst in sunder, Rufin lib. 1. cap. 13. Socr: lib. 1 ec, hist Cap. 25.
after the manner of Judas Iscariot, and his bowels gushed out. Montanus, who
gave forth of himself, as if he were that Comforter promised by our Savior,
and those two lewd women his Prophetesses Priscilla and Maximilla hanged
themselves. Eusebius. Ec. hist. lib. 5. cap. 13. and cap. 14.
Paulus Samosatenus, who denied Christ to be the natural Son of God, was
stricken in his body with a contagious Leprosy, he was excommunicated in all
Churches, and in the end deprived of his usurped Bishopric. Hierenim:
Catalog. Scriptor.
Manes who had amassed and heaped together diverse absolute heresies, out of
which he confected his venim, was imprisoned by the King of Persia, and by his
commandment skinned alive, Eusebius. Ec. hist. lib 7. cap. 30.
and his skin was stuffed full of chafe, and set up before the entry of a
certain City of Mesapotamia.

The Arian Bishops intending to meet in the Town of Nicomedia, Socr. lib. 1.
cap. 22. hist.

Socr. Ec. histor. lib. 2. cap. 39.


and there to consult together for the propagation of their heresy, the Lord
by a fearful Earthquake overthrow the Town to prevent their meeting.

Therefore let us fear to fall into any heresy, lest the Lord be as angry
with us, as he was with them, knowing that if we turn our faces against the
fundamental points of Christian belief, we are worse than murderers, we are
worse than Infidells, we are worse than Schismatics, Gods plagues hang over
our heads in this life, and eternal damnation in the life to come. The Lord
does hate, and therefore take revenge on the very places of heretical
conuenticles; a late experience we had in the ruins of certain rooms of a
house in this City, The house at the Blackfriars
nota est historia, though I fear it be almost forgotten such are the first
sort of the deceivers here mentioned, those that oppose the grounds and
principles of Christian religion.

The second sort we call Schismatiques, Schismatics are Enemies of the
doctrine taught in the Church.
from the word (...), which signifies division; because they divide themselves
from the body of the Church and Congregation, and have their conuents by
themselves, What Schismatickes are.

August. lib de quaesti. Euang. Secundu^. Matthew. Call. institut. de fide, cap. 8.


the difference between Heretics and Schismatickes, St. Augustine will have
to be, Quod illi falsis d^gmatibus, fidei sinceritatem corrumpant; hi autem
interdum etiam in fidei similitudine, societatis vinculum disrumpant: that
Heretics with false doctrine, do corrupt the sincerity of the faith, but
Schismatickes sometimes even in the similitude of faith, do break asunder the
bond of love. Whereby it is plain, that the properties of a Schismaticke are
these two; first, he must make profession of the faith; secondly, he must
divide himself from the body of the Church; and it skills not whether for some
point of doctrine, or for Ceremonies or any other thing with which he is
discontented: the matter is, he deuideth himself from the Church, and is
therefore a Schismaticke. Upon this reason was Lucifer, Bishop of Calaris in
Sardinia, justly taken and reputed as a Schismaticke, for that he divided
himself from Eusebius B. of Vercellis, Rufin. lib. 1. cap. 30. Ec. Hist.

Theodocet. Ec. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 4. and 5.


and from the Church of Antiochia, for that they disapproued the ordination of
Paulinus, whom he had ordained to be Bishop there.

A man would think it a small matter to be discontented, and therefore to be
divided for such a trifle: but it is that which St. Paul blames among the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3.3.
where there is among you envying, and strife and deuisions, are ye not
carnal, and walk as men? if carnal, Romans 8.1.
then not spiritual: for the flesh and the spirit are opposed. To walk after
the flesh is one thing, and to walk after the spirit is another thing. Upon
this reason Schismatics have not the Spirit of God, and therefore walk as
men, even as those that are carnally minded which is death. Romans 8.6.
For to be carnally minded is death: but to be spiritually minded, is life and
peace. If I dissemble not with you, or go about to deceive you, I must needs
conclude, with a learned Divine, Eulling. Dec. 5. Ser. 2.
that schisms are crimina atrocissima, most crying sins. For behold Gods
just judgments in one particular, upon the heads of Sschismaticks. Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, Number. 16.
made a division among the people of Israel, but the earth opened her mouth,
and swallowed them up alive. A judgment able to warn all succeeding ages, to
take heed how they go apart from the congregation of the Lord; and more
especially those that will separate themselves from our Church, for some few
Ceremonies and formalities retained therein. For the less cause they have to
do so, the greater is their crime. I pity the case of those that delight
more in private conventicles, than in public Congregations, and will be
divided, because they will seem to be singular, as the Scribes and Pharisees.
I would to God they were all of them acquainted with thus much of Cyprians
Theology, Cypr. lib. de unit. Ecclesiae.
Habere non potest Deum Patrem, qui Ecclesiam non habet matrem; He cannot have
God to be his Father; Of the particulars of the text, and therein first of the
first part, wherein he makes request, ver 17. wherein the first thing observed,
is his humble Introduction. Romans 1.7.
that has not the Church his Mother. But let us now see the particulars, that
we may receive direction how to deal with them.

1. I beseech you brethren.

Unto whom he writes his Epistle, them he saluteth by the name of Brethren.
These were not the Elders or Rulers of the Church only, but every one who
being called to the knowledge of the truth, made profession of the blessed name
of Jesus: To these he dedicated his Epistle, To all that be in Rome, beloved of
God, called to be Saints, and all these he here styleth by the name of
Brethren.

This is done upon a double reason; first, we have all one common Father, which
is God. One is your Father Which is in heaven. Mat. 23.9.
Upon which respect you shall never see the Apostle so uncharitable, but he
will repute the very Jews his brethren. Secondly, the members of the Church
are joined together in a more near fraternity, for God does become our Father
in Christ his Son, by faith we are made the sons of God. Ioh. 1.12.
As many as received him, to them gave he power to be the sons of God, and we
are adopted to be the heirs of God, Romans 8.17.
and joint heirs with Christ, it is therefore no indignity to the person of
the Apostle, to salute the meanest Christian by the name of Brother; and
account him so to be, for he is redeemed by the same price, and bought with
the same blood, he is the adopted son to the same Father, and has the same
inheritance. Why then should not the Apostle receive him and repute him as a
brother?

O ye that advance your selves above your brethren (and because ye have
place, either in the Church or Commonwealth, or gifts more excellent than your
brethren have, presumptuously thank God with the foolish proud Pharisee in the
Gospel, that you are not as Other men are) come hither and learn humility,
Luke 18.10.
lest because you exalt your selves now, God humble you hereafter: As good a
man as the best of you, Act. 9.15.
A chosen vessel unto God: As great a man as the greatest of you all, An
Apostle of Jesus Christ, Romans 1.5.
is joyous to be rankt in this fraternity. And when you shine in your gold
and silver, Act. 12.^1.
like Herod in his royalty, and with admiration of these outward things,
Physiolog. cap. 12.
like that (...) that boasting bird the Peacocke beholding his goodly feathers
with great rejoicing, then remember your poor kindred, if ye be Christ his
servants, the meanest Christian is brother to the greatest; he is redeemed with
the same blood; he is bought with the same price, and heir unto that
kingdom, to which all the kingdoms of the world are not worthy to be
compared; behold his nobleness.

And let that proud Commander of the world, who will be called Universal
Bishop, De Mayor. and Obed.

Vnam Sanctam in extrauag: Bonifacij 8. Durandu^ Council* Lat. Sub. Iulio 2.

Did 9. Innocent. De Mayor: and in obe. li: 50. lit^. in extrauag^ Ioh. 22 cap
cum inter nonnullos. in gloss^ finali in editione impressa Parisiis. 1503.


the head of the Church, the Ruler of both the Swords, the high Conveener of
Counsels, who dares to have it affirmed, that the whole world is his
Diocese, that he has all power both in heaven and in earth, that he cannot
be judged by all the Clergy, nor by all the people, that all Kings and
Emperors have all their power and authority from him, that he is seventy times
seven times greater than the greatest Kings, that his power is more ample than
all other Patriarchs, that he is the Lord God, no pure man, but something made
and compounded of God and man, who is wont to command Purgatory, and the fire
of hell, and to send the blessed Angels to fetch bring, deliver, and carry
souls out of Purgatory into heaven (with as good discretion as sometimes King
Xerxes commanded the great Mount Athos in Macedonia, to stand still, and not to
stir one foot out of his place, and to cause no trouble unto him or his
Army, upon pain of his high displeasure.) Let him learn humility well
suiting with Apostolical sanctity; let him stoop to the meanest Christian as
to his brother, let him note but the Apostles spirit, who though as an Apostle
he might command them, yet does he beseech them as his brethren rather
choosing to prevail by love than rigor,

And there are two reasons why the Apostle does rather entreat then command.
First, he is ardently zealous, the greatness of the cause moved him to be so.
For what is the danger? the public scandal of that blessed name by which we
are redeemed; the propagation of the Gospel hindered, those that give care to
the enchantments of these Sirens seduced, and their souls destroyed, the more
the danger is to be feared, the more ardent is his obsecration, I beseech you
brethren. Secondly, it is more suitable to the nature of a brother, to be
requested, then commanded by a brother: the faithful he will set free from
their Schoolmasters, Gal. 3.25. Gal. 4.18.
those that are led by the spirit, he subiecteth not to the law. And therefore
in all his Epistles you shall find him seldom or never commanding, always
entreating and beseeching vt precibus flecti possint, to bow them, and bend
them to their duties with his earnest suite, I beseech you brethren. Romans 12.1.
I beseech you brethren by the mercy of God, that ye present your bodies a
living sacrifice. I beseech you brethren, Romans 15.30.
for the Lord Jesus Christ his sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that ye
strive together with me, in your Prayers to God for me. I beseech you brethren
mark them which cause divisions and offenses. And from his humble
Introduction, he proceeds to his learned description, which is the second
thing that I observed in the first part.

Secondly, of the description of these evil disturbers.
Which cause deuisions and offenses contrary to the doctrine which ye have
learned.

He inditeth them of two capital crimes, Divisions and offenses by them
caused; which how o(...)ous and insufferable they are, lay but against them
says he, the doctrine which ye have learned, and ye shall easily perceive;
for Contraria iuxta se posita magis illucescunt, Contraries laid one against
another do appear more plainly and are more easy to be discerned, now these
are contraries, therefore you must compare them, and see how bad the one is by
the goodness of the other.

( Deuisions) the word is (...) which signifies discord, or disagreeing, and
it is here properly referred to opinions, so that it must necessarily implie
sects, and devisions in Religion, diverse doctrines, contrary to the truth of
Christ for so the text expounds it self.

The devil was the first deuider, for when God had joined all things together
in the best order, his study was to separate that which God had united. He
first caused a faction among the Angels in heaven, and with those whom he
found to adhere to his part, he left his habitation. He stirred up Schism,
Iud. 5.6.
He divided himself from God, and from the society of the blessed Angels.
He divided man from God, that if it were possible, he might also divide God
from man. He was the first that preached Heretical doctrine in Divinity; for
when God had said unto Adam, Of the tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil; thou
shall not eat of it; Genesis 2.17
for in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die. Or (as it is
in the Hebrew) dying thou shall die. Contrary to this the devil preached, Ye
shall not surely die: for God does know that in the day ye eat thereof, then
your eyes shall be opened, Genesis 3.4, 5. Genesis 4. Genesis 6.2.
and ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and Eu^ll. In the persons of Cain and
Abell, he divided the brother from the brother. He was the first that brought
in that ancient destinction the sons of God, and the sons of men. By his
study he is a deuider, and therefore properly called in our English tongue the
devil, from the word Diuello, which signifies to vnioyne or pull in sunder;
for he is always laboring to dissolve that which God has joined.

And hence it is, that when a Schism was made in old time in the Church, they
had wont to call the author of it the devils son. Paul called Elymas the
Sorcerer; Act. 13.10.
the child of the devil, St. John being at Ephesus bathing his body in a
Bath, in which Cerinthus the Heretic was also bathing, fled away, as if the
devil had been there, because Cerinthus the devils son was there. And when
Marcion the Heretic meeting Polycarpus, said unto him, Cognoscenos: pray know
us, take notice and acquaintance of us: Polycarpe made him this answer,
Cognosco te primogenitum Satanae. Yes, I take notice of thee, and I know thee
well enough, thou art the devils eldest son. Upon this Irenaeus makes this
grave conclusion. Iren lib. 3. cap. 3.
Tantum apostoli, and horum discipuli habuerunt timorem, vt neque verbo tenus
communicarent alicui little, qui adulterauerant veritatem; So greatly stood the
Apostles and their disciples in fear (lest Heresies and Schisms should
prevail) that they would not communicate, no not so much as in exchange of a
word with any of those who had depraved the truth of Christ. Upon this ground
divisions are noted; they divide us from God, and God from us: they divide us
from the Communion of the faithful, and the faithful from us: nay, they
subdeuide, for by Heresies and Schisms, even the wicked are divided among
themselves: they are the works of the devil, and they that cause them do as
the devil did; they are all ingenerall the devils sons, but those that
divide by heresy are primogeniti Satanae, the devils eldest sons, and
heirs apparent to his kingdom.

( Offenses.) The word is (...). that is to say, any manner of things whereat a
man stumbleth and takes harm; as stones or blocks cast in our brothers way,
occasions of sin, and such like. These are caused either Dictis or factis, by
their wicked doctrine, or by their lewd lives, and indeed those that cause
deuisions, cannot choose but cause offenses, upon the same reason, because they
cause deuisions; and therefore the Apostle says, (...). Divisions and
offenses; because the one is bred by the other, as the fruit is nourished by
the tree; or rather false doctrine and schism, is the vegetative power of
offenses.

It is true, that there is sometimes Scandalum acceptum, where there is not
Scandalum datum; an offense taken, where there is no offense given, as it is
like that a blind man may stumble, and fall in a plain foote-path, where
there is nothing laid in his way. But we are now disputing De dato scandalo,
of offenses given, and of those that lay blocks, and cast stumbling stones in
the way to overthrow their brethren, contrary to Christian charity, and
Christ's commandment, who has commanded us to love one another, (...). ^.34.
as he has loved us, and contrary to the Apostles rule, that we should
consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to good works.

Heb. 10.24.
Furthermore, upon what reason the Apostle does indite those that cause
deuisions, and not those only, but them also that cause offenses, it may
appear by the Scriptures which sets forth the causing of offenses to be a
most capital crime: for which cause God commanded the people of Israel,
utterly to destroy the old Inhabitants of the land of Canaan, left they should
cause offenses, and cast stumbling blocks in their way; Deuteronomy 7.4.
They will turn away thy sons from following me, that they may serve other
Gods. Our Savior Christ says, Woe unto the world because of offenses: it must
needs be that offenses come: but woe to that man, by whom the offense comes.
And woe to him to whom our Savior Christ says, Mat. 18.7.
Woe, for what said he a little before? It were better for him that a millstone
were hanged about his neck, verse. 6.
and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea.

But for what cause is a woe so grievous pronounced against him that causes
offenses? St. Paul gives the reason, 1 Cor. 8.11.12.
By this m^ane^ shall the weak brother perish, for whom Christ dyed: when ye
sin so against the brethren, and wound their weak conscience, ye sin
against Christ.

For Gods love take this to heart, ye of uncircumcised hearts and ears, who
never diue into the reckoning of it, what it is to wound the weak consciences
of your brethren: and I speak not to those only that makes deuisions in our
Church, either in matter of Doctrine or of Ceremony; (if there be any such
that hear me this day.) But to you that offend your brethren by your evil
lives, either in the abuse of Christian liberty to your lusts, as drinking to
drunkenness: dressing to pride: sparing to covetousness; eating to gluttony,
or such like: whereby that which is lawful, is used unlawfully, or else by
doing that which is absolutely unlawful, as Whore-mongers, Thieves, Usurers,
Liars, sweaters, and such like. You wound the weak consciences of your
brethren; ye cause your weak brethren to perish for whom Christ died: repent
and amend your lives, or let me tell you, that ye your selves will say
hereafter, that it were better if that a millstone had been hanged about your
necks, and that you had been cast into the depth of the Sea. For though it be
necessary that offenses should come, yet woe be unto you by whom they come.

I must now demonstrate this impiety a Contrario, as it were by laying white
against black, to discern the colors.

Contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned. This is the touchstone, at
which all deuisions and offenses must be tried: by this we must try the
spirits, 1 Ioh. 4.1.
whether they be of God. He had taught them the high and profound mystery of
Christian religion by authority of the Scriptures: now he condemns not simply
all deuisions, and all offenses, (...), with respect and relation, those only
that are contrary to Gods word, and the proportion of faith and manners, which
was that doctrine which they had learned at his mouth.

We must divide our selves from all Jews, Turks, Papists, Infidells and
Heretics; as the Israelites were divided from the abominations of Aegipt; and
if we cause offenses to them, as Lot to the Sodomites, and the faithful of
the primitive Church to the Idolatrous Gentiles, by the synceritie of our
Religion, and our good conversation we sin not, for this is bonum Schisma,
and bonum Scandalum, a good Schism, and a good scandal, which Christ himself
made, or rather which he professed to make* I am come to set a man against his
Father, and the daughter against her mother, Mat. 10, 35.36.
and the daughter in law against her mother in law, And a man's foes, shall be
they of his own household. But the unlawful deuisions and offenses, are those
that are made contrary to the Apostolical doctrine, the blessed word of God.
Ex illo (says one of the learned Fathers) fidem alimus: ex illo spemerigimus:
ex illo fiduciam firmamus: thereby we feed our faith, thereby we advance our
hope, Romans 1 16. ^ Tim. 3.15.
thereby we confirm our trust; for this is the power of God unto salvation to
all those that believe; this is able to make us wise unto salvation through
faith which is in Christ Jesus, and therefore though we, or an Angel from
heaven, preach any either Gospel unto you, then that which we have preached
unto you, let him be accursed (says Paul) but those that do so, let us now
see, Gal. 1.8.
how we must deal with them.

Thirdly, of the Apostles godly counsel how we must deal with them.
We must mark them, and avoid them, (Mark them) the word is (...), which
signifies, that we must be like unto those that sit upon watch Towers to
observe the coming of the enemy. For they that cause deuisions and offenses,
are the common enemies of the Church of God, and they come to destroy our
souls, and therefore we ought to be most careful to mark them. Secondly,
they come with all policy and subtilty, 1 Pet. 2.1.
and bring in their damnable heresies privily; and therefore we ought never to
be absent from our watchtower, but to have an eye unto them continually, left
they come upon us unawares, and suddenly destroy us, and as this is generally
the duty of all men, upon this reason, that every man has a soul, which is
his best part, and the choysest thing that he possesses, Mat. 16.26.
and more dear unto him than all the world ( for what is a man profited, if
he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man
give in exchange for his soul? So more especially it is the duty of those
that are in authority, either in the Church or Commonwealth, upon this
reason, that in the Scriptures they are called Watchmen, for how do they
watch, Eze. 33.6.
if they defend not Gods flock diligently against these ravening Wolves? And
against whom do they watch, Mat. 7.15.
if not against these enemies of men's souls.

Therefore let every man in general mark them, as they desire the salvation
of their own souls, but more especially the Magistrates according to their
places, as they will answer for the souls of those that shall be seduced. Whom
in the name of Christ I do beseech to be careful of it. Let them mark them
by making them known unto Gods people in their colors, as Paul marked
Hymenaeus and Philetus, and Alexander the Copper-smith: as St. John marked
Diotrephes: and our Savior Christ the Scribes, Mat. 16.6.
Pharisees, and Saduces, Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees,
and of the Saduces. Let them admonish the people to take heed of the leaven of
Jesuits, Anabaptists, Brownists, and all deuiders and offenders whatsoever,
and let them mark them to restrain their madness. Excellently St. Augustine
in his Epistle to Donatus, August. Epist. 127. a^ Denat.
Deputy of Afric, Sic igitur eorum peccata compesce, vt sint quos paeniteat
peccasse, Do thou so bridle their sins, that they may repent at heart, that
ever they have sinned.

A second duty subordinate to this our watching is the avoiding of them; for
if we mark them, we may avoid them, but if we mark them not, we cannot
avoid them, (...), be gone from them, and shun them, as men are wont to
run away from noxious beasts. Iren lib 2. cap. 19
For as Irenaeus says, they are like unto Hunters, and their intent is to make
a prey of you. Epiph Haeres. 34 Cont^. Marcofi^^.
Epiphanius does well compare them to the Serpent called Dypsas, which
poysoneth those pooles of water, at which he drinks, whence it comes to
pass, that the beasts which drink there, fall down dead suddenly, and burst
in sunder, being poisoned with the venim of the Dypsas. I cannot now stand to
dispute of cases of Conscience, how far it may be lawful for a man to
confer with those that cause Devisions and offenses* I will only press you
with the words of the blessed Apostle and Evangelist St. John, If there come
any unto you, 2 Ioh. 10.
and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him
God speed. And now I come to show the cause or reason hereof which is the
second part of my text.

Secondly, of the Narration or Exposition of the cause or reason. and therein,
first of the scope of their profession.

Mat. 10.40. Luke 10.16.


They that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly.
Those that serve Christ, especially in the work of the ministry, we are
commanded to receive: it is our Saviors doctrine; He that receives you
receives me. He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you,
despises me. By the rule of contraries, he that receives those that serve not
Christ, in the work of the ministry, he receives not Christ, but them and
him whose works they do, that is the devil: here then is the matter or first
cause whereupon we are not to receive them; nay, we must mark them, nay, we
must avoid them, they serve the devil, He that receives them, receives the
devil: he that marks them not, marks not the devil: he that auoideth them
not, auoides not the devil. A roaring Lion who would meet him? but how mad is
he that will receive him into his society, to be familiar with him? In three
things those that cause deuisions, and by deuisions offenses in the Church of
God, have relinquished the service of our Lord Jesus Christ. First, because all
such are most notorious hypocrites; for as the Serpent called Drynas, is like
the color of an Oken leaf, Epiph. Haeres. 65. Cont. Paulum Sam^sot.
whence he has his name, (and yet indeed is a venomous beast:) so though they
seem to be like Christians, they are not so indeed, but (to speak the truth)
no better than Jews. The Arian heretics gave forth of themselves, that they
only were the catholic Church of God: those that were members of the Church
indeed, they called sometimes Ambrosians, sometimes Athanasians, August.
Epistel. 48. ad Vincent.
sometimes Ioannites, in derision of the truth of God, which those holy and
learned Fathers, Ambrose, Athanasius, and John Chrysostom had preached: as now
the Papists call us sometimes Lutherans, sometimes Caluinists; sometimes
Zuinglians and Huguenots, in derision of the truth of God by them and us
maintained. Nestorius being a pestilent Heretic, yet as Theodoret says he
covered himself, (...). With a cloak or veil of the Catholic faith. And
Ebion, who maintained the opinion of the Samaritans, would yet as Epiphanius
says, be reputed a Christian. This they have learned of the devil, who to
deceive is transformed into an Angel of light. 2 Cor. 11.14.
By this means they get proselites and followers, whom they make twofold the
children of hell, Mat. 23.15.
more than they themselves are. Secondly, they are most cruel and bloody, I
ibide praescrip: aduers^ haeres: cap. 42.
Cum hoc sit negotium illis, non ethnicos conuertendi, sed nostros cuertendi,
says Tertullian, for their study is not to convert Infidells and Pagans to
the faith, but to throw down us that are Christians from the faith; and indeed
the persecutions caused by Heretics and Schismatickes, have been more bloody
than those which have been raised by Infidells and Pagans. I say not here,
that no age has heard of the like barbarous cruelty to the late intended
Gunpouder treason, but so many thousand glorious Martyrs butcherd: so many
millions of Confessors tortured; so many myriads of Godly men and women
persecuted, whose souls lie under the altar and cry with a loud voice and
saying, Reu. 6.10.
How long Lord holy and true, do thou not judge, and avenge our blood, on
them that dwell on the earth? All these shall witness with me, that the
tyrannous persecutions which have been raised within the Church, have been
greater then those which have been raised without the Church; and whosoever
makes deuisions, it is to be presumed, that he has the like will, though not
the like power. Lastly, their end is, that they may walk according to the
flesh; and therefore though they pretend much strictness, and reformation of
life and manners, by chastening the body, as it were to subdue it to the
spirit, it is but subordinate to some fleshly end; for they turn the grace of
our God into lasciviousness. Iud. verse. 4.
I will not stain your chaste ears with the fleshly deeds and godless
practices of such kind of people in all ages, by authority of Ecclesiastical
histories, and diverse Orthodox Fathers, which in some small measure I am able
to present unto your view; let it be sufficient to note with our Apostle this
one thing, that they have renounced the service of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
serve their own belly. Quid foedius, quid turpius? What more filthy, odious,
abominable, damnable, or detestable?

Where we note that the ( Belly) in the Scriptures is taken in a double sense;
properly, or figuratively in its proper sense, it signifies the belly of man
or woman, as where we read that Phinchas the son of Eleazar the son of
Aaron the Priest, thoust Zimry the man of Israel, Number. 25.^.
and Cozby the Midianitish woman, with his Iauelin through her belly: in its
figurative sense, it is taken sometimes for the heart, by the figure called
Synecdoche, When I heard, Habac. 3.16.
my belly trembled; that is to say, Commetum est cor meum quod est in ventre:
my heart in my belly was moved, sometimes it signifies the body of man; Psalm.
132.17.
Of the fruit of thy belly, will I set upon thy throne. Sometimes it
signifies particularly the womb; Psalm. 22.10.
Thou art my God, from my mothers belly. Sometimes it signifies a drunkard, a
gluttonous person, and one that is profuse and lavish, upon his own Lusts. So
Paul calls the Cretians (...), Tit. 1.12.
slow bellies. Sometimes it is taken for all worldly things, especially those
that conduce to the present maintenance of life; and in this sense the Apostle
says of such kind of people as those, concerning whom we now speak, their
god is their belly; Phil. 3.19.
as if he should have said, that they only regard the things of this world,
for them they study, and do their uttermost deuoire. Magister artis ingenique
Largitor venture, Ters.
their belly teaches them their skill, and bestows their wit upon them.

See here the meaning of that place, they cause not Deuisions and offenses,
contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel, for any care or conscience to serve
God, but to serve their belly, in acquiring the things of this life. And this
is an especial mark of infamy, with which they are always branded in the
Scriptures. Tit. 1.11.
Paul to Titus says, that they teach things which they ought not, for filthy
lucres sake. The Apostle Peter says, 1 Pet. 2.3.
through covetousness, shall they with feigned words, make merchandise of you.
And the Apostle Jude says, Iud. ver. 11.
that they run greedily, after the error of Balaam for reward.

This being their aim, we need not seek the cause, why those of the Romish
Church, so obstinately maintain their masses, Indulgencies, Pardons, and such
like Satanicall sigments, for (because they are separated from the Congregation
of the Lord) it cannot be, but their study is to serve their belly. Again,
this being their aim, we need not wonder if in this flourishing Church of
England, and as it were in the noone-tyde of the Gospel, as well the doctrine,
as the discipline of the Church, being agreed upon in public convocation, by
the learned and religious of the Land, and authorized by law, you have yet many
among you, who willingly would (and do as far as they dare) alter the form
of our public Church-Seruice, and Ceremonies: and feign would innouate
something, either in respect of substance or of circumstance, and if you have
Sects of Anabaptists, Brownists, Papists, Familists, Catharists, and those who
mislike all things but their own inventions. For what wonder shall I bring* if
that I tell you, that it is possible there may be covetous men among us? For, 1 Timothy 6.10.
the love of money is the root of all evil, which while some coueted after,
they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many
sorrows.

Now because these Leopards do hide their claws, and sometimes under the
profession of voluntary poverty do practice covetousness, the Apostle will
therefore show you wherein they hide them, lest because you see them not, you
may think them to have none: and so like children, play too familiarly with
them, not finding out their private end, their belly.

By good words and fair speeches. Secondly, the plausiblenesse of their
behavior.
The Doctors of the Romish Church among other blasphemies, are wont to teach,
that the holy Scripture is a nose of Wax, and a leaden rule, meaning thereby
that it may be bowed, This did they set forth openly at Worms, Anno 1557.
wrested, and turned to contrary expositions and interpretations, for the
maintenance of private opinions and absurdities. It is most blasphemous to say,
that the Scripture is so, and yet St. Peter takes it for granted, 1 Pet. 3.16.
that it may be wrested, yet with this Prouiso, to the destruction of them that
wrest it.

Mat. 7.15.
Now because it is true, that false Prophets shall come in sheep clothing to
deceive, therefore it does follow, that they shall bring nothing more than the
Scripture in their mouths, which they have wrested to their own damnation. A
thing which the devil himself has taught them, who when he tempted our
Savior Christ in the Wilderness, could yet cite the Scripture to his purpose.
If thou be the Son of God, Mat. 4.6.
cast thy self down, for it is written, he shall give his Angels charge
concerning thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee up, least at any time
thou dash thy foot against a stone. These are those good words the Apostle
speaks of, with which the mouths of all those that cause deuisions are
stufft; (...)en. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Adaptare cupientes ea, quae been dicta sunt, ijs quae male adinventa sunt ab
ipsis, Striving to fit those things which in the Scriptures are well spoken,
(according as there they are spoken,) to what they themselves have mis-inuented.

With these good words so ill employed, will the Valentinians go about to
establish their 30. couple of Gods and Goddesses: The Manichees their duo
Principia, or brace of gods: the Arians to deny the true divinity of Christ:
the Papists their Purgatory, their Transubstantiation, and all the parts of
their Mass: and every new deviser his own brain-sicke Fopperies: therefore as
good coyners are not wont hastily to receive, and to approve of every piece of
gold, but will first try it, and prove it by the touchstone (especially if it
be an unknown coin.) So if any man bring unto us any news in matters of
religion, and will thrust it upon us for gold, in the name of the Scripture, as
good coyners we must bring it to the Scripture, and compare Scripture with
Scripture, that so we may iudiciously discern and see Quis nummus probus sit,
quis adulter, which is good coin, which is Copper. And the reason is, because
it is the practice of those that serve their belly, to come with good words,
even with the most blessed words of the Scripture in their mouths, like as the
Hiaena is wont to counterfeit a man's voice to obtain his prey.

( Fair speeches.) I refer to their morality, by which they strive to be
complete every way. For it is the condition of an hypocrite, to counterfeit
virtue; for Hypocrisy it self as Chrysologus in one of his Sermons observes,
is virtutum fucus, Chrysolog. Ser(...).
the false painting or shadowing of virtue; therefore must they come with fair
language and virtuous speeches, that they may with more ease be received. It
is true, that their end is their belly, yet do their outward actions, bear
such a show of holiness and charity, that (to our shame it may be spoken) to
the sight of the world they exceed us far, And hence it is that so many
Churches, Temples, Oratories, Colleges, Schools of learning, Hospitalls,
Almes-houses, and other monuments of all sorts, which our eyes daily do
behold, have been erected even in the days of blindness: to say the truth,
we scarce repair and uphold those most necessary buildings of all sorts, which
our Progenitors, in the time that they drank of the waters of Babylon, have
erected to our hands. We must not belly the devil: you shall see more
almsdeeds of all sorts done by the hands of Papists: more strictness, and
reformation of life and manners, among Brownists, and Anabaptists: more
religious observation of oaths and promises among the Turks themselves, than
among the Formalists of our profession.

It is true, we cannot say these men to be virtuous, notwithstanding these
great works, for because their good deeds are directed to a wrong end, they
are but Vmbrae and simulachra virtutum, the shadows, pictures, August Fraefat.
in Psalm. 31.
and counterfeites of virtues, and as one of the Fathers says, vt magnae
vires, and cursus celerrimus praeter viam; like to great strength, and
exceeding swift running when a man is out of the way, because they proceed not
from the true faith, Heb. 11.6.
without which it is impossible to please God. Yet is it to be feared, that
our high calling in Christ Jesus, does hence receive a most bloody stabbe, for
that the general sort among us, want those fair speeches, and that morality
of life, of which our Adversaries brag, and with which they do deceive. Want
it did I say? nay, abound in the contrary; the Bribery of Courtiers, the
looseness of Clergy men, the infidelity of Lawyers, the prodigality of
Gentlemen, the deformed pride of Ladies, the poling avariciousnesse of
Citizens, and in this land of ours, Quicquid vidit Colchos, aut Phasis nefas,
Sense.
the very crying sins of Sodom and Gomorah, shall bear me witness.

Therefore as the third persecution of the Emperor Traiane, raised against the
Church of Christ, was counted greater than the two former, moved by Nero and
Domitian, upon this reason, that contempt and shame was added to their
afflictions; for it was no great dishonor to be hated by Nero and Domitian,
wicked men, and haters of righteousness, but to be hated and persecuted by
Traiane, a man accounted a pattern of upright dealing, this was a great
rebuke. In like manner, if in the eyes of the world they live more syncerely
than a great many of us, and seem to make conscience of their ways (which is
incident to all deceivers) they shall with their good words, and fair speches,
prevail (with less exception against them) to pull down the truth, than we
to set it up: and like as the fish are carried in the pleasant streams of
Iordane, sporting and floating, till they fall into the dead Sea, where by and
by they perish: so in the sweet streams of their good words and fair
speeches, do they carry their disciples (as it were sporting and floating in a
pleasant course) till on the sudden they fall to their own destruction. This
is added by the Apostle in the last place, and is the effect produced, a most
lamentable shipwreck both of soul and body, the heart seduced.

They deceive the hearts of the simple. Lastly, of the effect of their practice.
The Scripture attributes the whole rational power, the understanding, the
will, judgment, cogitation, consultation, election, and endeavor to the
heart. Upon which reason, God does most strictly require the heart, and will be
loved, feared, honored, and prayed to with the heart: that is to say, with the
whole reasonable soul, and with all the powers and faculties of the same: Rent
your heart, and not your garments: Joel. 2.15. 1 Samuel 16.7,
and turn to the Lord your God. A man looks on the outward appearance, but
the Lord looks on the heart. Upon this reason they are blamed in the
Scriptures, whose hearts are not right with the Lord their God: Isa. 29 13.
This people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor
me, but have removed their heart far from me.

This is the chief and principal part of man, if this be lost, all is gone,
for if the heart be not with the Lord, though the tongue pray, the hands give,
the knees bend, the eyes look up to heaven, and all the body do its duty, it
is but hypocritical service, because the heart is not right with the Lord.

See then, the Apostle describes a most miserable shipwreck, the whole man
cast away, because the heart is deceived. For if God have the heart, he will
have all the rest, if he have not the heart, he will have none of the rest:
and therefore when he does ask all, Prou. 23.26.
he does demand the heart. My son give me thy heart.

But with their good words, and fair speeches, they deceive the heart! Oh
whither goes that miserable man? Ruf^ exposit* in Symb*
He goes from the Church of God, which is Matter viuentium, quam aedificauit
Deus in ipso summo angulari lapide Christo, the Mother of those that are
elected to life eternal, which God has builded in Christ Jesus, the chief
corner stone. In going from it, he goes unto the synagogue of Satan, the mother
of those that are ordained to destruction, because not built, or not rightly
built upon Christ Jesus the chief corner stone. He goes from Gods mercy, and
all the sweet promises of God in Christ Jesus unto life eternal, unto Gods
justice, and the malediction of the Law, to everlasting death; he
relinquisheth the society of all the faithful upon earth, which is by grace in
this life, and in so doing has no possibility (if he continue unto his last
gasp) to enjoy the company of the blessed Saints in heaven, which is by glory
in the life to come.

Cyprian does well affirm the Church to be Noah's Arc, without the which there
is no salvation. Cypr. lib. de Vnitat: Ecclesiae.
For like as he that falls out of a Ship into the Sea, on which side soever
he falls, if he be not drowned, he is in great danger of drowning: so he
that falls away from the Church, by what Sect, Schism, or heresy soever, if
he fall not to his destruction by it, he is in great danger of it.

My exhortation therefore is the very same with the wisest of Kings, Keep thy
heart with all diligence; Prou. 4.23.
for out of it are the issues of life. God requires it as his part, that he
may save thee; the devil seeks to win it, that he may destroy thee; if he can
win thee from the right faith, he will pull thee from the Church, if thou art
drawn from that, thou art withdrawn from God: therefore keep that, and
stop thy cares against the melodious tunings of these Sirens, be of ripe age
in understanding and if by good words and fair speeches, they prevail on the
simple, let them not prevail on thee. Thus have you the Quid, and do see what
is seduced ( the heart.) Now come we to the Cuius, that we may see whose heart
is deceived, that is to say, the heart of the simple, they do soonest of all
lend their ears to good words and fair speeches.

There is a twofold metaphorical simplicity, the one is opposed to learning,
knowledge, and good manners: and hence it is that rude, barbarous, rustic,
illiterate, and mannerlesse people, in the Scripture have the name of simple
men. How long ye simple ones, Prou. 1.22.
will ye love simplicity? the other is opposed to craft, guile, fraud,
injustice, oppression, and such like vices. And hence it is that plain dealing
men, void of fraud and deceit, Masters of their words, moral honest men, in
the sight and appearance of the world, are called simple men. So shall you
read that Esau was a cunning hunter, Genesis 25.27.
a man of the field: and Jacob was a plain man dwelling in tents: Clauis
scripturae v^ce simplex.
or (as Illyricus and others translate) a simple man, dwelling in tents: In
like manner, St. Paul says in this same chapter, Romans 16.19.
I would have you wise unto that which is good, and simple concerning evil.

Now, these second sort of simple ones are of two sorts, Regenerate, or
unregenerate; the Regenerate may for a time, as it shall please God to try and
prove them, be separated from the Church; yea, in time of persecution, they may
deny that blessed name by which they are redeemed, Mat. 26.70.
as Peter did, but they shall not die in their separation, Romans 8.1.
for there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, the
unregenerate may be deceived, and deceived finally, and by Gods just judgment
perish in their sins, because they were seduced, and opened their hearts to
those that caused deuisions and offenses, and both these sorts of simple ones,
as well the regenerate, as unregenerate, are those that are here noted to be
deceived, by the good words, and fair speeches of seducers. For the words are
(...), which words are well translated by Theodorus Beza, hominum minime
malorum; that is to say, men not drowned and plunged in the usual sins, and
vices of the world.

And this may teach us two things. First, that we join not our selves to any
of those Sects, that are divided from our Church, which is a member of the true
Catholic Church of God, whether Papists, Anabaptists, Brownists, Familists, or
what else you may call them, for that we observe many excellent Ministers,
endowed with many rare and admirable gifts and qualities, to teach their
heresies; for such a one was Arius the Heretic. Ioaech: Camerat. iuaicat.
haeres. de Ario.
And we can neither deprive our Adversaries of the Church of Rome; nor diverse
others, that in other kinds trouble our Church with strange opinions, of that
honor, if yet we may call it honor, and not rather Gloriam Herostrate, such
honor as Herostrotus achieved by firing the Ephesians Temple. For what if
they have learning, wit, and eloquence? what if in outward gifts they shine as
the Stars? Reu. 12.3.
is not that great red Dragon in the Revelation, said to draw with his tail
the third part of the Stars of Heaven, and to cast them to the earth? or has
not the devil at all times gotten such to make deuisions, and to cause
offenses.

The less ought we to admire, if they win to be their disciples and
proselites, ciuell honest men, whom the world, for the morality of their
lives, holds in some esteem; for such were they whom Absalom, by fair
speeches and large promises, had drawn to his part against the King his
father, 2. Sam. 15.
even to commit treason, and rebellion with him. Such because they mean least
hurt, are soonest deceived, like unwary fishes taken in a Net. and being
deceived, do much advantage the devils cause, for that their lives are had in
admiration, and they have gained the good opinion of their neighbors, for that
syncerity of which they make profession; no less than the Scribes and
Pharisees. Ne aetas vos little, nec authoritas fallas; (...) 5 Presbyt:
S^^isma(...)s, Epist. 40.
Let not their age, let not their authority deceive you, faith Cyprian. Again,
we must not vncharitaby judge them to be utterly cast away, all who decline
from, or leave our society, for that the heart of a regenerate man, may for a
time, (God turning his face from him, that he may be troubled) be deceived,
but rather let us pray that their fall be not final, and if it please God of
his mercy, to send them back again unto us, let us not refuse them as Nouatus
did, for that they have sinned so scandalously against our good profession, to
the dishonor of God and of our Church, I will end here with the words of
Cyprian, Sufficiat lapsis vna ruina. etc. Let one fall be sufficient to those
that are fallen, let no man deceitefully throw down those that are willing to
rise up again: let no man press down more grievously, those that already lie
flat on the earth, for whom we pray that God with his hand and arm would help
them up; let no man deny the hope of life to those that are half dead,
desiring to return to their former health. Nemo nutantibus lapsus sui
Caligine, omne itineris salutaris lumen extinguat; Cypr. Epist. 40. de 5.
Presbyt.
Let no man put out all the light of a secure voyage, to those that stagger in
the darkness of their fall. And seeing that those whose hearts are deceived
are fallen down, lie groueling on the earth gasping for breath, and grappleing
for life, and being ready to die, do lie in darkness, and in the shadow of
death, it follows that those who deceive their hearts, throw them down,
stabbe them, and wound them even unto death, therefore that I may draw to a
conclusion, I will bind up all that hitherto has been spoken in the words of
the text. Now I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause deuisions, and
offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. For
they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Chrest, but their own belly, and
by good words, and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple.

And now to recapitulate what has been spoken, you must remember, that the
enemies of the Church and people of God are of two sorts, foreign and
domesticke, the first are those that make no profession at all of
Christianity, neither will be so reputed, as Jews, Turks, Infidells, and
Pagans, the other are those who make profession of Christian religion, and will
be accounted Catholics and Christians, these are of two sorts, Heretics or
Schismatickes, the one does cut in sunder the band of faith; the other does
make a breach in the knot of love.

Against these St. Paul addressing himself, beseeches all faithful men as
his brethren to mark them, and to avoid them, upon this reason, that they are
most dangerous enemies to the soul* causing deuisions and offenses in the
Church, contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel.

Now, least this his fatherly counsel might be slighted, he proceeds to show
the cause or reason, upon which we are to mark them, and avoid them, viz.
their aim is not to serve God by so doing, but they have worldly respects,
tending to their own advantage, they talk like Divines, and demean
themselves like moral honest men, by which means those that are plain, and
mean well, are soonest deceived, like harmless Doves, caught in the Fowlers
Net.

Upon which great causes (that I may end with application) I am bold to direct
my speech first to those that are in authority, The duty of Magistrates.
whom (though I cannot accuse for former negligence, and even in my own
conscience, am confident that they will carefully discharge their duties in
their several places with wisdom and judgment) yet do I desire that they
will be pleased to let me mind them of it, as sometimes Philips servant minded
him of his mortality. God and the King has committed the Sword unto them, Romans
13.4.
which Sword they bear not in vain. Therefore by the power of the sword
committed to their trust, may they mark those that cause deuisions, and
offenses, contrary to the doctrine that we have received.

This doctrine is the truth of God, The doctrine of the Church of England; the
39. art.
taught and delivered in the blessed Scriptures, which that we might hold with
unanimous consent, and not divert from it, it was agreed upon in certain
Articles in the Convocation, confirmed by the royal authority: which Articles
are a declaration of what our Church approves in the most principal points
concerning says and the public service of God.

Let me beseech them to mark those that cause deuisions and offenses,
contrary to that received doctrine. Yet with a just distinction as well of the
persons of those that cause deuisions and offenses, (for some are obstinate,
and some are tractable) as also of the deuisions, and offenses by them caused
and maintained; (for of those also, some are damnable, some only dangerous,
and to the honor of the Church of God scandalous.)

For the better effecting of this, let me remember them further, that the old
Aegiptians, who were not altogether sottish in worldly matters, were wont to
paint their Judges blindfolded, and their President or chief Justice without
hands, as intimating that Justice should neither see the person of any man, or
feel his reward; which if it be to be practiced in matters temporal: how
much more in this great matter, which so nearly and merely concerns the
souls of men?

Secondly, let me beseech the Ministers of the Word (whom Christ calls for
the work of their profession, Mat 9.38. 1 Cor. 4.1.
the laborers of his harvest; who are the ministers of Christ, and stewards of
the mysteries of God.) To look back upon those forenamed Articles, The duties
of the Ministers of the Word.
and to remember whereunto they have all subscribed with their own hands; not
with equivocation I hope as Arius, but with synceritie, and with a good
conscience, as good Christians ought to do, and more especially; as men of God
should do, and therefore jointly with their hearts and mouths, to stand in
defense of that truth unto which they have given their hands. On the other
side, if any man preach another Gospel, or defend or maintain any contrary
opinion, by which the peace of our Church is disrupted, with such a one,
according to the Apostol call counsel to have conference, and to admonish him,
to return to the soundness of faith, and into the bosom of our Church, like
Noah's Done into the Arc again. Tit. 3 10.
A m^n that is an Heretic; after the first and second admonition, reject.
Where I desire them to observe that ( admonition) in that place is (...), which
word points out the end and purpose of our trauells, rather than the pain
and labor of them; namely, to put a right mind into him, or to bring him into
his wits again. For he is mad, as Nazianzen spoke of Apollinaris; and as
Eusebius says, that Manes was mad, according to his name, therefore must we
labor to reduce him to his right wits again. Indeed to cure a madman,
seems to be a most miraculous thing, seeing how few will be reclaymed. But
let us not despair, seeing that God has sometimes blessed the labors of his
servants in this kind. Berillus Bishop of Bostra in Arabia, Eusebius. Ec. Hist.
lib. 6. cap. 33.
who denied that Christ was existent before he took flesh of the Virgin, by
the painful travel of Origin was brought into his wits again. In like
manner Coracion, Eusebius Ec Hist. lib. 7. cap. 24.
who had been infected with the error of Nepos an Aegiptian Bishop, father of
the Chiliastes, was converted to the faith by Dionysius B. of Alexandria. But
if none of our admonitions will prevail with them, (but because they are
filthy, they will still be filthy) let us then reject them, for their profane,
2 Timothy 2.16.17
and vain babblings, will increase unto more ungodliness, and their word will
eat as does a Canker. Let us have no more acquaintance with them, than the
Jews had with the Heathen men or Publicans, or St. John with Cerinthus.

Let those that have authority in the Church, after the example of the
Apostles, and the godly Fathers of the prime age of the Church, deliver them to
Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme. 1 Timothy 1.22.
And let us, after the like examples, utterly avoid their company and
society, as knowing them to be the devils sons, which do gigantum more,
bellare cum dijs, war against God, as the Poet feigned certain monstrous
Giants to wage war against the gods. Let us leave to converse with them which
say they are Jews, and are not, Reu. 2 9.
but are the Sinagogue of Satan. In a word, if we cannot convert them, let us
be sure to avoid them, and utterly to reject them, lest God say unto us, as he
said to the Angel or Bishop of the Church of Pergamos, thou have them that
maintain the Doctrine of Balaam, etc. For if we proceed not against them, by
that lawful power which God and the King has given us, or if we will not do
so much as to avoid them, it cannot be denied, but that we have them.

The peoples duty.
Lastly, let me speak a few words in the ears of the people; and because they
are of two sorts, either those whose hearts are deceived by good words, and
fair speeches, or those pillars of the sons of Seth, against whom the floods
of Beliall, which have even ouer-flowen the world, like the great and general
Deluge, have not prevailed.

Let me first direct my speech unto those that are fallen (whom I will not
terrify with the greatness of their fall, by pointing upward from whence they
fell, and downward to let them see whither they are fallen) I beseech them to
look on our Christian charity, who do not esteem them to be Heretics or
Schismatickes, but do deny them so to be, unless with obstinate minds, they
will defend and maintain their dangerous conceits.

My counsel unto such therefore is, that they will resort to our Sermons and
Lectures, where they may hear the reasons given in public, for the faith
which we profess; and if jointly with this they will follow Christ his
counsel, searching the Scriptures, adding instant prayer unto God, that he
would be pleased to reveal unto them the mysteries thereof, they shall do
well; and I doubt not but they will return again into the bosom of our
Church, to be ingrafted as natural branches into the true Olive, from which
for a time they have been cut off, and we shall rejoice exceedingly that they
are come again; yea, the Angels of God in heaven, shall joy for their
conversion.

Secondly, to those whose hearts are not yet inuenomed, let me speak a word in
due season; Romans 1.5.
Obedience must be given to the faith. Therefore let them cleave close unto it,
and not suffer themselves in any sort to be seduced. It is a rule to interpret
the Scriptures. Let them expound the Scriptures according to the proportion of
faith. For if they meet not in all places with the natural sense, and the
direct meaning of the holy Ghost, for that in the Epistles of St. Paul, and
diverse other books of the Scripture: Some things are hard to be understood; 2
Pet. 3.16.
yet so long as they interpret nothing contrary to the Articles of their faith,
August. de Doct. Christian: lib. 1. cap. 37.
Augustine will tell them that they are like unto a certain traveler, who
having lost the direct way, wandreth in those fields that lead to the Town,
whither he is bent to go. Three sorts of people marked.
And being it is Gods cause, let me beseech them to mark, and to avoid three
sorts of people. First, those whose teaching does give way unto them, either
directly or indirectly to commit, or to continue in any manner of sin.
Secondly, those who deny either all, or any part of due obedience to the
minister of God, the lawful Magistrate, whether it be the King, or any other
subordinate power. Lastly, those who are wont to wound the Magistrates person,
and to speak evil of the Ruler of Gods people, by noting unto the people his
personal sins and vices, either in public or in private, to the end to make
him odious in the eyes and ears of men. For the Apostle Jude will have these
things to be the true notes and marks of most mischievous foule-killers. These
filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil of
dignities. Iud. ver. 3.


And God Almighty bless this, and what has been said this day unto your
hearts, so that you may all bring forth the fruits thereof in your lives and
conuersations, to the glory of his great name, who lives forever. Amen.

1 COR. 16.22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ,
Let him be Anathema Maranatha.

FINIS.

