An Epitaphe declaryng the life and end of D. Edmund Boner etc.
LO now the lingering hope is past, that late the Papists had:
Their braggyng breasts which boild in hate, their hearts with care have clad.
They looked long for wished time, of Antichrists return:
When they in wonted wise might spoil, and heaps of Martyrs burn.
But see the providence of God, their malice to assuage:
He has bereft these Papists proud, the pillar of their rage.
Their whip, their sword, their fire brand, of wrath their chefest stay:
The spoyler of the Christian flock, of whom he made a pray.
For bloody burning Boner now, has made exchange of life:
That whilesome was the murderer, of infant, man, and wife.
Yet sometime be a ^auorer, and did profess the troth:
Defiyng Pope and Popishnes, five times with solemn oath:
And let not for to accuse, and note of heinous crime:
Such as were slack to do the like, during Lord Cromwels time.
A learned Epistle eke he wrat, in praise and in defense:
Of Bishop Gardiners work the book, of true obedience.
Wherein he does accuse the Pope, his Church and Romish rabble:
Of heinous crimes right horrible, and deeds detestable.
As tyranny, vsurpyng state, reprochefull unto God:
Of England eke a very spoil, to Christ his flock a rod.
He names the Pope a greedy wolf, he joys in his decay:
Hopyng the truth long trodden down, at length should bear the sway.
He prayseth much the noble Prince, and calls K. Henry virtuous:
That in suppressyng Popish power, he is so studious.
Whereby most plainly may appear, how Boner had a taste:
Of Christ and of his Gospel pure, tho he them scorned at last.
In Denmark eke Ambassador, he published with speed:
The book and Epistle named before, as worthy works in deed.
Then sent Ambassador to France, from Henry puisaunt King:
He furthered with free consent, the English Bibles Printyng.
And caused diverse of the same, it seemed of godly zeal:
For to be plast within Paul's Church, Christ's truth for to reveal.
He causde five hundred Testamentes, be Printed, this I know:
And those as precious jewels did, upon his friends bestow.
But as a wavering weather cock, Lord Cromwell being dead:
Forsaking Christ and all his laws, to papistry he fled.
And of a Paul became a Saul, a Herod thirsting blood:
As on young Mekins well was seen, his cruel killing mood.
For when one quest had cleard the boy, and iudgd him giltles quite:
He causd another Quest be called, and him condemnd by might.
Thus drove he forth king Henry's days, but when his noble son:
In fathers place to regal throne, by due desent was come.
Then called to count for his offense, as justice thought it fit:
In humble wise before the Lords, himself he did submit.
But afterward most stubburnly, with great contempt and scorn:
He did deny his former fact, as one, ere then forsworn,
For which offense in prison cast, where he with wealth was fed:
Without regard of God or prince, a peruerst life he led.
But when in brothers sacred seat, God would Queen Mary place:
This wilful man from prison called, by her especial grace,
Abusing much the lenity, and mercy of the Queen:
Such bloody broils began to brue, as erst was never seen.
And like a roaring Lion he, of Plutoes poisoned band:
Made havoc of the saints of God, his Christ he did withstand.
He trod his gospel under foot, as much as in him lay:
With tormoyle great, and torments huge, the Church he did affray.
And pity none would he allow, no mercy might him move:
His broyling breast enflamed so, with popish fathers love.
With coals and candle light also, of some the bands he brent:
Of some the hair, from of their face, with cruel claws he rent.
Some men he beat upon the face, but some, most like a beast:
He scourgd with whips and rods (O wretch) that deed, all men detest.
And breathing forth his tyranny, consumde with fire and flame:
The old, the young, the rich, the poor, the halt, the blind, and lame.
that should I say, my heart it rues, the peoples tears record:
The wayled woes for saints so slain, which is to be abhorde.
But all this might not move his mind, for wit gave place to will:
Both grace and reason fled him fro, his heart was hardened still.
But when God of his providence, our famous Queen did send:
To stay the rage of tyranny, and wastfull wreakes to end.
The mercy of Elizabeth, tho it does far exceed:
Could not reclaim his cureles heart, which errors still did feed.
But that he used irreverently, with scoffs in mocking wise:
Her graces high Commissioners, both worthy, grave, and wise.
So when the people prayed for him, reprochefull words he gave:
Most vile, not christianlike, as one that had a soul to save.
The second time to prison brought, where he his life did leave:
Where learned men persuaded him, unto the truth to cleave,
And fly the fancies of the fond, wherewith he was abusde:
Unwilling still to hear them speak, good Council he refusde.
So that until his dying hour, he showed no perfect sign:
Of a repentaunt heart or mind, that would from sin decline.
But as he liude a lothed life, unconstant, vile, and vain:
Forsaking faith and natures kind, which God has in disdain.
His glory aye the peoples grief, the poor man's pain his pride:
(A woeful flock where such a wolf, appointed was for guide)
Even so his end was doleful to, wherein did well appear:
On him the judgment just of God, right wonderful to hear.
For dead his face as black as coal, and monstrous withal:
His grisly look so terrible, as might a man appall.
Was to the good a very glass, wherein they all may learn:
To shun, the way that Boner went, and better path deserne.
Yet tho in life he would not grant, Christ's mercy for to crave:
He wild his wretched Corpse with pomp, brought should be to the grave.
Unto the Church whereas sometime, a Prelate plast was he:
Even there his solemn obsiquies, and funerals to be.
But since it was so far unmeet, a place for him more fit:
Within the Churchyard of S. George, he has a homely pit.
And since he loved not the light, but did the same despise:
At midnight was he buried there, from vewe of peoples eyes.
Wherefore ye Papists all beware, forsake this Romish whore:
And fear the Judgments of the Lord, which will you else devour.
Recant ye all your heresies, and leave your perverse way:
Wherein you walked so stubburnely, so long and many a day.
Love God, obey your sovereign, and pray for her estate:
Renounce ye all your Maummetry, least ye repent to late.
T. Bro. the younger.

Finis.
Imprinted at London, by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

Cum gratia and Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


