Observations Upon The first ten FATHERS. By H. BROVGHTON.

Imprinted at London by W. White dwelling in Cow-lane. 1612.

OBSERVATIONS Upon Adam, Seth, Enosh, Kenan, Mahalaleel, Iared, Enoch,
Methuselah, Lamech, Noah: the first ten Fathers. 1. Chro. 1.
1 IN that all men which have been since the Hood, come of those ten
Patriarchs, all may be counted faulty, that regard not the History of such
their own and most noble Ancestors: all faithful Christians; all recorded
thrice in the Writ of truth for their age. Genesis 5. and 6. And all recorded in
three Books for their line. Genesis 3. 1. Chr. 1. Luke 3.

2 Seeing Jews and Gentiles both agree, that CHRIST is the glory of all men;
all should think that the Holy spirit would not begin his Line, to leave it
afterward imperfect (as the wicked Jews now know it not) but would continue
it through unto himself; as in S. Luke it is chayned from Ely Mary's father,
up to Zorobabel, Nathan, David, Adam.

3 While these men lived in the world, there was but one Tongue, that in which
Adam spoke, What Tongue Adam and Eve palce.
and was fit to argue his Angel-like wit; which the same, the holy Spirit
used in all the Books of the old Testament, and has not left it in any other
Writer extant; but has ended it with the old Testament. Their Language so
witty and so sanctified, should be known of all their (not bastardly) race,
what worthiness it has, In some generality.

4 That Adams Tongue was the same which Moses used, the Notations do show in
Adams words: He calls her which was taken out of his side, Isha;(in the
morning presently upon her creation) because she was taken from Ish. That
Language held unto In Malachies age the old Testament ended, and authentical
Ebrew. The h^d Apocrypha is not in that tongue, nor penned by the holy spirit.
Malachy: Ish for Man, Isha for Owman, or Of man.

5 The same appears in the name which he gives to the woman in the evening
of the same day, upon the promise of Life; Eua or Ch-Eua, Life: from a term
of living, Chaya, flowing out of the same spring.

6 Eua declares the same Tongue to be her Tongue: For she names her first
son Kain, Possession; from the verb Kanah to possess: showing that to be
the reason of his name, because she possessed a Son by the Eternal.

7 The other names, A digression to Habel and Kayn.
Adam, Earthie, of Adama Earth. Habel, Vanity, are plain of them selves, and
often touched in glaunces; as Col Habel, Col Adam; the whole that comes of
Adam, is wholly Vanity. Psa. 39. 6. And all Adam, Man is Habel. Psalm. 39. 11.
And, truly the sons of Adam are Vanity. Psalm. 6. 2. 11. Adam is like to
Habel, Man to Vanity. We may not think it a small matter, when the matter is
so often handled by the spirit of all Wisdom perfect, that has nothing
superfluous. Thus we may find the ^^^guage of our first Parents, what it was ^
and moreover how it was most fit for perfect Wisdom; and how the first
persons contain all man's estate. Adam the earthy man, what possession (Kynian)
soever he gate; all is (Habel) vanity. The Man (Chaya) lives by the promise
in CHRIST.

The words of Rabbi Bochai touching Kain and Habel, are in mine opinion worthy
citing: and the enemies own testimony for a truth, should be not the worst.
Thus Bochai says. In a witty sense Kain and Habel conteyne in their names
aduertisementes, and close glaunses for matter of true continuance, and
corruption* Kain, betokens Possession in this world: and Habel betokens one
humbled in mind, and holding such possession vain. Such was his offering,
Sheep kind; the gentlest of all living beasts: and therefore the favor of
God followed him. And the offering of Kain was of the fruict of the Earth, as he
loved the possession of this world, and the service of the body (which yet can
have no continuance) and followed after body lusts: Therefore the blessed God
favored him not. This the Rabbin speaks, glauncing at their names. Diuiner
matter from their persons and doing, we are taught: That Kain was of the
Serpent, and hated his brother, because of good works. Also just Habels
slaughter, the first that dyed, was an effectual proof, that for beng just,
the best should die: as our Lord tells the Jews how Habels blood shou^^ be
required at them, murhterers of him. And the faythles Hebrew Docters are at
their wits end, as touching what Gods counsel was, in that good Habel should
so be kilde. The Apostles compare them with Cain; Habel with Christ, suffering
for goodness. But my degression, drawing unto the ten Fathers to collateral men,
may not be long; I will go to the right line.

1 Seth commeteh Adams heir. His name in Adam tongue and ours, falls a like;
Set, or settled sure. Eve named him Seth, because God has Set me an
other-gates Seed in stead of Habel, for Kain slew him, and proved his days
to be Habel, Vanuie. Genesis 3. 25. Adam approved the same name, as knowing that
he should be the sure-setled, when all other Familyes should end by the Flood.

2 Therefore Balaam speaks, that all the Sons of Seth, that is, all Nations
(all come of him) sh^lbe unwalled by Christ; and taught by doctrine or
experience, that all their strength is nothing Number. 24.

3 It is a good meditation to think of Adam, Habel, and Seth; how the
Scripture conferreth all three with our Lords cases: Adam the earthy, with the
heavenly: Habels blood, with our Saviors: and Seths families, with his
conquestes.

4 Adam and Eve both agreeing for the name Seth, gave a doble witnessed warning
to the world, that as Kain was cursed, so other families joining with his,
should feel in the Flood, the curse of all the earth, that they should better
regard Seths right line.

5 The Scripture tells in Seth only in plain sort, that after Adams image
and likeness he was borne, because he was the fittest to show what all Adams
^ace was, being the first in the line continued still: and as he was, so must
all be.

6 The Jews commonly Some Iewe^ of malice study to perue^^ all Christians
doctrine: as this man, Abrabbaneel, or, Barbinel, a Rabbine of great pains and
wit, bu^ not of grace: and only to b^ followed when he clearly is on our
side. Without then our age can not fear^ (...) things: and much they (...) the
unacquainted with them.
pervert the meaning of the terms: The Image and likeness of Adam. Thus
Abrabbaneel expounds it. page 39. Because Adam was excellent in his likeness
and Image intellectiue, God like; Seth came forth like unto him in that image
and likeness which God made in him: For he was a wise son, and in his
wisdom and understanding, he was like his Father; which was wiser then all
men, being the frame of the hands of God. And hereupon it is said; And he
beg^t according to his own likeness, according to his own image: That is,
he begot a Son which should issue in the likeness and wi^te of Adam: the
wit^e, and of knowledge; and therefore his name was called Seth, by a term of
stablishment and settling: because he saw by his Wisdom, that his seed should
be settled in the world. And therefore it was not spoken so of Kain or Habel,
because they were not after the likeness of Adam, and should not have
continuance in the World, but their end should fail. This doctrine is badde.
Every man is borne the Foale of a wild Ass, and conceived in sin, and dead
in sin, and a child of wrath naturally. Kain, Habel, and Seth, were all three
borne after the image of the earthly: Kain continued therein; Habel and Seth
were borne again. The mention of natural corruption, or Adams image and
likeness in Kain or Habel, had not touched us so much as in our own Father:
So the name of Seth is frowardly applied by him to Adam likeness; for all
Adams, is all Habel: His continuance and settled state was by Gods favor, not
by his wit or wisdom. His other Families proved that.

7 Against the Jews Yet in all other of Seth, they held the nature of all men,
corrupt. But that point was very needful to be cleared to the full.
common error, our Lord teaches Nicode^^s, that the Sons of Seth, and all
of Adam, must be borne from abone, or they enter not into the kingdom of
Heaven: and so much^ ^oses meant, to tell of Adams corrupt image in Seths
birth; not of that which he first had, and lost.

8 Enosh is next Seth, his Son, much to be considered. The letters of his
name in the appellatiue, signify Sorrowful, Grievous, and the like; and that
very often in Scripture. Moses gives closely a reason of Seths counsel at the
naming of him so, Tremellius, Tum caeptum est profana^i in inuocando nomine
Jehouae.
saying: Azhuchal, Then sprang Corruption, touching the calling upon the name
of God.

9 Men not acquainted very much with Scripture, would marvel why any would
cite the Text so, seeing it is commonly translated thus; Genesis 4. 26.
Then men began to call upon the name of the Lord. So Moses may be translated;
AZ huchal, Then was a Beginning. The Greek draws near unto that. The Latin
translation called S. Ieromes, follows that, and many others.

10 This point cannot be well weighed, A digression for a matter of some
difficulty.
without judgment of a rule general through Moses and the Prophets, and the
later Jews their translaters from Adams tongue into Greek, how all these hide
their mind, when matters come to be spoken of, which to profane men would
seem strange. Life eternal plainly meant, but never named in Moses: and why?
Moses never names life eternal in the plain and usual phrase, but by
strong consequentes; as how the Lord is the God of Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob;
and not of the dead, but of the living: whereby they must be holden to live. So
Life in his Law, signifies often Life eternal: and Death, Death eternal. So
by this place, Deuteronomy. 32. 39. I kill, and I make alive; Aben Ezra notes, that
Death, and life after it, is closely taught. And this reason is rendered of many
Rabbines, why Moses never names Life eternal, though all his doctrine tends
thither; even because the world then all profane, which skant heard of one
God, and hardly believed the Creation, was to be allured by open and plain
things, first unto the worship of the one God: and that being done for Earthly
blessings, they might afterward be drawn easily unto the Eternal: Unto
which, if directly they were called, the strangeness would make them reject
all. So, Moses hides his mind in the Paradox of Adams present fall, with
manifold turnings of the Narration: and likewise of the ages of Iapheth and
Sem, Genesis 11.
Haran and Abraham: and with doubtful terms for the Peregrination of the
Children of Israel, as though they had been 430. years in Egypt: But he had
relation to Abraham's Peregrination and Promise of Christ: Galat. 3. 17.
which the estranged could not conceive. From disputing whereof, he minded to
bridle men unskillful, by doubtful speeches; yet gives rules thither, to
understand him As in Exodus 6. 18. showing that his grandfather, who was of
their number who came into Egypt, ivued 133. years, his son Amram 137. Moses
80 there: all 350.
rightly. So here, the term Huchal may be taken for a Beginnig, or for
Corruption: But the matter tells, that God was called upon long before that,
in the first Sabbath; and therefore, Beginning could not be then: wherefore,
Corruption must be meant there, by Huchal. So David Kymchi the King of
Grammarians, does take it in his Roots, for Corruption. So in Breshith Rabba,
the fallinges away from God, are reckoned in the days of Enosh, of the Deluge,
and of Babel. The Zoar, and others, the most of Iudahs name, hold the same:
Arias Montanus has both. The Greek-Hebrewes knowing why Moses hid his mind,
they turned it fit for Heathen, Then men hoped to call upon Gods name. All who
incline that way, have great defense by Grammar, and much authority; some of
Hebrews, more of others. But the matter will require Corruption; not a
Beginning of Religion, to be meant there: As in the speech continuing the
Narration (after the Catalogue of the Fathers) it is manifest; how the Sons
of God, saw the Daughters of Adams Sons, and so chose Wives of a strange God:
Otherwise, Moses tells not when apostacy from Religion should fall.

11 If at Enosh birth, men began to call upon God; Seth upon that occasion,
would not ever have named his son Sorrowful Enosh; nor Moses have joined
presently thereupon (after naming the Fathers) the falling away. The Prophets
likewise name Life. My digression would be too long, if I took examples of the
like concealing the mind, from the Prophets, and from the Greek translaters.
I will now proceed unto the next.

12 Kenan is he: Konen, To Lament, might be the root, for his name. Twice
speaking of one thing is usual, for vehemency; as in Dan. 5. Mean, Mean: So
these two names, Sorrow, and Lamentation, teach, that they lamented the
sorrows of their Works, and of the Earth, which God has cursed.

13 Ma-hahal-El, a prayser of God; teaches what comfort ought to be in sorrow;
the seeking of Gods praise, and glory for the world to come. An other Notation,
Mahal-Le-El, God brings a Confusion (by water,) is well agreeable to the
Argument. So, thy Wine, is Mahul, Confused (with water.) That is fittest for
the continual threatening of the Flood; to show the curse upon the Flood. So
that this name comprehends the drift of all the Scripture.

14 Iared, is in the playnnesse (casting away no letter) Descending: as
betokening a downfall in the behavior of men, without hope of goodness to
any bettering. Such as derive this name from Radah, to Rule, go twice further
then they need: The Argument calls for no such matter; and, that Etymology
should first be admitted, which has best agreement in the Letters, when
nothing for the matter disagreeth; and not any far off sought out, when one
at home is fit only.

15 Enoch signifies, Dedicated, Appointed unto. If Kain had called him so, the
name had been of no praise; but as in one appointed for the wicked world; now
it is the best as in one Consecrated unto God. He is in number, the seventh
(as any may reckon) from Adam: and also, as the Holy ghost notes, for an
higher purpose. The providence of God may be sweetly considered, in continual
calling of us to consider the Sabbath, by his disposing of great matter
gracious most often by seauens. So Moses was from Abraham, the seventh. The
time of his life is wonderful, matching in years the days of the Suns
year. 365. A matter most pleasaut to teach, what recompense comes by walking
with God. If his assumption had not been recorded; yet the number of his years
would have caused celestial admiration, what kind of man he should be. He
walking with God, was doublesse a most zealous Preacher of righteousness, and
told of the Flood to come. S. Jude eloquently frames an Oration for him, by
the matter, as Orators may lawfully do: thus it stands, Jude 14. Behold,
the Lord comes with his holy thousands, to execute judgment against all
men, and to reprove all the wicked of them, for all their works which they
have committed; and for all their hard words which wicked sinners spoke against
him. This is a most sweet Oration, framed from Moses, for this our holy
Father. In the Flood God showed judgment: and as on Sinai he came with
thousands of his Holy-ones; so doubtless at the Deluge, against men that cast
often, and scorned truth of Religion, and holy Patriarchs admonitions, and lived
wallowing in all badnesse. Also, the term Behold, may have a close glaunce at
the notation of Methuselah: Then first, Enoch walked with God, as a Prophet and
holy Teacher.

16 Meth, He dying, V, then; Shelah, He (God) sends: what? the matter spoken
of, judgment upon the wicked. The Scripture is full of close glaunses: And
well might Enoch name his Son so, as Iared gave him a name fitted to his
event. While Methuselah lived, the Flood came not; few days after his death it
came, when he had skant begun his last year of 969. For memory of the phrase,
the Jews say, that he lay upon the Arc: For, being just, he perished not;
only eight were in the Arc; and he could not have his full years 187. to
Lameches birth, and 182. thence to Noah's, and his 600. complete, but as upon
the Arc. This is the meaning of their fable, the showing how his age reached
into the Flood. And I think that the mockers which S. Peter speaks of,
skoffed the prophecy contained under his name, when they said, Where is the
appearance of his coming? For since the Fathers dyed, the world continues in
the same state. Now the Fathers all, and his Son, dyed before the Flood: and
for the sadness of that, he gave to his Son the name Lamech.

17 La-Mech, of Match, Striking. Tubalcayns father, that would kill a man in his
wound, had the same name, as a Striker: but this man was stricken with all
calamities: He saw Adam turned to dust, Seth set in his rest, Enosh taken with
sorrows of death, Kenan lamented by mourners in the street, Mahalaleel depart
thither where Angels praise God, Iared descend to the low parts of the earth,
Enoch taken up; and knew that he should die before his Father, when he named
Noah, the Comforter. Whereas seeing his Father lived unto the Flood, without
prophetical knowledge, that he should die before his Father, he, not Noah,
should have been thought the Comforter. And the saddest Oration that could
proceed from a broken heart, is that which he makes at Noah's birth, saying:
This is he that shall comfort us, concerning our works, and concerning the
sorrows of our hands, and concerning the earth which GOD has cursed. So
Lamech gives sadness; as his Son, a remedy to sorrow.

18 Noah, the tenth, has his name arguing that Lamech spoke Hebrew; as Moses
in the Notation, Noah and Naham. Great matters are to be considered in him: He
was long a single man. When he was 480. the spirit of Christ, not recorded
ever since the first day of man, to have spoken to any (saving to the cursed
Kain,) never to any for effectual Salvation, speaks to Noah. Therefore S.
Peter talking of Christ his Divinity, had not an auncienter open record since
the speech to Adam, to talk of, for Christ his open full speech speaking unto
men, though the other nine were illuminated with prophetical knowledge. Noah
is 500. before he was a Father, or married; as we may gather: That argues his
great fear of Gods judgments; far unlike his sons now adays, given as
Horses, to all voluptuousness, and not caring for their own most certain
destruction. Twenty years before he was married, he had a warrant, that his
house should not perish. His breathren and sisters yet would not take that
warning, for all that Lamech and Methuselah both could do, beholders of the
Arc, and witnesses doubtless of the wtath no come. Lamech lived not out the
whole to 120. years, as Methuselah; but dying before his Father, gave a
further warning, that he spoke as a Prophet, touching the Flood. The three
witnesses, were a full condemnation of the wicked world. The further Stories of
Noah, may better be fetched from the fountain of Genesis, then abridged by any
man's wit. This much I thought good to speak severally of these ten Fathers:
some things common to them all, may well here be joined; as their Religion,
and long life: and near the same, comes the comparision of their ages
together.

Their Religion was perfect and sinceere. They knew the Creator to be Genesis ver.
1, 3.
one GOD; and that the Son should bruise Satan's power; and that the Spirit was
a person coequall and coeternall. All that Moses records for us, touching
those times, we may know that they knew, by the speeches uttered in Job before
the Law: Eliphaz, Zohar, Bildad, and Elthu, spoke no otherwise then the
Fathers: For they had not the Law to reach them, but were taught from the
fathers, as they had bin.
For they spoke soundly of all Religion; whereby we may be sure, that the
first, came not short of them, in knowledge. Adam knew the natures of all
things, the creation of the visible things, and the unvisible; the fall of
Angels, and their eternal condemnation: the corruption of mankind, being the
seed of the Serpent, and a generation of Vipers. And as Moses tells, that
Elohim said; Let Us make man: So he knew that, and why Elohim was a form
plural, for GOD. It were gross to think that the Cabalistes (which expound
Elo him, El-hem, They be one God, in Bachai upon Genesis 1.) should know more then
Adam, for names. And the Hebrews upon Middras Tillim, bring in God talking with
Adam as he gave names, and asking; What is my name? To whom Adam said: Thou art
Elohim, and Jehovah. Whether God by expressed word named himself Jehovah and
Elohim, or gave Adam wisdom so to do; we see that the names were known from
the beginning: For the Serpent names Elohim to Euah, and turns presently the
form plural unto Gods profanely, saying: Ye shall be like unto Gods, that
know good and evil. Which plurality, Adam and Euah referred to the holy
Trinity. There the Greeks in the Serpents word Elohim, the second time
translate very learnedly, Gods. And so do the Talmudistes hold it meant, in
Masseceth Sopherim, Perk. 4. And we may be sure, that Adam and Euah were not
ignorant of Satan's thoughts, when by experience they found him out. Now when
Euah bare a Son, she spoke void of all doubt, to the Unity, I have
possessed a Son by Jehovah, by the one Eternal: yet we may be sure that she
remembered the speech of the Trinity, Adam will be like to one of US now. The
late Jews have Satan's darkness, which will have that term US, to be spoken
of Angels. The Angels were not yet spoken of in all Moses style, and therefore
they could not be meant by any of his terms; but as Elohim was used for the
Creator only, so common native logique would stretch it no further there: and
US the plural, to be as Boreica, Thy Creators in Eccle. 12. 1. a mystical
speech, marked and cited even of Rabbi Bochai the Jew: a witness strong
against his own side.

Moreover, as Moses knew a difference in signification betwixt Elohim the
term of Might, and Jehovah named of Being simply by him self, and giving a
Being to all his works and words; and therefore never uses the term
Jehovah, before the Creation had his full being, Genesis 2. 4: So wet may be
sure, that Adam and Euah knew the difference betwixt Jehovah and Elohim. The
Serpent names not Jehovah, but only Elohim, as a name of bare Might, and the
form whereof her might pervert to Gods: He trembled to consider the eternal
truth, constant to give performance of Mercy and Wrath, noted by the term
Jehovah Now, whereas in Sems time, EL was Gods name; it is all one as Elohim,
Mighty: only a form singular.

And this seems to be the reason, that Satan had corrupted the world to
understand Gods by the term Elohim; as in Nachors religion, Elohim is Gods in
Labans words: Therefore Sem might use EL, Almighty, in the frame singular.

Abraham first names God Adonai; that is, My Pillars; with a mystical note of
the trinity. Adam, who knew not upon what Pillars the Earth could be fastened
in the midst of the liquid Air and Water, but by Gods power, knew him to be
Adonai, though occasion was not offered to use the word, until God and his
providence became unknown, and denied almost of all the world.

IAH, an abridgement of Jehovah, used first in term by Moses, Exodus 15.
substance could not be unknown to Adam, though in later times more names to
express Gods nature were seen needful by the eternal Spirit. The Unity and
Trinity being thus known to Adam, he would deliver it over equally to his
Sons, to Methusela and Lamech.

Now for the Redemption: He confessed that he was naked, and was afraid; hid
himself, as needing one to bring him into favor: and knew that he who should
overcome Satan, being in man's nature, was to die, as all of Adam: and must
recover himself from death, and must revive Adam, and must restore all, fallen
once to corruption: and know that none but God, could do this much: And this
he believed, and thereupon named the Woman Life. And for the most unlikely
part, of death, he had Sacrifice to seal assurance of that; and requiring an
open profession of that every Sabbath, that day being ordained for that use:
Whereby we must needs know, that when that was performed, which in that day
was represented, the day must be altered. And as the Skins of the Beasts
covered his body; so the Carkases burnt, represented whose Death should cover
his Soul with Justice, taking away the giltinesse of sin. Moses was to
speak short or these matters, that the profane should not trouble them selves
with that, which they would never believe. Doubtless Adam knew that the most
Holy should annoint the Humanity, with the dwelling of the Godhead in it, and
sanctify himself for Adam and his faithful Sons; and must be called by the
name fittest Messiah: And he that knew the whose course of Nature, could not
but know, that the liquor of Spices was the fittest to represent Divine things
by an Ointment made of it. And seeing it was most needful that he should be a
great Prophet, we may say well with the Jews; that he saw the lot of his
Sons through all ages: And God would hide nothing good for the Vineyard; nor
would do any thing, but he would reveal it to his Prophets. And although he
lived not to see Henoch taken up, he might well know it; and Iared might use
his counsel in giving Heno^h the name Consecrated, or, Dedicated to God. And
as Noah in his three Sons names contained their Story for Religion, in
Divine Sem: in Iapheth, that the new Testament should be written in Greek, as
the Jews well gather in Thal. Ierusalemi, in Megilah, by the alusion Iapheth,
and Iapheth will persuade: So, Hot Countries dwelling, by Chams house, by his
name Hot. And as Noah saw their whole state; so no doubt Adam did as well as
he: and they all beheld the days of Christ, and knew that he should redeem
them on Mount Sion. And Rambam records that, which no reason can deny, how
the Jews ever held by tradition, that Adam, Habel, and Kain, offered where
Abraham offered Isaac, where both Temples were built: on which Mountain our
Lord taught, and on that also he died.

All that, Moses figured at large: and that the new Testament opens in
substaunee they knew. And seeing they be our Fathers, and Mirrours of Wisdom
in their names, faith, fear of God, and years; we should in our meditation
bring back the Gospel unto them, as they foresaw it, and forbade to say, Who
can go up to Heaven to bring Christ down? or who can go into the deep of
the Earth, to bring Christ from the dead? But they knew (as I touched both, in
the Incarnation) that the Savior in Hebrew Ioshuang, in Greek Jesus, was God
dwelling in Christ: and just Habel showed his death, and Henoch his ascension.
And in these few points, Deuinitie stands; in the Trinity, and Redemption:
that all just went hence up to joy at Gods Throne. All this the Heathen heard
of, and the Scribes held it sure: But, that God was to dwell in Christ; and
that he should by death ouer-him that had the power of death, they despised to
hold that in knowledge, bending their minds to earthly benefits.

These meditations I hold profitable for all, who by study will of them selves
multiply them: and a Child knowing these Stories, shall pass Aristotle in
sound Wisdom, to fear God, till the Body return to the earth, and the Soul
to God that gave it: To whom with the Son, and Holy spirit, be all praise,
honor, and glory, both now and henceforth for evermore. Amen.

For conference of ages, Conclusion.
I thought good to place here, the Table printed in the Concent: where every
Patriarchs years be set underneath him, at what age he is a father, or dies;
and with how many others he lived, and how long.

Meditations herein, will bring great knowledge, comfort, and delight.

ADAM falls before the woman is called EVE. And CHRIST is promised a
destroyer of the Devils works. Sacrifice is a seal of justice, given by Faith.
ADAM. his years. 130 Seth borne. Genesis 5. 3. 235 105 Enos borne. Genesis 5. 6. By
Enos birth, religion is sorrowfully corrupted, through marriages with Gains
house. The faithful are called the children of God. Ioh. 1 12. 325 195 90
Kenan borne. Genesis 5. 9. 395 265 160 70 Mahalaleel borne. Genesis 5. 460 330 225
135 65 Iared borne. Genesis 5. 622 492 387 297 227 162 Henoch borne. Genesis 5. the
seueuth from Adam. Jude. 687 557 452 362 292 227 65 Mathuselah borne. Genesis 5.
21. 874 744 639 549. 479 414 252 187 Lamech borne Genesis 5. 25. 930 800 695 605
535 470 308 243 56 Adam dies. Genesis 5. 5. 987 857 752 662 592 527 365 300 113
Henoch is taken away. Gen 5. 1042 912 807 717 647 582 355 168 Seth dies. Genesis
5. 8. 1056 821 731 661 596 369 182 Noah B. Ge. 5. 29 the 10. from Adam. 1140
905 815 745 680 453 266 84 Enos dies. Genesis 5. 14. 1235 910 840 775 548 361 179
Kenan dies. Genesis 5. 14. 1290 895 830 603 416 234 Mahalaleel dies. Genesis 5. 17.
1422 962 735 548 366 Iared dies. Genesis 5 20. 1536 The patience of God Abode
120. years, in which the spirit of Christ preached while the Arc was in
making, to the spirits now in prison. 1. Pet. 3. 19. 849 662 480 CXX. years
begin. Genesis 6. 1556 869 682 500 20 Iapheth borne. Genesis 5. 32. 1558 871 684 502
22 2 Sem borne. 1651 964 777 595 115 95 93 Lamech dith. 1656 Mathuselah dies.
Genesis 5. 27. 969 600 120 100 98 The Flood.

FINIS.

