Aduertisements FROM BRITANY, And from the Lovv Countries* In September and
October.



LONDON Printed by John Wolf. Anno Domini, 1591.

TO THE READER.
LEast that the better sort should be mis-ledde by the malicious, who hearing
of some smalgarboyl between the French and English, enlarged it so on
Tenterhookes, that they proclaimed it a ruin of both the armies. I thought it
good to publish this Iournall of Aduertisements, which I received out of
Brittanie, as well to make it known how well our slender and weak Forces
daily confront the enemy, as also with what good agreement (by the great
wisdom of the Commanders) the two Naeions join in a common quarrel against
a common enemy.

If I may find this to be acceptable to the Reader, I shall be willing to
acquaint him with therest, as it shall come unto my hands.

Farewell.
ADVERTISEMENTS OVT OF BRITANIE, IN SEPTEMBER. 1591.
SIR, by my last letters of the 20. of August, I did acquaint you with those
reasons that moved the Prince de Dombes in such earnestness to urge, and my
Lord General to yield unto this viage of the South: which conclusion so
mightelie perplexed the Inhabitants of S. Brieux, that their greeues forcing
the ordinary passage of a popular coffeehouse, resolved into most bitter
railinges against the Prince, upon whom they publicly exclaimed: That having
six months since supplied his army with all things necessary, (entertained
both him and it 14. days in their Town, and lastly yielded to a contribution
of a thousand crowns,) he would now abandon them unto the implacable fury of
their professed enemies, the Lambalists, and the greedy covetousness of the
Duke de Mercury, who already had extorted 1400. crowns from them: Some did
solemnly vow to seek new habitations, and the greatest number absolutely to
give themselves unto the League. How be it in very truth these reasons were
not sufficient, to bind an army to the conservation of so mean a place,
which by neither party can be otherwise preserved.

The Gentlemen of those parts seeking to divert this resolution, by drawing
the Prince unto a second undertaking of Lambalta, made proffer of 10000. men,
toward the better performance of the service, and offered an hundred of the
best of them, unto the first breach that should be made by the Canon. These
were of those Gallants, which left us at the late siege of Lamballa. who
contented themseles to look on at the cutting of our throats, while they (good
men) did figure unto themselves no other care, but the fetching in of harvest,
and the conservation of their petie menage; as if the wars of their
Countreie, nothing apperteining to themselves, were only to be determined by
her Majesty's Forces. But seeing the army ready to march, and that reckoning
some what disappointed, knowing withal notwithstanding, the Duke de Mercuries
safeguard, which the most of them have, that their own near neighboring
hungry Garrisons, would eternally pray upon them: after the feigned instance
of Ixion, and the Aegle: they became untimely suitors for that, which not long
before (through their own endeavors) they might easily have conquered unto them
selves.

Upon this Text you must give me leave tonote, that these Petitioners were
only such, whose whole livings did lie subject to the daily incursions of the
Lamballists. Those which dwelt but six leagues from Lamballa, were never moved
at our departure, no more do the Britanes otherwise apprehende this general
quarrel, then in regard of some particular interest: which error, the King
(being assisted with her Majesty's Forces) may easily reform.

The Prince being taught by former experience that those few particularities
could bring no great advancement to the Kings service, continued his former
determination of carrying his army into the South, where a great supply of
forces was promised by Monsieur de la Verdun, and others: and according to
that, our army dislodged from S. Brieux, upon the one and twenty day of
August. That night we came to Kersoe, the 23. to Plemy, the 25. to Collinie,
where the Prince received information, that the Duke de Mercury was dislodged
from Dinant, and marched that night toward a sdmal village called Brun: by the
opportunity of which place, he might, to his reasonable advantage, charge us in
our next days march. Brun is somewhat more then two leagues from Collinie, and
not a quarter of a league from the hie-way, by which we were to pass unto S.
Meyn.

Upon which intelligence, the Prince, with some of his principal Counselors,
came to my Lord Generals lodging, which then was an English mile from Collinie,
where Monsieur de la Verdun, dilating all the circumstances of that late
received advertisement concluded with these two doubtful considerations. The
first, that in regard of the enemies purposes to cross our passage into the
South parts of Brittanie, it was necessary to consider, whether our Forces
were sufficient to second our defenses. The other, that in holding a right
forward course, the Duke de Mercury might cut us from al supply of victuals,
coming from Reins, and Monford, by taking his lodging at S. Meyn. Unto these
two doubts, being the only matter of moment propounded by Monsieur de la
Verdun, my L. General most gravely and resolutelie answered, that the Prince,
Monsieur de la Verdun himself, and the rest of the Princes Counsel, after a
long deliberation, and most earnest opportunity, having embarked themselves,
and him into this course, it was not now to look into their weakness, which
before should have been weighed with better judgment. Whereby since their
reputation were so deeply engaged, he now thought them all tied in honor,
to march directly forward, without any regard to their small numbers; and that
to take any other course, would altogether savor of an exceeding fear, unto
the second, that Duke de Mercury could no more anoy us by putting himself
between Reins and our army, then we, by possessing those passages which
lead to Dinant and S. Malo, from which place he was likewise to attend his
greatest relief.

These reasons being highly approved by the prince, and Monsieur de la Verdun
himself, who willingly would have driven a wider course by Malletroit and
Plermer, it was concluded, that by break of day following, the army should
dislodge, and march directly toward S. Meyn, and that forth with certain
light horses should be sent forth, to discover whether the enemy was that
night come to Brun, or not. The order of march, and the place whereunto the
army should the next day march, was referred to the morning consultation, at
the place of Kende^ous.

At the Council, I remember, Monsieur de la Verdun would needs prescribe a
solemn platte of battle, against the next days expected encounter, but that
devise was readelie altered by my Lord General, who affirmed, that al forms of
fighting were evermore tied to the circumstances of those places, wherein men
were to fight, and therefore, not to be determined, til the place were first
viewed.

The 26. our army dislodged from Collinie; and because the Prince was
certainly informed by those light horse, sent forth the night before, to
discover that Duke Mercury was not come to Brun, it was resolved that the
army should march that day to Saint Meyn: But through the vnreadines of al
things appertaining to the Cannon, whereby the best part of the morning was
wasted, and the dishabilitie of our weak men, in so short a time to perform a
march of such length, this course was cut off by the waste, and at night we
came to Medrimack, which stands in the mid way betwixt Collinie, and Saint
Meyn. At Medrimack the Prince was truly informed, that the Duke de Mercury,
the day before in all secrecy, about seven of the clock in the evening,
dislodged from Dinant with his army, and was that night come to Plenaden,
where this day he reposed himself, meaning thereby (as afterward it appeared)
the better to cover his intention, which was, with a speedy march in the night
following, to possess Saint Meyn before we should suspect his departure from
Plenaden, which is four Leagues from S. Meyn. From Medrimack thither are
counted but three leagues: but this fraud was easily discovered by my Lord
General, who advised the Prince, our Gross being not able to perform that
march, through the comber of the Cannon, and the great number of weak men,
that Monsieur de la Verdun, having four hundred of our ablest Footmen joined
to his fourscore Curaces, and not above five hundred Harquebuzers, a cheual
should dislodge about midnight, and assaie, if by a speedy diligence he could
disappoint the enemy of his intended lodging at S. Meyn; which was accordingly
performed.

My Lord General, most exceedingly careful upon al hazards to second these
troops, caused our army to dislodge from Medrimack the next morning, almost
two hours before day, which was the seven and twentieth. In our march the
Prince received advertisement from Monsieur de la Verdun, that Saint Meyn was
invested with his Forces, and that nothing could be discovered of the enemies
intention that way: So that all seemed to be very sure on our side. But my Lord
General suspecting that which in truth followed, persuaded the Prince to
advance with his Caualarie in so much the greater speed toward S. Meyn. And
to the end that our Footmen might follow with the better have, his Lordship
commanded the Cannon and baggage to be placed after the Rerewarde, and for the
guarde thereof appointed certain Launceknightes. The event did show some
spirit of divination of what should follow. For the Prince had not been three
quarters of an hour in S. Meyn, when a very warm report was brought unto him,
that the Duke de Mercury with his whole army, was within half a league of
the Town. The truth of these matters was very sensible, for the reporter
brought with him two Spanish Captains, whom he and his companions, being all
but common Soldiers, had presently made prisoners: the one of these two did
afterward swear Bota dios, that he was taken per Caritad in their march, and
going to their succors; they were taken by those French companions, which came
thither A la picoree, not two hundred pace from the head of the Duke de
Mercury his army.

Some will say, that Monsieur de la Verdun, did this day forget himself: for
coming by six of the clock in the morning to Saint Meyn, he did neither send
forth his light horses, (pour batre le strado,) whereby the enemies approaches
might have been advertised in time convenient; nor employ the service of his
foot in garding the enemies, but in a plain security of all that might
happen, he lodged himself and his in a village, half a league from Saint Meyn,
quite opposite from the way the enemies should take, and left our foot
embattailed in the town, rather for a Parade, then to any other serviceable
purpose. By the like carelessness in Monsieur de la Verdun, the County Soysons
was two years since taken at Shateau-giron, his army absolutely defeated, and
himself did meet with a very narrow escape: but our leisure at that time did
not very well serve us to dispute of errors.

The Allarum amongst our French, you may be sure, was very hot, the Prince
confused, and those about him, who in calmes would overrule all councels; in
this little storm did know, never a point in the Compass. The enemy was
within half a league of S. Meyn, Monsieur de la Verdun had bestowed himself
and his troops so far, or farther off from us. The French horse that came
with the Prince, had already lodged themselves in villages, and where the
Prince was, were only left those four hundred, sent the night before with
Monsieur de la Verdun, and my Lord Generals Cornets of horse: Our Vantgarde was
at the least a long league and a half from us. In which hard plight, neither
the Prince, nor those about him, could apprehende any other course of
proceeding, but what they did see with the eyes of a most desperate fear. But
my Lord General, with a most cheerful countenance, and excellent
persuasions, full of all comfortable assurance, did first win the Prince unto
a better opinion of his fortune, and then, to repose himself only upon his
service. By his Lordships commandment, the English troops were presently
drawn out of the town, and by himself placed in those ways which did lead
directly toward the enemy. First, the horse were appointed to advance the
foot some quarter of a mile. The dikes and hedges were lyned with shot, to
the best advantage that might be thought on: and in the highway which was
somewhat large, our pikes were disposed into three several stands. Mean
while, the Prince had sent for Monsieur de la Verdun, and the rest; so that
having a greater increase of horse, discouerers were sent somewhat further off,
to see what course the Duke de Mercury did take, who being certainly
informed, that the Prince had already invested S. Meyn, became sodenlie more
perplexed in the field, then his Countreimen were in the town: his army was
exceeding weary, for the same had marched all that night. To make any fair
retreite they could not; to tarry and fight with us they durst not; much less
to force us from our lodging at S. Meyn, where they supposed all our army was:
So that the confusion amongst the enemy became very great, and it was verily
believed, that at that time, with two thousand English men, the Duke de
Mercury and all his army, might easily have been defeated. But how so ever,
certain it is, that in a very gentle fear he retired to Luedilliack, which
did very well appear, for not finding that place of such strength as he
ordinarily uses to encampe in, and nothing liking our near neighborhood,
Luedilliack being but one league and a half from S. Meyn, he was contented to
dislodge from that place. After that the Logas for the Cor-degard Fires were
laid together, and to encampe at Saint John. Whereby the Duke de Mercury did
find the mean, to put a reasonable good river between him and us, and to lie
two long leagues and a half from S Meyn.

Thus with a handful of men, and my Lord Generals careful foresight, the
Prince was delivered from the greatest hazard that ever he was in, and we
became quiet possessors of our lodging at S. Meyn, which was a service of great
consequence, principally, in regard of the multitude of our sick men, who
otherwise had been left unto many hard discomfits: besides, the enemies
disgrace hereby received, was not little.

As for the rest of the army, they came not unto us in two long hours after
the enemies retreit, and it was almost night before the arriual of our Canon.
This is the sum of that days work.

And because it was the next day found that the Duke de Mercury dislodged
not, the Prince was advised by some, in whose hearts (peradventure) some
relics of the former days fear yet remained, to follow his course toward
Reins, which he might very well do, having abundantly satisfied his
reputation in his last confronting the enemy, and crossing his purposes. But
my Lord General directly opposed himself against this council; affirming,
that if we dislodged first, the enemy would be encouraged to pursue us, and
beating still upon the tail of our weak army, travel the same with
continual pain and trouble, which could not be tolerated; besides the
performance of his former vaunt, which was, that he would drive us before him
into Reins. That it was therefore better for the Prince, to send for such
succors as might be drawn from Reins, and other places not far off, to make
good the place whereof they were already possessed, and to attend, either the
enemies first dislodging, or some good opportunity, whereby he might be
forced unto the same.

This counsel was followed, and such diligence used in the execution thereof,
that by the next morning two hundred horse were come unto us, and two Cannons
sent from Reins, were already advanced as far as Monford. Upon the arrival
of this small supply, it was presently resolved, that our army should
dislodge the next day, and encamp within a quarter of a league of Saint John.
But the Duke de Mercury (who all this while did but seek to countenance himself
with his stay at that place) understanding the resolution of our army,
dislodged the next morning before ten of the clock, and marched four
leagues, unto a village called Ereat, where (for him self and his Spaniardes)
he found a lodging of great strength.

Certain knowledge being given, that the Duke de Mercury had made his
retreat to Ereat, the Prince streitelie commanded, that all our army should
be in readiness by nine of the clock in the night, to march toward the
enemy. For it was presupposed, that by the advantage of that march in the
night, we should fall upon the Duke de Mercury his army, weary, and not
looking for us, and so perform some great piece of service; or at his next
mornings rising, distress the rereward of his army. Our sick men and baggage
were left at S. Meyn, and an hundred of ours for their guard.

My Lord General being well acquainted with the weakness of our army, and
observing the thin repair of those that were sent for, did very much oppose
himself against this course, the rather, because at that time there was not one
in our army, that could justly inform the state of the Enemies lodging.

But the Prince, to satisfy my Lord herein, told him in great secrecy, that
al was but Pour fair la Meyn; and that after some two leagues march, it was
meant that we should return. How be it, in our march one piece so pulde on
another, that la Mein was quite forgotten, and something before day light, we
were come within two miles of the enemies lodging: where, (and that not without
good cause) a stand was made, and it was solemnlie demanded, what could be
done upon the enemy. The state of their lodging was freshly enquired after,
whereunto answer was made by a French Gentleman, dwelling in those parts,
that there were but two Rivers between us and the enemies Gross of his army:
whereof the one was hardly to be foorded. And that from thence, the way to
Ereat was exceeding streite. By means whereof, we did now begin to learn how
our Canon might have been lost, and our enemies notably engaged. Upon which
considerations, every man began to disauow this council: first la Verdun,
then Momertin, Bastine, and the rest: yet God of his goodness did save all our
honesties; for while the Prince, my Lord General, and the rest were in
council, some of us had taken a priest and a peazaunt: by whom they were
informed, that a compaine of the enemies hargabuzers a cheuall, did lodge
within half a league of us, and that there were nothing more easy, then the
cutting them in pieces. To the seazing of this pray, la Verdun, and Monsieur de
Bastine, with thirty Curasses, and three hundred Hargabuzers a cheuall, were
presently sent forth, (for in sudden enterprises it was thought better to
use the service of those French shot on horseback, then on foot.

These following their guides, found not only that compaine, but three French
Regiments lodged al estart, every man in a sound sleep, and not so much as
one Centronel to give the allarum, which being well perceived by Bastine, he
willingly would have sent for four hundred of our shot and pikes, wherewith
questionles all the skirtes of the enemies army might have been handsomelie
cut off. But la Verdun, either in an emulation toward us, in too great
impatiencie with himself, with his Curasses far enough off, he sent those
Herga a Chi to the enterprise, who finding no kind of resistance, slew an
hundred and twenty of the enemy. In which number Captain Messandere was one:
and at that time la Mott Cheure was taken prisoner, who commanded another
compaine of Herga a Chi. The rest which were not, but might very well in like
sort have been assailed, received the allarum by their companions last
cries, and so saved themselves. The army likewise warned by these, did
presently put themselves in arms.

This service thus performed, we did stand three long hours imbattelled
upon a fair spacious heath, not half a league from the Duke de Mercury his
Army, but when it was perceived, that neither honor, nor loss, could drive
him unto a trial of Arms (although besides his French forces, it was certain
that he had then with him above three thousand Spaniards) that it was not
possible to pass any further without apparent loss, the Prince thought good
to command our retreite.

We poor souls were not this day able to march twelve thousand strong: but
had you seen their notable resolutions, and earnest desires to fight, you
would peradventure grieve that such men, and a commander of my Lords worth,
should be exposed into so great an inequality as hitherto we have met with.
For I protest unto you before the living God, that our soldiers only have
borne the entire burden of this Summers service. At Lamballa we were not
assisted with three hundred French, which may seem very strange, but what I
write is most true: and how far my Lord General will in all service
adventure his own person, is so well known unto you, that I shall not need to
mention the same. Upon every opinion of encounter with the Spaniards,, a fair
blew scarf (in likelyhoode presented by some honorable Lady) is fastened to
the end of his Pike: for his Lordshippe understanding that Don John de
Laguilla had used some brave speeches: did send him word by Monsieur Gibrian,
that by that favor he would make himself known at their first meeting.

After our return to Saint Meyn, the Prince perceiving that the Duke de
Mercury meant that day to dislodge from Ereat, and that the place of our
abode, did yield no kind of comfort unto our weak army, other then such as
came thither from Reins and Vittrie, which was sometime cut off by the way,
thought good likewise to dislodge the day following, and so for this time the
Duke de Mercury and we did part compaine. He upon the thirtith day leaving
Ereat, did take the way toward Iocelin: we upon the day following dislodged
from S. Meyn, and so to Hendet: the second of September to Breall, the third to
Noyall, where the Prince did accord unto us twenty days rest at
Shatteau-grion, for the refreshing of our weak men: at this place we arrived
the fourth of September.

The day following, my Lord General was solempnly invited by the principal
Magistrates of Reins to visit their City, and the third day after was
received into the same with all those testimonies that might assure a most
kind and friendly welcome.

The Prince in the mean time having three hundred men, and three Cannons from
Vittrie, did inuest the Castle of Chattillion, upon the seventh of this
instant. But after three days trial, finding those forces nothing sufficient
(for he had but those three hundred French, and five hundred Launce-knights) he
sent unto Reins for six Cannons more, and to my Lord General, in all
earnestnes, to assiste him with six hundred English. His Lordshippe
considering, that after such a deduction, the remainder would be very weak,
and by such a separation subject unto hazard, thought good with all his
companies to remove to Saint Aubin de Cormer: whereby the strength of our Army
might stand still united, and the Prince, according to his desire, readily
enough assisted. For from Saint Aubin to Chattillion are but three little
leagues. In the mean season his Lordshippe sent two hundred shot and pikes,
to attend the Cannon of Reins, whose service afterward the Prince used to
great purpose.

Thus not having staide six days at Shatteau-giron, we dislodged upon the
tenth of September, and encamped that night at Shatteau-burga, the next day to
Saint Aubin.

The Prince having received those Canons sent from Reins, and planted the
same, upon the twelfth of September, were discharged some lost volleys upon
the defenses of the Castle: The morning following my Lord came to the Prince
with three hundred English more, and then the battery was pursued with such
fury, that by twelve of the clock the breach was made very fair and
assaultable: which being well perceived by the defendants, they came to a
parley, and from the Prince received these last conditions: That all Gentlemen
and Captains within the Castle should become prisoners: That the soldiers
should have their lives, only except twenty, which should rest at the Prince
his discretion: for he meant to make some examplary punishment of them.

While the enemy did entertain somewhat too long time in the acceptance of
these conditions, our lance knights in a hungry desire after spoil, drew
themselves (uncommanded) toward the assault: my Lord General perceiving the
same, and doubting that some touch in honor to the Prince might thereby arise,
partly by persuasions, and sometimes by threatenings, did stay them from that
purpose a long half hour: but in conclusion they offered violence to their
Coronel, disobeyed all their commanders, forced the breach, where they found
no resistance, and of two hundred and thereescore that were within the Castle,
left not twenty alive. But in the eager pursuit after spoil, they fiered
(unawares) some barrels of powder, with the fury whereof thirty of them were
presently slain, and at least fifty more came from thence, the most miserable
creatures that ever I did behold. The judgment of God was most justly executed
upon them both; in these for their disobedience; in the enemy, for their
notorious spoils and infinite outrages committed upon the country: it is
constantly affirmed, that these companions did yearly spoil La vall, Vittrie,
and Reins, of more then twelve thousand crowns.

They of Fougiers were so terrified at the taking of Shattillion, that in doubt
of our next remove toward them, they did begin the very same day to burn
their Suburbs, which (peradventure) was but a needless fear: for in plain
English, we have neither men, nor means, to undertake the siege of such a
place.

Monsieur de la Verdun did leave the Prince at I. Iendit, and promised to
return within three weeks with three thousand footmen, and five hundred
horse. His preparations (for ought that I perceive) do come but slowly
forward, and yet I know the King has of late vrgentlie hastened the same, our
men do now begin to die, and that very fast: so that without a present
supply, we are like to have but a poor army.

The Spaniardes pay arrived at Blanett, about the eighteenth of August last.
The same was brought thither in four Galliasses. The Duke de Mercury is gone
to Nantes, where a Spanish County, of the house of Tolledo, has these days
past attended his coming thither, sent by the King of Spain to negotiate
about the affairs of Britain. Upon the promise of some honest bribe, you may
peradventure win me to send you a true report, both of what is past in the
last years traffic, and in this present negotiation between the King of
Spain, and Madame de Mercury, for it is she that does swaie the balance.

And so hoping that you will be as weary in the reading, as I am in the
writing hereof, I commit you to the comfort of your best desires: and us both
to the blessed protection of the Almighty.

From our poor army at Saint Aubin de Cormer, this sixteenth of September,
1591.
Aduertisements FROM THE LOVV Countries.

The 16. day of October.



LONDON Printed by John Wolf. Anno Domini, 1591.

BY LETTERS out of the lovv Countries, of the sixteen of October. 1591.
Upon the fourteenth day of this present, there was intercepted beetvveene
Antwerp and Newport, a Spaniard, named Barnardo de Helena, late of the Castle
of Antwerp, (repairing to his brother, serving in the company of Don Carlos de
Luna, Captain of the Horse at Newport) this man being carefully examined,
says, that the Duke of Parma is still remaining at Bruxels, without any
likelihood of performing his pretended viage into France: And delivers
farther, that certain of the mutined Spaniardes, to the number of one
thousand and five hundred, being upon promise of pay, drawn out of
Heretalles, and the Son of the Duke of Parma sent to them, to induce them
thereunto. By whose persvvasion they were brought into the land of Waes, they
now upon some new coffeehouse, are retired back again, have seized the
Town of Tiel-mont, in Brabant, where they fortify against the Duke, and
have carried with them perforce, his Son, whom they deteine with a
Collonell, named Don Sancho de Leua, sometime Governor of Liere, until their
demands be granted and performed.

Mondragon is in the Land of Waes, with three thousand Foot and five hundred
horse, to erect certain Sconces for the freeing of the passage betvveene
Antwerpe and Gaunt, impeached by the taking of Hulsts, which being performed,
and the mutiny appeased, the Duke gives out that he will into France.

The late Governor of Hulst, and a Spanyard that was commander of the forces
in the Town at the time of rendering thereof, are now close prisoners at
Bruxels.

Monsieur la Mote is in Brabant, sent of purpose to pacify the mutinies, who
as yet do obstinately make refusal of all his offers.

The Governor of Cambray with five hundred horse has made of late a great
rode into Henault, and there exceedingly waste the country, which has
been utterly contrary to the Dukes expectation, and it is thought to be the
chiefest cause of his stay of his journey for France.

It is advertised, and from diverse places confirmed, that the kingdom of
Arragon is revolted, the Viceroy massacred, and those of the Inquisition in
that kingdom banished, being practiced by the King of Spaines Secretary,
fled from the Court upon coffeehouse.

The inhabitants of Venlo, by the assistance of the Italians there in garrison,
have put out the Wallons that were also in garrison in that place, and
afterward by a notable dexterity have rid themselves also of the Italians,
but do as yet hold for the King, and only as it is thought till they have
made their peace with the States.

The Duke of Parma renevveth his demand of five thousand pounds by the
month, and would have it to be levied for six months before hand upon the
vvalled Towns, and they afterward, to collect and reimburse the same upon
the country and villages.

FINIS.

