THE Agreemente of Sundry places of Scripture, seeming in show to Jar,
Serving in stead of Commentaryes, not only for these, but others like,
Translated out of French, and now first publyshed by Arthure Broke.

Seen and allowed, according to the order appointed in the Queens Maiestyes
Injunctions.



Imprynted at London, in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Crane, by Lucas
Harrison. Anno. 1563.

The Prynter to the Reader.
THE AUTHORS ABsence, whose only cou^tenau^ce would have feared faults, and
polished a far meaner work: pleads in excuse of the apparau^t flacknesse, in
perusi^g this small treatise which, as now it swarms with matter and singular
profit, had also flowed with Eloque^cemought he have enjoyed himself, when the
Realm thought good to co^mau^d him. But, sith, even absent, he might hereby
benefit the godly: though repyning to see his learned knowledge racked from
Eloquence, enforced he was, by my often entreaties, to leave behind him this
orphane Babe. Worthy in deed, for lawful and unspotted doctrine, to bear his
Syres Name: howbeit, yet rough, unmeet to match with many other his trauaylles,
satisfieng the high expectation that fame had blown of him. Notwithstanding,
sith it is not the least trial of mercy, to father the fatherless: what he
disdayneth in this young Imp, for it has not yet raught the honorable rooms
of the rest: that, ye, to who^ hereby commodity by our means shall grow,
accept to your patronage. That, as the cause of imperfection, (if any be) rose
for your sakes, through my means: so the protection from the envious (sitheuen
much it shroudeth worthy envy) may proceed from your Curtesyes. It doing, y^ure
selves shall ye discharge of unkindness, me of blame, him of fear, Which, if
by one praise worthy work, ye will not, small encouragement has be,
hereafter, with the venture of his fame, to tender your profit. And I as light
cause, to h^sard my thanckes, in like importunity on the Learned Shame therefore
be it, to neglecte your friends, Fear and doubt to hinder your selves. Which
as ye shall seek to avoid: so, in eschuing the Causes, pursue the contrary.

SOme me^ heretofore have attempted this self manner of writing and ye same
work that is here offered unto you: Neither was their labor altogether vain.
For at the least if they had but gathered such places of Scripture as seem to
dysagree, and done theirendeuour to agree the^, though they have not yielded
the true meaning of places which they had taken in hand to expound: yet so it
is ye this invention of theirs has given a taste and opened away unto such
other as followed the^, who were able to give a more certain resolution of the
same differences. Let every one have his praise: but chiefly let not the first
inuentours be grieved y^ those which came after help themselves with their
invention, and yt having a greater light of y^ scripture they labored to open
y^ which before was very darkly handled. Neither let y^ last sort seek to
set forth themself to ye dysco^mendation of those y^ went before: but let both
parts setting abroad simply yt which god has given the^, bring forth their
works with a common agreement to the glory of him only which opens the eyes
of men, and gives them understanding and wisdom to speak well.

Be it so than (friendly Reader) that you read y^ others works yt have treated
on this manner, or be it y^ you be desirous to take profit of this present
work: I pray you bring with you a sober and quiet Judgment. And I hope y^
when you shall have red ye other you will not refuse y^ reading of this as
unprofitable. As at other times it has been nedeful to repress the fransy of
many troubled spirits: so think you y^ at this day all such are not yet so
stilled, but y^ they give many occasions of terrible frayes, overthrowing and
corruptyng y^ meaning of ye scriptures to confyrme their opinions. And it is
necessary that they should be withstode. And because y^ most troublesome and
hard fight of theirs, y^ we must abide, is when y^ assault is given us by ye
holy* scriptures, of which self scriptures we must borrowe al our strength and
defense, it behooves us in this case, to use great wisdom by which we may
repulse y^ deceiptes and sleyghtes of our adversaries, and so to apply the^ to
our purpose as nevertheless we mystake the^ not and so be destitute of weapon
and defense. For if we were assailed by any other mean, either by Philosophye
or by any other doctrine of men, it were an easy matter to repulse such
assaults, for y^ word of God which we make our bucklar and defense, is of
strength against al doctrynes, and is above al doctrynes. But here in is al ye
doubt when by y^ word me^ will destroy y^ word in us and us in the word. There
are many yt read ye holy scriptures, to this purpose only y^ by the they may
establysh ye traditions and ordinances of men. They seek in the^ some cover to
keep their trifling ceremonies There ar other yt having Imagined or taken some
opinion in their head holding wilfully and stubbornly, yt which they have once
conceived, they wrest awrie and ouerthwartly the places of scripture having
regard to their own ambition rather the^ to y^ teaching and edif^yng of ye
simple ones. There are also diverse which (not caring for any religion but
rather wishing y^ al thing were disordered, and y^ every one should do what
seems hi^ best) wickedly take certain scrapings of y^ holy scriptures, and
as soon as they have found in the^ some little show of discord, they lay hand on
y^ as if they had over come al, tending to no other end but to bring y^ word
of god to be despised and hated and the readyng of it suspected. How is ye
world at this day fyld full of Epicures and contemners. Co^trarywise there ar
very few y^ hit y^ mark, which bring with the^ a good mind and read and
hear ye scriptures to find Christ in the^, and to co^fyrme the^ self in ye
true faith, and to obey God devoutly as they ought But these Hogs and Dogs would
not once voutchsafe to open their eyes to look upon one only syllable in the^
if it were not to find some Jar in the^ and to make the^ disagree, and to
have some occasion to find fault with the^. But ye holy ghost which is ye
teacher and author of ye scriptures who is y^ spirit of truth ever like to him
self, always fast and constant profers nor brings forth any thing yt is
contrary to himself, nor any thing to entangle or trouble ye spirit of y^
fathful reader, or to make him uncertain, or in doubt what opinion to believe
and what not to believe. For verily if there be any disagreeing in ye holy
scriptures how may a man know what is certain and sound? How shall a man
discern y^ truth from y^ which is false, y^ good from y^ il, y^ certain from
y^ uncertain, the light from y^ darkness? Wherefore we must not fear that the
scriptures deceive us, as if there were any disagreeing in the^, neither need we
doubt yt the false expou^ders of the^ shall have ye upper hand, and reach to y^
mark y^ they shot at, if to y^ readyng of the^ we bring with us a spirit
ready to be taught: but rather we shall have whereon to stay us, and to defend
us against al assaults. I hope yt they which shall be guyded with such a spirit
of meekness may be help by this work which as yet is but begone.

This is but only a proof offered in have, at which if you shall begin to
take profit, let us understand it, and you shall give him y^ has thus begone ye
occasion to go further foreward which thing also he promises you. Read and
profiite in the fear of the Lord.

FINIS
1
No Man knows whether he be worthy of Love or of Hate. Ecclesiast. ^ I
know in whom I believe and am sure that he can keep that which I gave him to
keep until that Day. Tym. ^. ep. ^
THE MOST IGNORANT of al, so they be not stubborn may easily understand what
Solomon means in this part of Scripture, to (...), y^ we trauail in hayne if
we judge by the present state, whom God loves or whom he hates: for God
shows not his love continually to those whom he will prosper, nor his hate to
them who^ he will afflict. And that to reprove the vayrenesse of man's
understanding which is dull even in those things which chiefly ought to be
known.

But this that is spoken touching ye judgment of outward things, and so far
forth as a man may Judge of himself letts not at all the certainty of faith
neither does it cause a faithful man to be unassured of y^ love of God, and
not resolved that life is laid up for him in heaven. This assuredness makes
us know what difference there is between faith and opinion. Faith leans not
on the authority of men, neither does it doutfully rest on God: but a certain
knowledge is joined with faith. So if according to the conceit of men we speak
of things that chance unto us, we have no assurance of gods goodness toward
us. But when faith guydeth the sprite of man, then man is well assured what so
ever betyde him, that nothing shall separate him from the love wherewith God
loves him.

2
Seek and you shall find. Math. 7. I was found of those that sought me not.
Esai. 65.
THis commodity we have by faith in our prayers, y^ if in faith we seek God, we
shall find him always redi to succor us in all our necesities, he is pressed of
himself to grant our requests, so that we pray to him. And his riches shall be
displayed unto us, so that we seek them and ask them. It is certain that God
watches often for the safety of his faithful when they sleep, to the end he
may prevent their prayers. For, we were more than miserable if in this our
brutall dullness God tarried for our prayers. But because Christ speaks here
to his Disciples he shows them plainly in what manner the heavenly father will
make us partakers of his gifts. Although therefore he give us all good things
freely: yet notwithstanding to exercise our faith, he will have us seek him by
our prayers, on which he will bestow that which proceadeth from his goodness
only.

So, God will have us seek him, yet he is the first that sought and found us,
which thing appears in that he says he was found, but it was of those that
sought him not, which was when he graffed us into his household by faith. And
therein he declares that his grace and mere goodness has prevented us, and
that we brought with us no desert, or worthiness at all.

3
I will remember their sin no more. Genesis. 3 Verily I say to thee, thou
shall not depart from thens til thou have paid the last farthing. Math. 5.
EVEN after that we have offended, God notwtstanding promyseth to be at one with
us: for of nature he is gentle and prone to pardon, else our offenses and
wickedness would shut the door and entrance to his bounty, if we had not this
thing ever set before our eyes, that he easily pardons and forgets our
sins, he keeps not in mind the faults and wrongs that are done to him: for
he condescendeth wyllingly and of his own accord to fall to agreement. But it
behooves us to know that this is not spoken to all mankind indifferently, but
is a privilege belonging properly to his Church. For it is said in
Deutronomy, that God reue^geth terribly casting back the faults of the Fathers
into the bosom of the Children. Gods wrath against rebels, unbelievers and
obstinate persons shall never be appeased. And in some sort that may agree
hereunto, which Christ our Lord says. Verily I say unto thee thou shall not
come out from thens till thou have paid the uttermost Farthing. Albeit Christ
simply gives warning that it is very profitable for us even after the manner of
men to agree with our adversaries betime, because that rigorous men are often
domaged by their own euel desire. Yet this similitude may be well and fytly
applied to God, that Judgment with out mercy shall be executed on him that will
not agree or be reconciled with his brethren, or that shall strive to the
uttermost.

4
Art thou called a servant? care not. 1. Corint. 7. Yet if thou ca^ be at
liberty, be so rather. 1. Corint. 7.
EVery man must be content with his calling and follow it: not that men are so
bound but some may lawfully change their estate or trade of life: but men
ought to amend their unadvised desire, by which some are stird to change their
sort of life without any just occasion, whether it be through superstition or
curiousness of conscience, or some other fond motion. To be short, this
sentence brings al men to this point to remember what stands with their
calling. If any be called to bondage says Saint Paul, he must not be vexed
with carfulness: but rather mass have his conscience quiet. He will have
bondmen to be of good there and not troubled as though bondage should let them
from the service and true obedience of God. Notwithstanding he mitigateth that
sentence: for (says he) if the servant can fitly bring to pas to com into
fredome, let him take to him that more comodious state of life. He teaches
that liberty not only is good: but also more commodious tha^ bondage. This then
makes these two sentences no whitte to disagree. For Saint Paul bids not
servants to steal away from their masters, or to use any force toward their
masters, so to shake of the yoke of bondage from their necks: But he advises
them not to be trobled, as though their state of life did take from them the
Christian liberty.

5
When I held my peace my bones vvoox old. Psalm. 23. In cryeng and groaning my
bones wax old. Psalm. 23.
ALthough there be some little show of contrariety in these words, yet they may
be easily agreed. The poor sinner is spoken of who feels himself cast out of
the favor of God. And the Prophet speaks not here of a common kind of
trial: but of an extreme rigor, by which ye sinner is utterly overthrown. As
in deed if we be not drawn by forcible means, we never aduau^ce our self with a
very earnest desire to seek to be at one with God. Therefore whether ye sinner
seek ease by holding his peace and saying nothing: or by crieng and brayeng,
his bones never lyn to wax old, nor all his strength to wast: on which side
soever he turn him, and by what soever will or affection he be led. Let his
mouth be shut up that he say nothing: let him have it open to bray and fill the
air with cries: To be short, let him do all that seems him good to find ease
of his grief, yet it auailes him nothing till he be come again into the favor
of God.

6
Thy God is one only God. Deutero. 6. I have appointed thee the God of Pharao.
Exodus 1.
THIS is very true, y^ there is but one God, and the same very. God and only
God y^ by his so^ Jesus Christ showed himself only wise, only almighty, and
wholly good, at whose hand alone we must look for safety, and all manner of good
things. He is ye true God who^ faith discerns from the vayn and folish
inue^tio^s of me^, and embraci^g him with an assured certainty, it neither boweth
nor wauereth. Yet for all that a man may also say. Many are called Gods not
of their own being: but by partaking of dignity, insomuchas God has made the^
his vicars and Deputies in some particular office, as it is said in the. 83.
Psalm. I have said you are Gods. For he speaks there to Princes and
Governors of ye earth. By ye self reason y^ scripture calls the Angels
Gods, for y^ the glory of God shines in the world through the^. Now this
tittle conveyed over from God as well to Angels, as to men, declares what God
does by the^, and what charge and office he has given the^. And yt is in such
sort, that no part of Gods glory is thereby minished. For he does not so impart
his force and strength to creatures, as in y^ mean season any of his power is
taken from him. He does not so work by the^ that in ye mean time he resigneth
his own power. He will not have his glory so shine in the^. y^ the whilst it be
darkened in himself.

7
All flesh shall see the Salvation of God. Esai. 40. The wicked shall not see
the glory or magnificence of God. Esai. 26.
IN ye the Prophet Esaias says, al flesh shall see ye salvation of God, his
purpose is to show yt the work of ye rede^ptio^ of ye Church shall be so
glorious that all me^ shall openly see yt God is ye author of such a
deliverance, and it shall make visible his Majesty and Power. But ye wicked and
unbelievers have no eyes mete so to considre it, as it may profit the^. The Lord
by sundry means makes his power, his justice, and bounty shine: and yet ye
unbeleuing and proud occupy not their spirits and wits about it. So although al
may behold ye glory of Jesus Christ: nevertheless few have known it because
of their blindness. There have been but few that have had their eyes opened by
the holy Ghost, to see this glory in our Lord Jesus.

8
I will harden the heart of Pharao. Exodus 4. Pharao has hardened his heart.
Exodus 8.
LIKE as God has kept unto himself this liberty to have mercy on whom it
seems good to him, and that therein we can find out no cause above his will:
so also he refuses as many as he will, and therein his will suffices for all
reasons. Saint Paul handling this argument in the. 9. Chapter to the Romans,
allegeth that which God had said to Moses before, I will have mercy on
whomsoever I will have mercy. On the contrary side he proponeth that which the
Scriptures say to Pharao, Exodus 9. I have stirred thee up even to this self
purpose that in thee I may show my power, and that my name may be renowned
through all the earth. Then after he concludes y^ God has mercy on whom it
seems good to him and hardens whom he will. The lord affirms that it is
himself that stirred up Pharao to this very end that being vanquished and
subdued whylest he stubbournly resisted the power of god, he should serve for
an instruction to teach how inuyncyble the arm of God is. Then, in that he
hardened the heart of Pharao, he is not only unreprovable: but also in his
wisdom and equity wonderful. And when it is said that God hardens, it is
not only me it thereby that God suffers, but also that his Godly wrath
works: for all outward things which serve to bild the reprobare, are evident
tokens of his anger. And Satan himself which inwardly works strongly, is so
Gods minister that he does nothing out by the commandment of God. Yet not
withstanding this also is true that Pharao has hardened his heart God truly,
does harden, but he does well and justly that which he does. ^ an hardens
himself, but what he does, he does stubbournly, against the will of God who
calls him to repeniaunce and salvation.

This we may see plainly by the exhortation which yt holy Ghost makes in the.
95. Psalm, when he says, If to day ye will hear his voice harden not your
hearts, He declares that our stubbournesse and rebellion against. God comes
out of none other fountayn than of our wicked will, when we shut ye door
against his grace. We have already by nature a heart of stone, and this hardening
is natural unto us even from our mothers womb, and only God may soften and
amend our hardness. Notwithstanding in that we refuse the voice of God, that
proceadeth of our wilful obstinacy, and not of any constraynt that comes
from else where or from without us. Every man may be a witness of this to
himself: Wherefore it is not without just cause that the holy Ghost reproves
all unbelievers for so much as stubbournly they wythstand God, neither is (...)
any beside themselves that taught them to rebel. Pharao may well scrue for a
notable crample hereof. So God remains just, and the naughty and hardened man
is Justly punished.

19
Increase and Multiplye, Genesis ^. Happy are the barraine that etc, Luke. ^3.
WHEN God had at the beginning ordained marriage, he spoke thus to Man and Woman
which he himself had joined together, Grow and multyply.

In giving them his blessing he wylleth them to engendre a line, beginning at
the marriage which he had ordained and hallowed, he comes down to generation.
Such is the^ the blessing of God from which as from a spring al ma^kinde is
derived. And we ought not only to consider it in a generalty but in every one
particularly: for we are frutfull or barraine touching the begetti^g of issue,
according as god poures forth his blessing and power on some, and withholdeth
it from other some. But when it is said Luc. 23. that blessed shall be barraine
women that shall not conceive. This is not spoken symply as though a woman were
to be accompled happy in that she brings not forth children, for rather
therein is the lack of the blessing of God whereof we spak: but our Lord Jesus
speaks there of the dreadful Judgment of God which should come upon the
Jews, so y^ then the barrain women should be happy in co^pariso^ of others
which should not only feel their own misery in their own propre bodies: but
also their chyldrens. To be short, seeing this shows an extremity of despair
to wish mountains to fall on them, to curse their issue, Jesus Christ shows
that the Jews shall feel that they have not had to do with a mortal man but
with the living God.

10
There is no respect of persons with God. 2. Ephesi. 6. Colloss. 3. Unto
whom shall I have regard but to the poor and lowly of spirit, and
trembling at my words. Esaias. 66.
WHen we read y^ God accepts not nor has respect of persons: that is not
to say y^ he has no regard to me^, as though he were careless of the^: but by
this manner of speaking we must understand that he looks on y^ cleanness of
the heart, and on ye inward innocency, and that he regards not those things
which bleare the eyes of men, and are commonly esteemed of them, as race,
country, dignity, riches, honor, beauty and other like things. Also he has no
respect unto ye contrary things which procure disdain and so^times hate, as
pouerti, low and base state. And this happens oftenest in Judgment, where
affections ouerthwartly reign, which are conceived by respect of persons.
They that are in any dignity flatter themselves, as though God should savor
them for such corruption, and think that the little or pore ones cannot be so
worthy as they, that God should voutchsafe to cast his eyes on the^ to take
their part: but of what estate or condition, of what country or kindred, soever
me^ be, they shall be pleasing unto God that fear him and do that is right.

Now when it is said that god looks upon the poor, and lowely, it is not
meante that he has more respect unto the person, but to the truth that is in
the person which can not be in him but through the goodness of God. So he
has regard to that that is his and not to that that men can have of
themselves. In this place of Esaias the false opinion that men conceive of the
service of God is overthrown in asmuchas they suppose that ceremonies and
outewarde, obseruaunces are much worth of themselves: but God cares not awhit
for them. When me^ think to appeace and content him by such shows he rather
casts his eyes on hearts thrown down, and trembling at his word, wherebye
he shows openly how we must beehaue our self to beco^me acceptable
unto God, to weete, so that al our powers, and all our senses be ordered to give
true obedience unto God, and that we attribute nothing unto our selves by
fond presumption: for the nature of our faith is to obey God, and causes him
when he speaks to us, to be heard of us attentively and quyetly.

11
Thou art not a God that love iniquitye. Psalm. 5. He hardens whom he
will. Roman. 9.
DAued in this fyfth psalm sets forth a confort to all the faithful, and
geues the^ council how to behave them selves as often as their enemies cruelly
persecute them, and gylefully, and violently oppress them. His advise is that
they should have recourse to the defense of God, who will not fail to
repress in good time, all their crueltye. And seeing it is so that right and
equitye are pleasyng unto him, it can not otherwise be but that he would take
vengeance of all wicked and unrighteous men. For how can it be y^ such should
avoid his Judgment, and abide unpunished, since he is the Judge of the world?
For his office is to destroy all the wicked, for he hates all wickedness,
and has already prepared a reward for the proud. And although he defer the
punishment and vengeance for a while, yet he will at last go up into his
Judgment seat, and will openly declare that he is a just Judge enemy to the
wicked and a friend to the good and ryghteous.

Now then to agree this place with that other which says, God hardens whom he
will, there needs none other doctrine but that which may be gathered out of
this sentence, to weete, that God hates all iniquitye, that is to say,
although he work by Satan and by the wicked, and uses their iniquitye to
execute his Judgments: Yet he is not author of sin, neither does sin
please him, for always he sets before him a just and holy purpose, so that
he condemns and punishes righfully and Justly those y^ he dryueth by his
secret prouydence, whether it seems good unto him. Verily he hardens whom
he will, yet is there no unrighteousness in him, for he does nothing but y^
which is ryghteously done. And not only he foreseeth the ruin of the wicked:
but also their fall is appointed by his council and will. As Solomon says.
Proverb. 16. that not only the destruction of the unrighteous and proud was
known before: but also they were appointed to perdition, even as God by his
bountye and mercy keeps the faithful, and suffers not the devil to have
power on them, nor them to be suppress with sin. So also, he does not only
give over those and denies them his grace whom he will punish: but also he
blinds them and gives them over into a reprobate sense, deliueryng them to
the power of the devil. Shall we then attribute unto God any thing at all in
evil works because that if he denied not his grace, no man should be given
into a reproved sense? It is certain that the wicked are given into a
reprobate sense not only by the sufferyng of God: but it comes to pass
through his just Judgment, and his vpryght order that the wicked are vexed by
this rage, as well through their own concupiscence, as by the force of the
devil. Yet we must not lay any fault on God, for the roots of sin ar still
remaining in a sinner. Therefore, when we find such sentences in the Scripture,
that God himself blyndeth or hardens ye heart of man, they assign not the
beginning unto God, neither do they make him author of evil, so as y^ fault
ought to be imputed unto him. It is said that God geues over the reprobate to
diverse desires, is this to say that he depraueth or corrupts their heart?
Not so, for the reason why the heart of man is subject to froward desires, is
forasmuch as it was already corrupt and faulty. Moreover it is said that God
blyndeth and hardens. May a man say therefore that he is the author or
mynyster of sin? God forbid, but rather by this means he takes vengeance
and punysheth sins, and that he does Justly without doing them wrong, in
as much as they have refused to be ruled by his spryte. It follows then that
the spryng of sin is not in God, neither may the fault be imputed to him as
though he took pleasure in euel doing. Thus it booteth man nothing to have
with God endeuoryng to lay his faults and offenses on him. And this is the
reason whatsoever evil there is, it proceeds from the evil appetite of men.

12
His mercyes are above all his works. Psalm. 145. He shows mercy to vvho^
he vvil. Roman. ^.
WE have already seen that God is no way beholding or bound to any creature,
he is free in all his wylls and workings, no man has given unto him to provoke
him to recompense. If he reccaue to mercy, and if he save, it is of his mere
goodness, as also if he condemn he has a just cause to do it. He has
mercy then on whom he will, and not on all, he offers his grace to all, but
all are not made partakers of his grace: but yet his bountye and mercy is
stretched over al his works, that is to say, God not only of his mercy and
fatherly bountuousnesse forgeueth sins: but also uses liberality
indifferently toward al, as he makes his sun to shine upon the good and
evil. The reprobate ar among the works of God, in as much as he formed their
bodies and their souls. Although therefore the remyssion of sins be a
treasure hydden from the wicked and proud: Yet their iniquitye lets not God
from spreadyng his mercyes and bountyes largely upon the^ also. But in ye mean
time these unthankful ones swallow down ye liberalitye of God not tasting or
felyng it at all: Only the beleuyng know what it is to enjoy the grace and
favor of God, as it is said in the. 34. Psalm. Draw you nere to him and be
you lyghtened and your faces shall not be ashamed. See and taste how sweet the
Lord is. And moreover seeing it is so y^ our offenses and sins, wrap all the
world in Gods curse, his mercy likewise both stretch eue^ to brute beasts
which he helps.

13
God tempts no man. Jacob 1. God tempted Abraham. Genesis. 2^.
IT is an easy thing to agree these two places, if we understand, what
difference there is between plucking that out which is hyd within ye hearts, and
styrring the hearts inwardly to naughtye desires. When Saint James says that
God tempts none it is to the end that no man should lay his sin upon an
other, and much less upon God, and the reason follows, that God is not
tempted to do evil: But every one is tempted when he is drawn and taken by
the bayte of his own concupiscence. He treats then of inward temptations
which be nothing but unruly appetites that stir us to sin. This then is
very well said that God is not y^ author of such temptations because they rise
from the corruption of our nature. This doctrine is set forth because it is a
very common thing among men to lay else where the fault of evils which they
commyt: Yea, and they stick not to charge God with it, wherein they show
themselves the very sons of their father Adam that said, the woman that thou
gave me disceyued me. The^ we are brought, back to the confessing of our own
fault and sin, to the end that we should not put God in our place as though
he himself did move us to sin. We may not therefore remove our offenses from
us to others, seeing that we have and carry the root in our own concupiscence.
For although Satan make us taste his poison, and his blastes kyndle evil
desires in us: Yet are we not driven to sin by any outward constraynt, but
our flesh styrreth us, and we of our own accord obey the intycementes of it.
This notwythstanding shall not let us to say that God has his manner of
tempting, as he tempted Abraham, y^ is to say, he brought him to a true proof
to search the faith of his servant to the quick. This ought to be most
manifest, there are also outward remptations which are sent us of God to prove
our patience and to try our faith by offryng us some occasion to make our
mind known.

14
No man ever savve God. John. 1. I savve the Lord face to face. Genesis. 32.
This sentence that no man ever saw God must not be understood only of the
outward syghte which is with bodily eyes: But also generally, that as God
dwells in a light that can not be attained to, so also he can not be known
but in his son Jesus Christ who is his lively Image. God which was before as
it were hyd in his secret, and profounde glory, became as it were visible in
Jesus Christ. And so when the son is called the lively Image of the father,
that belongs to the particular benefyte of the new testament. And when it is
added the only Son, which is in the bosom of his father, the same has told
it thee, it is showed how God is manifested in the Gospel and what difference
there is between the old fathers and us, and how we be in higher degree than
they* as S. Paul shows. 2. Corin. 3. that there is no more a veyle now as
there was in old time under the law. But God is openly beheld in the face of
Jesus Christ, not that the ancient fathers were without the knowledge of God,
among which the Prophets even at this day bear a torch before us to light
us: but in comparison of us they had but small sparks of the true light, and
we at this day be lyghted with a full light. Now as touching that, that is said
of Jacob that he saw the Lord face to face, it is very true that he had but a
little taste of the glory of God: Yet was it not without cause that this holy
patriarch did set forth this vision above all the other in which God had not so
manyfestly appeared unto him: Yet notwythstandyng in comparison of the
bryghtnesse of the Gospel yea or of the law it was only a little spark or a
very dymme beam. Jacob the^ saw the Lord of an unwonted fashion, so he
speaks in respect of other revelations that he had, and not in comparison of
the apparaunce of the Gospel which we have at this day. If we will speak of an
excellent vision, there is scarcelye any such as Moses vision which he obtained
in the hill, which is spoken of in Exo. 33 and yet God pronounces expressly
thou may not see my face, only thou shall se me behynd. He signifies by
this similitude that the time of the full and clear reueling was not yet come.
But now, let ye face of Christ be taken from us, and there is no mean whereby
any man be he never so excellent, may see God, the signs in which of old he
showed himself, have declared, that the look of man can not pearce to the
beholding of God, whose being is incomprehensible, as when he appeared in a
cloud, in flame, and smoke.

15
The wicked shall not rise in judgment. Psalm. 1. We shall all rise to
judgment. 1 Corint. 15.
THere is very great diversity between these two sentences, for in the first
Psalm there is nothing spoken of the last Judgment, nor of that rising up,
which shall be when the sone of God shall come to Judge both the quick and the
dead. The Prophets mind is to show that the state of the happy life is
grounded upon a good conscience, wherefore it is no meruayll if the wicked be
by and by disappointed of the felicity which they them self have imagined.
They have their pleasure in this world, and they tryumphe whylest al things are
full of trouble here beneath, as thieves skirmyshing in the forest and woods
when the provost Marshall is far of from them: Yet things shall not be always
so dysordered, but when they shall be brought into some good order, then their
pleasures shall be taken from them, so that they shall feel that they were
drunk when they thought they had been happy. The wicked then and proud are
pronounced to be miserable for as much as to be blessed, a man must have a
good conscience. It is very true, that before they be searched to the quycke,
al things laugh on them, but the whilst none deserves to be called or
accounted blessed, except he be held up by a fast soundness of heart, when
the good and just be tried, the^ at length men know which is the fast and true
pureness. Thus when it is said that the proud and wicked, shall not rise up
in Judgment, the meaning is, they cannot stand upright or abide it when they
are examined by the Just Judgment of God: And withal, this also is true, that
the wicked shall rise again in the last Judgment of Christ as well as the good:
but in a diverse sort as it is said. John. 5. the hour shall come, in which
all they that are in the graves shall hear the voice of the son of God, and
they that shall have done well shall go into the resurrection of life, and they
that shall have done evil into the resurrection of condemnation. True it is
that in the Articles of our faith there is no mention made of y^ rising of the
wicked neither of their eternal death because y^ ^rede which contains the
said Articles is a brief sum of the faith of ye Christians wherein nothing is
entreated of but that which serves to confort the chosen, showing them the
good things which God has prepared for them. It was made to quiet the
consciences of the faithful in y^ they have wherewith to maintain and
stablyshe themselves in y^ hope of their salvation, which the wicked shall have
no part of Brieflye, the resurrection of the wicked is not to set them in
better state: But rather to make them altogether confounded, and accursed for
ever more. Howbeit the power of God shall appear in their resurrection when he
shall punyshe euerlastyngly both their bodies and souls, as also it shall be
seen in the risyng again of the good and Just, when he shall make them wholly
and continually blessed.

16
Jesus Christ forbyddeth us to be angrye. Mathe. 5. David says be angrye.
Psalm. 4.
Jesus Christ leadyng men back to his authority which of right ought to be
set before al, Pau. Ephesians. 4*
ancient and repulsyng the common opinion of yt scribes, sets forth three
degrees of condemnation beside the violence of hands, signifying thereby that
this decree of God, thou shall not kill, does not only restrain the hands:
But also all affections that are contrary to brotherly love, and he openly
calls them manquellers which shall but be angry with their neighbors, or
that shall arrogantly mock them, or that shall by any outrageous word offend
them. And although he condemns to the torment of fire only those which use
against their neighbors open reproaches and dyspytes: Yet he does not exclude
wrath and anger from this pain: But alludyng unto earthly Judgments he does
witness that God will be also the Judge of secret and hydden anger to punysh
it. Now when Saint Paul: Ephesians. 4. says, be angry and sin not, whether he
have therein alleged the testimonye of the Psalm either else that he did only
allude thereunto followyng the greek translation. Howsoever it be, he has
applied this sentence very well to his purpose: for he shows thereby what a
fault it is for men to spewe up their collar on other me^, seeing in them self
they have matter enough to be angry with themselves to keep them from offendyng
other, wherefore he would they should rather frett inwardly and exercise their
collar against themselves, for there is cause enough for the^ to be angry and
to deal dyspytefully with themselves. And forasmuch as the infidels that have
no fear of God nor any quick feeling of him run hedlong at al adventure.
They are warned (if at least wise there be yet any hope of help in the^) to cry
and tremble wtin the^ selves. For hereof c^ometh the presuptio^ and fool
hardiness of all the proud through which they stick not to make war with
God. They are drunk with a vain and fond assurance, and they harde^
themselves with their own will, when forgetting god and themselves, they follow
at that, to which their fond and lewd sensuality drives them. The medecin to
make them sin no more in this behalf is that they wake out of their deep
slombre, and begin to stir and tremble in themselves. So when they shall have
well shaken of their sluggishnesse the desire to sin shall cease in them, for
whence comes it that the unbelieving sort deal so spitefully with the good
and simple, and that they raise up so many troubles and storms? but hereof,
that they are to well at ease in them self. Doutlesse by our anger and
indignation we offend God, first, when we are angry for every light cause, and
often without a cause, or being moved by the wrongs which are done to us
particularly. Again being once moved to collar we pass beyond our bownds and
run forth without measure. Lastly we stir up that anger against our
brethren which we should stir up against our selves, and against our own
offenses: but the true tempering of a lawful collar which causes us not to
offend is when we seek the matter of anger rather in our self, than in others
bendyng our anger against our own vices. As touching others we must be angrye
with their faults rather than with their persons, and we must not conceive
displeasure of faults and offenses committed against us: but rather the zeal
of the glory of the Lord ought to inflame us to anger. To conclude, let our
anger be so moved in us that when need is it may be appeased but let it not
be myngled with the troublesome affections of the flesh.

17
Eye for eye and toth for toth. Exodus 21^* If any man stryke thee on the right
cheke give him the other also. Math. 5.
IN this place of Exodus, God gives a Law for Judges and Magistrates to the
end they might punish with a like pain the wrongs and dispightes that are
done. As it is reason that his blood should be spilte that has spilt
blood. Likewise it is reason that he that has pulled out another man's eye
should have his eye pulled out also, and so in like case his toth. But because
then that under this cloak every one would avenge himself and reward with like,
the Lord Jesus does give warning that although it was decreed that Judges
should repress the violence of the Wicked and Proud and punnyshe it: yet
every manne ought patientlye to endure the private wrongs that should be
done to them. Butte by this sentence, if any Man strike you on the right
cheke, offer him the other also, the Lord Jesus meant not to overthrow the law
appointed by his father, but only so fashion the hearts of his faithful to a
measure and softness, to the end that when they should be once or twice
stricken they should not be discoraged therwtall. It is true that Jesus Christ
wythholdeth as well our hands from revenge as our hearts: but when any man
with out outrage and revenge can defend himself, and so keep his goods that
no man wrong him, the words of Christ forbydde not such a man peaceably and
sobrely to turn away the violence which he sees nere unto him. A man may
castlye think that Christ would not exhort his faithful to whet or kyndle
foorther the malice of them that already burn to much with a ragyng appetite
to hurt. Now to offer or give the other cheek after that one blow is received
at a proud man's hand what were it else but to move him ye more? Every one may
easily know at what mark our lord Jesus shoteth, y^ is to say that end of one
fraye will be the beginning of another, and therefore the faithful all the time
of their life, must abide diverse dispites and many injuries by continual
degrees, when they have been once harmed. By this lesson he will have them
fashioned and brought to suffer, that in suffering patiently they may learn to
be patient.

18
Thou when thou prayest go into thy chamber. Math. 6. My house shall be called
the house of prayer. Esai. 56.
OF old time the Lord would be called upon only by the Jews, and therefore he
had appointed a temple to them only, as Saint Paul says in the 6. to the
Romans. To Israel belongs the choice, the glory, the agreementes, the
decrees of the Law, the service of God, and the promyses. The temple then was
placed among them by a singular privilege. Now that which is said by Esaias
agreed with the circumstance of the time: for he foretells the calling of the
Gentiles, for he promises that God shall not only cause his temple to recover
the former magnificence: but also that all nations shall assemble there and all the world shall agree in the true religion. And til the time of christ the
temple was truly the place or house of prayer, to wete, so long as the law had
force with her shadows. And it began to be a house of prayer unto al nations
when the doctrine of the Gospel was blown abroad, by which all the world has
been united in agreemente of faith. Now then since all the difference that was
between the Jews and the Gentiles is at the last taken away, the entry into
the house of God is open to al men, of what country soever they be. For the
Chirch is so enlarged that it stretches through all the regions of the earth:
for all people are called to pray and to call upon the name of God But when
Christ says, that when we would make our prayer we should go into our secret
chamber, it is to teach us to (...) the example of the Hipocrits and not the
commune places where the faithful come together to pray. For the Hipocrites are
wont to pray in the assemblies and in the ends of the streets because they
would be seen of men. They grossly and shamfully profane the name of God in
that they pray openly or rather make show of praying because they would be
praised of men. Therefore he commands those that be his to enter into their
closets if they will pray as they ought, and make such a prayer as may be
pleasing unto God. It is true that we are commanded in sundry places of the
Scripture to pray unto God in the midst of a great assembly and to give him
thanckes before all the people, and that to the end to witness our faith or to
acknowledge our selves unto him, and also to move others to do the like,
neither does Christ turn us away from such a zeal and exercise: but
only he does warn us to have God before our eyes as often as we purpose to
pray. This is not then, to say, that we should fly from men and that we cannot
rightly pray except we wtdraw our self a part: for he speaks by comparison
signifieng that we should seek some solytary place, rather than conet the
presence of men to see us pray. To be short whether any man pray alone, or
before others, he must be contented with the only witness of God, as though
he were wtdrawen into some place apart.

19
I am the Lord and there is none other forming the light and creating the
darkness making peace and vvorking evil, I am the Lord doing al things. Esai.
45. When the Devil speaks lies, he speaks that that is his own, for he is
a (...) and the father of lying. Jeremy. 8.
IN this place of Esaias Godds providence is spoken of by which al things are
governed both the good and (...), the merry and sad. Here al men are warned
(whereas before they did assign all things to fortune and to their Idols) to
acknowledge the power and stength of God to the end they should yield to him
the government and glory of al things. If this be required even at the Pagans
hands, let us considre a little what shame it ought to be to the^ that bear
the name of Christians to take from him his power and to spoil him of his
strength and glory to the end to give it over unto diverse governors which
they themselves have forged after their own apetit. For God is not
acknowledged or aduoutched for God when men attribute unto him a bare name
only: but when all authority is given unto him. Hereby we may see that when it
is said that God is he that makes peace and creates il, it is not to be
understood that he is the doer or author of naughty things, and the oposition
which is here shelues it more plainly, to wete, this word peace, for there is
a contrariety herein between prosperity and adversity, for a man ought to
understand by peace prosperity as also by ye al adversity, to wete, war famine,
and al other like things, where as if there were a co^trariety between justice
and evil this error might have so^e color: but the contrariety that is here
shows very well another self, to were, that there is neither prosperity nor
adversity, neither good nor evil but that proceadeth from y^ hand of God of
who^ we cannot say that he is author of the fault but of the pain. There are
restimentes ^now in the holy Scripture which show plainly that the Lord shall
^aue the mischeuous and proud to chasten us by them: yet for all that we cannot
say that he breaths into them the (...) but he uses it or serves his cour^e
with it or correct us, and therein does the (...) Judge. So we may conclude that
God is the only author of al things, that is to say, prosperitye and adue^sity
are sent by him (although he use the hand of men) to the end that nothing be
attributes to forrane or to any other cause.

But even as God tempreth not nor stirs any person to euel doing as he
himself is not tempted to euel, so also the Devil burns with a raging desire
of doing il. God will use him and his wickedness to prove and try us: yet the
wickedness is roted in y^ sprite of y^ Devil, and God has not breathe (...)
into him: he is called a liar and a murderer and that he has of his own, he
is accustomed to lie and can do nothing else but forge lies, with craft and
guile, but that he has of himself and not of the first creation of God: for
when y^ Lord Jesus makes him the workman and author of lies he does manifestly
separate him from God and makes him al together contrary to God, so much we may
well say of all the wicked and reprobate that are obstinate in their wickedness
God has in no wise wrought y^ euel or mischef that is in them.

20
Honor thy father and thy mother and he that shall curse his Father and Mother
let him die the death. Exodus 20. (...) If any com to me and hate not his
Father and Mother he cannot be my Disciple. Luke. 14.
THIS commandment is set forth in the law of God that we should honor our
fathers and mothers, and this co^maundementt requires that the children be
lowly toward their fathers obey them, reverence them, and help them, as they
are bound, and to be at their commandment. The true love is there required
without which there can be no true obedience, and as the promise of long life
is made unto those that obei their fathers and mothers, in the curse is
pronou^ces against such as curse or speak ill or are stubborn toward their
parents, yea they are adjudged to Death by the law of God. Exodus 21. Leuit.
10. Deuteronomy. (...) and though they should escape the hand of men* yet God will
revenge (...) in some sort although he ^arry long, as we may see it by common
experience. For how many of such people die either in the wars either in
bralles, or are eueri day given into the hands of the hangman or dye shamefully
before their age, or in some other sort: so that a man may perceive that it is
Gods hand that makes them die with shame. And if it com to pas that they
escape to the old and later age: yet do they but pine away because they are
destitute of the blessing of God. Then seeing the love of Parents is so much
commended unto us, yea and that in such sort that whosoever does against it
either by rebellion, either by disobedience, or by striking, is adjudged to
Death by the certain decree of God. How may this agree with it, that a man
should hate his Father and Mother to follow the son of God. Our Lord Jesus
commands us not to take away and put of the affections of men, he does not
forbid us to love our pare^tes as we ought, but he does decree, that all the
mutual love y^ is between men should keep his own due order to the end that
the fear of God should be far above all. Let the house band love his wife,
the wife her houseband, the father his son, the son his father so as for all
yt, the love of man bears not the reverence that is due unto our Lord Jesus.
For if among men themself even where the line of frendshyp is strayghtest,
there are some above others, is it not reason y^ the son of God should be
placed before all. And in very deed this is not a sufficient acknowled^ to
considre what it is to be received among the Disciples of Jesus Christ if the
price of this honor and dignitye have not the force in us to subdue and
repress all the affections of our flesh. It now any man think that this manner
of speech, to hate his Father is to hard, yet it is one self sense, as if he
said if the love of our fathers and mothers let us from following Christ we
must Manfully resist it.

21
Hebr. 6. They that have been once illumynated, and have tasted the heavenly
gift, and been partakers of the holy Ghost and have tasted the good word of
God and the power of the world to come, it is impossible they should be
renewed by repentance if they fall back. Whosoever shall call upon the name
of God shall be saved.
WHEN God pronounces his threatenings unto us and is wylling to astonne us with
them, he pryckes us forward as sluggish and slow asses to seek our salvation.
And in these Judgments he sets before us dredful signs, as though the su^ne
were altogether dimmed with darkness, and y^ Moan turned into blood, and all that
is here below mingled and confounded. And also after that he has so filled the
heaven and earth with darkness, yet for all that he shows us the mean how
we may openly see our salvation shine before our eyes, that is by calling upon
his name. If God did but simply promise to save us, yet that were a great
matter: but behold here a more excellent and far greater thing, when he
promises this salvation among diverse bottomless depthes and gulfes of Death.
When al things shall be confounded, and that there shall be on every side fear of
death, only let us call upon the goodness of God and we shall be saved. Although
therefore there be a gulf of euels to swalow in y^ pore siner, yet a remedi is
set before him to escape. This sentence is general, for without exception our
good God receaueth all men unto him, and by this means calls them to
salvation. And seeing that no man is shut out from calling upon God, the gate
of salvation is open unto all, and there is nothing but our own unbelief that
lets us to enter. But although it be said al, yet notwithstanding we must
understand only those unto who^ God shows himself by his gospel. As in the
calling upon him there is a certainty of salvation, even so we must be resolved
that without this calling on the name of God we are more than wretches and
castawayes. In the mean time the calling is not separated from faith seeing it
is grounded upon faith only: but the Prayer of an Hypocrite and of a dispiser
deserves not to be called the calling upon the name of God. Now to the end
that this sentence of the Epistle to the Hebrews may not seem to take away
that which is here set forth, we must mark the circumstaunces thereof, and
how the name of God cannot be called upon by them which after they have tasted
heavenly things beco^me obstinate, and of what fall y^ Apostle speaks, to the
end that seem not strange unto us which he says, it is impossible that they
which fall back should be renewed by repentance, let us understand then that
there be two sorts of falls, one is particular, the other is general and
universal. When a man has committed one fault or many, he is fallen from the
state of a Christen man, then how many sins there are, so many fails there
are, and from this fall a man may be raised up by repentance through the grace
and goodness of God. But the Apostle speaks not of theft, of adulterye or
whoredom, of perjury, of slaughter, or drunkenness: but he notes a general
tournyng back or universal appostasle or falling from the Gospel, when the
obstinate sinner offends God, not only in one sort: but wholly forsakes his
grace for ever. But yet we must note y^ graces of God, which are there
rehearsed: For what may a man look for at his hand that turns back from the
word of the Lord, that quenches the light thereof, that spoyleth himself of the
heavenly gift, and forsakes the partakyng of the holy ghost? Now seeing that
is to refuse God fully, it is also to shut up his heart wholly in such sort as
repentance which is one of the heavenly gifts should not have power to
enter, and yt cannot chance to a man except he sin against the holy ghost.
And such a fault is vnforgeueable, as Christ has pronounced. For he that
transgresses the second table and the first by ignorance is not yet gylty of
such a tournyng back or falling from God. And God takes away his grace from
none but from the reprobate, that is to say, in such sort as he leaves them
no hope remaynyng. Then they that by their pride and obstinate wickedness have
cast of the benefytes of God, with what repenta^nce can they at any time be
touched?

22
Of my self I judge no man. Ierem. 8. The father has given all Judgment to
his son. Joan. 5.
FOR the good understanding of the first of these two sentences we must also
look on y^ which Christ said before, making answer to his adversaries. He said
to the^ you judge according to ye flesh, he reproved them for y^ they Judged
after y^ froward understanding of their flesh or according to the apparaunce of
y^ person. Now, where y^ either affections and desires of the flesh reign or
the respect of y^ person causes judgment to be given, we must in no sort look
y^ truth and equity may have place, and there where the spirit rules not, the
flesh cannot well and rightly judge. And touching him, to show unto his enemies
yt they be rash and led with a fierce and proud spirit, he says y^ he
judges not folyshly as they do. His enemies took upon them to great license to
judge folishlye and rashly, and he y^ whylest forbear to do y^ office of a
judge, although he might judge without doing them wrong, and yet they could
not abide him. But to the end that it should not seem that he gives up the
authority that was given him of his father, he adds farther, and if I judge
my Judgment is true. That is to say, that his witness deserves well to be
allowed. So, a man may know what this sentence means, to we^e, that the
father has given all judgment to his son, that is, that the father
governs all the world in the person of his son, and exercises his
jurisdiction under the rule of him: Not that the father as a private man
remains now idle in heaven without meddling with any thing: for this manner
of speaking is not so much in respect of God as of men. The father changed not
his state at all when he appointed Christ to be King, ruler, and sovereign
governor of heaven and earth: For being in his son he works in him and by
him: But because that when men will clymbe up to God all their senses by and by
fail them. Therefore Jesus Christ is set before our eyes as the visible Image
of invisible God. See now how a man must agree these two places. Christ judges
not his adversaries folyshlye as they did judge him proudly and stoutly and yet
he might well judge them without taking any thing in hand that belonged not to
him: Yet he judges all the world as his father has appointed him thereunto.
And we must not seek the secrets of high places, seeing God provides for our
weakness when he shows himself nere unto us in the person of his son.
Whenever there is any thing to do touching our state, touching the
government of all the world, and touching the heavenly defense of our
salvation, we must direct our sight upon Jesus Christ ye son of God, as in
deed al power is given him and the heavenly father appears to us in the face
of his son.

23
Who is he that has knovve^ the mind of the Lord. Roma. 12. But we have
known the mind of Christ. 1. Cor. 2.
SAINT Paul speaking of the predestination of God, shows us that if men
consider it according to their own understanding they are therein altogether
blind. And a man can not dyspute of an unknown thing but by great
foolehardinesse and fond ouerweenyng. Wherefore men may not rise above the
Oracles and revelations of God, for how may a man know his meaning and
council any farther than those things which by him have been reveled unto
us. In that case men can dyscerne no more than a blind man in the dark. But
yet for all that our faith is not a whyt overthrown, it leaves not to make
us certain of Gods goodness toward us, seeing it proceadeth not from the
fynenesse of man's wit: But from the only lyghtenyng of the holy ghost. For this
cause in the second Chapter of the first to the Corrinthians Saint Paul
having showed that as the mysteryes of God do far surmount the conceit of
our understanding, by and by after he joins thereunto, that the faithful
understand and know the meaning of the son of God, because they have not
received a spirit that is of this world, but the spirit that they have was
given them of God, by which they are taught y^ mercy and goodness of him
which otherwise is comprehensible. Al faithful servants know by ye teaching
of the holy ghost, yt which is far above ye fleshly sense so that they speak
boldly and freely as out of the mouth of y^ Lord. Wherefore eue^ as by their own
abilitye they cannot come unto y^ knowledge of y^ high mysteries of God: so by
the grace of y^ holy ghost they have a certain and clear knowledge of the
same. Now the holy ghost must go before and we must follow, we must stay
where he leaves us, and there we must set fast our foot. But if any man desire
to know more than y^ same spirit has opened, he shall be euerprest with the
infinite brightness of his light.

24
The same is Helye. Mathe. 11. I am not Helias. Joan. 1.
According to the true interpretation of the Prophet Malachy Jesus Christ
affyrmeth iustlye that John the Baptist is Helias, if you will receive him says
he the same is Helia that should come. He shows how John began to Preach
the good tidings of the kingdom of God, that is to say, in as much as he was
y^ same Helias that should be sent before the face of God. Then Jesus Christ's
will is to have this fearful coming of God that was celebrated by Malachy
acknowledged of y^ Jews seeing that the same Helie that was there promised, did
then as it were the duty of a porter. But John the Baptist also speaks the
truth in saying that he is not Helia. The Jews knew by the Prophecy of
Malachye y^ Helie should be as it were as a daystarre to show the coming of
the Messiah. In the mean time they held this overthwart opinion that the soul
partyng forth of one body, should enter into the body of another man. Because
Malachye said that Helia should be sent, they thought that the same Helie
that was in y^ time of king Achab should come again. Wherefore John the
Baptist answered ryghtly and truly that he was not Helia, for he spoke and
answered according to their opinion.

25
Those that he has called he has also sanctified. Roman. 8. Many are called
but fevve are chosen. Mathe. 20.
IT will be an easy matter to agree these two places, so we understand that
there are two sorts of callings, one of the which is spoken of in the eight of
the Romans, the other in y^ xx. of Matthew. First then there is one calling
which is effectual that is the dyscoueryng of the eternal election, when God
by y^ mynistery of his word and the grace of his holy spirit declares unto us
and makes us to know perfectly y^ he is our father. Here we have not to do
only with y^ outward preaching, which should but beat our ears except y^ the
second were joined to it, y^ is to say, the holy ghost which causes this
calling to have his effect. And they y^ in this sort be called be also
sanctified, they, possess ye free righteousness which is in Jesus Christ.
They be sanctified, they have also a continuing of Gods goodness from y^
calling until ye death* There is another sort of calling with which god calls al
(...) by his gospel. Many infected and unclean persons preace in by force
which though for a while they occupye a place among others: yet at y^ last they are driven out, and drawn to punishment. Not al they by a great many y^ be
called, or bydden, or y^ have some entry into y^ Church, are made pertakers of
everlasting life: but only they who^ y^ son of God shall find prepared, and
clad in such a garment as is worthy of the heavenly palace.

26
He is not the light. Joan. 1. He was the burning and shyning lamp. (...)
IN both these places John y^ Baptist is spoken of. First when it is said y^
John was not ye light, that is to be understood of y^ light which does give
light to every man coming into the world. Jesus Christ only is that light, who
makes every one of us to feel some force of his clerenesse. And true it is y^
as he is the eternal light: so he has a bryghtnesse y^ is natural to him and
is not taken from any where else: But rather we are sent back to y^ experience y^
we al have of it. Seeing our lord Jesus makes us al partakers of his
brightness, we must also confess this honor to belong to him alone, and
generally al me^ ar here contained. For we know, y^ me^ have this singular to
the^ above al living things y^ they have reason and understanding, they carrye
graven in their hearts the difference of good and evil. There is no man
therefore but has some syghte of this great and everlasting light. This cannot
be said of John the Baptiste nor of any other whosoever he be, of whom it is
said ryghtly y^ he is not the light, to the end his bryghtnesse be it never so
great dymme not the clerenesse of the glory of God. For some did so stick to
John y^ Baptist that they made no account of our Lord Jesus: As if a man should
be astonned with the sight of the dawnyng day, or of some little star, and
the whilst voutchsafe not to turn his eyes toward the sun.

Now as touching the other sentence, it is also true that John y^ Baptiste was
a burning and shynyng lamp. This may be said of al faithful, that they be
lyghtes to the Lord, as Saint Paul calls them. Ephe. 5. and the reason is
because they are lightened by his spirit. And they have their eyes open not
only for them self: but also to direct and guide other into the way of
salvation. The Apostles also have carried the torche of the Gospel to drive
darkness out of y^ world. Although therefore the faithful be decked with this
honorable title that they are called lyghtes, and that inasmuch as they have
the word of life and salvation, they must shine in the world as lyghtes and
torches: Yet Jesus Christ does attribute this particularly to his Apostles and
the ministers of his Gospel because they carry a lantern before other to lead
and to guide the^. For seeing we be al blind in the myddest of darkness, God
lyghteth us by the light of his word which is spoken to us by his ministers:
Yet he garnisheth John the Baptiste particularly with this title of honor,
because that by his ministry, God gave a much more excellent light to his
Church.

27
There is but one good, and that is God. Mark 10. A good man brings forth
good out of the treasure of his heart. Luke. 6.
IT is true that men be they never so excellent cannot deserve so honorable a
title as to be called good, no not y^ Angels. For they have not one only drop
of goodness of themself: But they have from God whatsoever they have y^ is
good. Beside, be it in men, or be it in the Angels, goodness is but begone in
the^, it is not perfect. Yet we must understand what y^ meaning of our Lord
Jesus Christ is, when he says to the young man, why do thou call me good?
There is none good but God, he will not affirm there y^ he is God: but he
brings this young man in, to believe his doctrine. He had already a certain
affection to obey: but Jesus Christ will have him mount higher, to hear this
holy doctrine as from the mouth of the living God, and not of a mortal man. For
as men are wont to make of devils Angels, so without discretion, men call them
good teachers, which have no true or good felyng of God. And so ar the gifts
of God profaned. It is no marvel then y^ Christ sendes this young man to God to
the end he may give authority to his doctrine. Yet there is no inconvenience in
calling a man good when God has changed his heart, which by nature was ill,
and when he has prynted in him some of his goodness. So the goodness shall be
always Gods, and the man also shall be good: Yet it shall not be of him self:
But in that God has made him such. So it is said that a good man brings
forth goodness from the good treasure of his heart. This sentence admonysheth
y^ faithful which made profession to be Gods servants to examyne and advise
the^ diligently what they set forth. Nothing will come out of the sack but
what is in it, as the proverb says, The naughtye heart cannot but bear
witness of it self by profane words, and by wicked words. So a heart fearyng
God sends forth fruits worthy a Christian man. But we must return to this
point that the heart cannot be good but by the only goodness and grace of
God, and out of this self root the good fruytes also shall spring.

28
Mark. ^. Touching the day and hour, none knovveth it, no not the Angels that
are in heaven, nor the son him self: none but the father. All power is given
me in heaven and in earth. Math. ^.
IF all power be given to our Lord Jesus as well in heaven as in earth, it
seems there is nothing, no not in heaven hyd or unknown unto him. But by the
way we must note to what purpose he spoke this. Christ willing to appoint his
Apostles to Preach the Gospel, first spoke to them of his power. A mean or
common authority had not in this case sufficed. But it was mete that he which
sent to have eternal and happy life to be promised in his name, should have an
Empire sovereign, and in very deed divine, to thend y^ all the world might be
brought in awe of him and that his doctrine which should be published should
be able to ^ame al loftynes, and to bring down al mankind, the Apostles had
never been persuaded to take on the^ so hard a charge except they had been very
certain that their warrante was placed in heaven being of sovereign power. He
calls himself Lord and king as well of heaven as of earth, because that in
that he brings men so true obedience, by the preaching of his gospel he has
established and appointed the throne of his Kingdom on earth. And in that he
regenerateth his faithful into a new life, and calls them to the hope of
salvation, he openneth the heavens to the end to lift up to happy immortalitye
with the Angels those which before not only crepe in y^ world but also were
plunged in the dark bottomless depth of death. True it is that Christ
everlastingly has had with his father al power and authority, and that of his
own right: but yet it is said that it was given him, to we^e, in our flesh.
Then he is appointed governor, judge, and sovereign Prince over all the whole
Church, but it was not clearly known till after his resurrection. For then at
the last he was adorned with the marks of a sovereign King, and receiving a
name above al names, he had also the ends of al things in his hand^ to
dispose them at his good pleasure. But whilst he is yet in our mortal flesh it
is said that the son him self knows not when the day shall be of his
fearful coming. In asmuchas he is God nothing is unknown unto him. He has
been ever God, neither has his Manhood taken any thing from his divine
majesty. The two natures were unseparably joined together in him: but it was in
such sort, that neither of both lost their property. Chiefly the Divinity
rested and showed not it self as often as it was expedient that the nature of
man did that which belonged to it, to accomplish the charge and office of a
Mediator. Wherefore there is no absurdity or inconvenience in this that the
son of God who knew al, yet according to the conceyte and understanding of
his manhood there was some thing which he knew not: for otherwise he could
not have been subject either to grief or to carefulnes, or have been like
unto us.

A man may reply yt this cannot be spoken of the son of God that he was
ignorant, because ignorance is the punnishment of sin, and he sinned never.
It is also spoken here of the heavenly Angels, that this day is hidden from
them, will any say that this ignorance proceeds of sin? Though they have in
no wise offended, yet are they in somwise ignorant. As touching the son of
God, he has so put on man's flesh that he has taken on him the pains due for
sin. And where he knew not of ye later day according to his humain nature,
that does no more take away any thing from his ^^nne nature, tha^ his being
mortal did.

29
You have the poor with you always, but me you shall not have alvvayes.
Math. 26. I am alvvayes with you, until the end of the world. Math. 28.
THe Lord Jesus speaks of himself in both places touching ye first, alowi^g
y^ which Mary had don, he shows how this service plesed hi^, yt is not y^ he
took pleasure in the (...) which had been poured out upon him for the good
^auours sake: but in (...) respect of his burial, because that by such a (...)
he would give them to understand that his grave should be filled with good
savor, as be did spread savor of life and salvation through all the world. But
since that the truth of this figure has been perfectly accomplished, and the
son of God when he came out of the grave performed with the good sauoure and
quickening smell of his death, not only one house, but the whole world. It were a
folly to begin again to do that which should be without cause or profit. And
therefore he sends us back to the pore to the end we should not excuse our
self as though we could no more occupye ourselves in his service: for once he
required such service as that which Mary did to him. But now seeing he is
mounted into ye heavenly glory, there is neither gold nor silver nor precious
ointments, nor sumptuousness whatsoever they be which we may offer unto him to
do him acceptable service. Now where he says, you shall not have me alwais with
you, that is to take from us al excuse, as though he said, that from thence
forward he would no more take pleasure in that which once he would have done to
him. He makes a distinction between y^ ordinary service, which must be ever
used among the faithful, and that extraordinary service which had an end when
he went up into heaven. Will we bestow our money well in true Sacrifice and in
holy offering? Let us bestow it to relieve the necessity of the poor and
neady. For our Lord Jesus says that he is no longer with us in this world to
be served with pompes and outward preparations. And we know, yea and we feel
by the experience of faith that Christ is present with us by his strength and
gostly grace. But he dwells not visibly among us (...) of us earthly honor.
He says (...) you unto the end of the world. He had ^^yd that he was appointed
King of heaven and of earth. Afterward us promises to assist his Apostels
whom he had enioined a hard office and charge, warning them not to look upon
that which they could do of themself: but to lean upon his strength and
inumerble power. The manner of this presence which the Lord promises to his
faithful must be understood spiritually: for it is not nedeful that he should
not come down from heaven to succor us seeing he can help us by the grace of
his holy spirit, stretching forth his hand to us from the highest of the
heavens. As touching his humayne nature it is certain that there is an
infinite distaunce between him and us. But he not only spreads the efficacy
of his spirit through all the world: but also he dwells truly in us.
Moreover this promise is not made only to the Apostels: for it reaches even
to the end of the world. Very true it is that he promyseth his aid, chyefly to
his ministers which for that they are weak and needy in every condition,
could not execute the lest part of their office. Seeing then their charge is as
troublesome and hard as it is healthful, assuredly they have more need than
all other of the assistance of our Lord Jesus, to the end they may have the
victory of all the assaults and battayles of this world: as in these days it
is showed us by plain experience, that christ works wonderfully by a secret
manner, so that y^ gospel has his course though Satan lay many lettes in the
way. But generally all the faithful ar partakers of this promise, to the end
no man should be discoraged as though he were forsaken.

Let us then make this conclusion that although Christ be departed into heaven,
yet he is not so departed butte that he ever is and will be to the end with
us. He has taken away the presence of his body from our sight: but he leaves
not the whylest to assist his faithful which must yet live in this world,
but he governs the world with a more present strength. This promysse of
his continual assistaunce was accomplyshed by his asce^tion, in which as y^
body of y^ so^n of god was lifted up above al y^ heavens: so his power and
efficacy is spread beyond all the bounds of heaven and of earth. So then these
two things may well be said, that the son of God is no more among us, and yet
he is among us, and shall be ever until the end of the world. He is here no
more according to the presence of his human nature, but he is here acording
to the presence of his Majesty. For a few days the Church had him present in
his flesh, now not seeing him with bodily eyes, she possesses him by faith.

30
Thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven. Math. 6. Appeasing by the
blood of his cross the things which be as well in heaven as in earth.
Colloss. 1.
WE desire by this petition contained in the Lords prayer, that al creatures
may truly and perfitly obey God on earth, as his* Angels in heaven do, and
execute his co^mau^deme^ts and al his holy ordinances without any gayn saying,
and not seek to dysplease him in any sort. Like as they know that there is
nothing better than that which God wylles: so they do readily obey him. And
this is the cause why they abide still and are not subject to change and
corruption, and why they have quietness and continual happiness. To weete,
because they are in all and altogether agreeing to the will of God. Seeing then
there is nothing in them that wtstandeth the holy and good will of God, nothing
that turns them away from his holy decrees, nothing that can be desired or
wyshed biside his good pleasure, it can not be but they enjoy sovereign rest
and true blessefulnesse.

Sith it is so that the Angels of heaven since their creation have ever in all
things and altogether yielded unto God true obedience, and by that means there
has never been strife or hatred between him and them, how comes it to pass
that they had need to be reconciled? For in the first Chapter of the
Collossians mention is made not only of men which are meant by the things
which be on earth: but also of Angels which are meant by things that are in
heaven. If hereupon a man would say that the Angels have been set at one
with men, and so the heavenly creatures are at one again with earthly things.
This is not that which Saint Paul means here: for he says expressly that
God has reconciled the^ to himself. The manner of ma^s reconciling to God is
this, that before while they were estraunged from him by sin, they should
have felt him to be a Judge to their ruin and condemnation, if the grace of
the Mediatoure had not come between to appease his anger. So the attonemente
made between God and men, is that the hatred and strifes were taken away by
Jesus Christ our Lord, and so god of a Judge was made a Father. Between God
and the Angels there is another reason for in this case there was no offense or
starting back, and therefore there was no separation or alienating: yet there is
two reasons why the Angels should be attoned with God. For since they be
creatures they were not out of danger of stumbling, but that they were strengthed
by the grace of our Lord Jesus. This now helps greatelye to make continual
peace with God, to wete, to tarry in one steady state of righteousness so that
there be no fear of falling or reuolting, or otherwise doing so that they
might be estra^ged from god. Moreover in this same obedience which they yield
to God, it is certain that there cannot be so exquisite or so perfect a
perfitnesse as may thoroughly and in all respects satisfy God so that they should
need no pardon. And for that consideration is it that good Job said, God shall
find wickedness in his Angels. So whatsoever perfect cleanness a man may
find out, if it be brought before the Justice of God, it shall be but
uncleanness. Wherefore let us conclude that the Angels have not so perfect
righteousness as suffices to ^oyne the^ wholly with God. Wherefore they have
need of a peace and atonement maker by whose grace they may cleave fully unto
God.

31
My flesh is verily meat. Joan. 6. The flesh profits nothing. Joan. 6.
THAT is very true which is said in the 36 Psalm, to we^e that the spring of
life rests in God, and no man can justly vaunt him to have life but in so much
as it is breathed into him by God But because the majesty of God should be as a
hydden fountain (as in deed it is far above our knowledge) it is openly
showed forth in Jesus Christ, in him we have a clear welspring whereout we may
draw, we may see it by that which is said Joan. 6* that as y^ father has
life in himself so he has given to his son to have life in himself, Whereby
he shows that he only is the fountain of life and that by his voice and word
he spredeth this life on al men, for life would not flow from his mouth unto us
if he had not in himself the cause and original of it: for it is not said
that God has life in himself only, because he only lives of his own power:
but also because that having in himself fullness of life, he gives life to all
things. So he would not have life to be as it were hid and buried in
himself. And for this cause he has yielded it over unto his son, that so it
might fall down upon us. Now then this life is poured into ye flesh of Jesus
Christ, so that whosoever seeks life else where shall find Death. The souls
then find no where but in his flesh the meat wherwt they are fed into
everlasting life. This is a wonderful secret of God that in our flesh he has
offered us life, where before there was but matter of Death, and by that mean he
provides for our infirmity and weakness, when to enjoy life he calls us not
above the clouds, but displaies it v^on earth as if he drew us into the
secret places of his kingdom. In the mean time correcting the ^O^tinesse and
pride of our minds, he tries the lowliness and obedience of our faith. His
will is that to find life we should stay on the flesh of his son, which in
show is little to be regarded. As the body waxes weak and dries up when the
ordinary fode is taken from it: so if the soul be not fed with y^ flesh of the
son of God, which is the heavenly food, it will suddenly sterue for hunger.
When we seek the matter of life in the flesh of Jesus Christ, then we find
life in him. So the glory and excellency of the children of God, is in Christ
crucified: for that as soon as we turn us back from the sacrifice of his
death, we can find nothing but death, and there is no other mean by which the
faithful are brought to the knowledge of his power, but by his death and
resurrection. If then we will the son shall show himself unto us to be the
head and author of life, we must receive him as the servant of his Father.
For we are made rich in all sort of good things in that he empouerished and
abased himself, his humbling of himself, and his going down into Hell has
lifted us up into heaven by taking on him the curse of the cross he has
raised up a triumphaunte bow in token of glory and victory. But now Christ
himself says of his flesh that it profits nothing. Yet in so speaking be
doothe not exclude alyke all profit of the flesh, as though there were no
profit to be taken of it. He says it profits nothing when it is parted
from the spirit. Whence proceeds it that it gives life but inasmuche as it
is spyrituall? They that stycke at the earthy nature of his flesh shall find
nothing in it but that that is Dead. But when we lift up our eyes to the
strength o^ the spirit which is spread upon the flesh, we shall there find
effectuously and by the experience of Faith that it is notte with out cause
that it is called quyckenyng. Well then we may well say that the flesh of
Jesus Christ is verelye meat, and yet for all that it profyteth nothing. It is
meat because we get life by it, because that in it God has been reconcyled
unto us, because in it we find all the parts of our Salvation accomplished. It
profits nothing if it be considered according to it own nature and beginning.
For the sede of Abraham which of it self is subject to Death can not give
life, but it receaueth of the spirit that wherewith we may be fed. For our
part, to the end we may eat, we must bring with us a spiritual mouth of
faith before we can be truly norished or sustained by it, now the selfsame
flesh is not immortal of it self. Moreover it belongs not to the nature of
it in any wise to quicke^ souls, yet though this virtue yrocede from else where,
notwithstanding it lets not this title to belong to it. Even as the
everlasting word of God is the spring and fou^tain of life, so the (...) that
is in him in his divinity comes from the flesh of his son even unto us, as
by a pipe. But we shall yet better understand this, if we mark what is the
cause of life, to were righteousness. Though righteousness come not but from
God: yet it cannot be clearly showed unto us but in the flesh of his son: for
in the same the redemption of men was fully ended, in the same the sacrifyce
was offered to wype out sins, in the same the obedience was yielded to God, by
which he was made at one with us, the same also was filled with the
sanctification of the holy ghost, the same finally was received into heavenly
glory after the conquest had of death. In the same then all the parts of life
were placed to the end none might Justly find fault that he is depryued of
life, because it is hyd far from him.

32
He that takes the svvearde shall dye with the svvearde. Mathe. 26. He that
has a garment let him sell it and bye a svvearde. Luke. 22.
Jesus Christ speaking thus whosoever takes a sweard shall dye on a sweard,
confyrmeth the commandment of the law by which pryuate persons are
forbidden the use of the sweard. When God strayghtly forbad us all slaughters
and wicked murders, his will was to show thereby, how well he loves mankind.
So Jesus Christ would not that folk should defend the^self by violence and
strong hand because y^ god in y^ law has forbidden to strike. It were the^ a
mad folly to infer thereupon yt it is not lawful for ^dges and Magistrates to
strike with the sweard. It is very true yt it is not lawful for any man to take
ye sweard in hand to use it at his fantasy, to be ye cause or furderance of
any murder. But ye Magistrates who ar appointed to be ye officers of God by who^
he exercises his judgments, must not be set among ye common sort of men. There
is more in it tha^ so, to wete, by these words of Christ their power and
authority is maintained: for when he pronounces y^ murderers shall be put to
death, we may very well infer thereof yt the sweard is put into y^ hand of ye
judges to punyshe those y^ unjustly have slain. It may happen sometime y^
mansleyars shall be other wise punished, but this is y^ ordinary mean by which
god would y^ the cruelty and proud fellonye of y^ wicked should be repressed
and not abide unpunished: Yet for all y^ his mind is not by the other sentence
to arm every one with a sweard to strike whenever he will. He signifies by a
figure y^ great and terrible troubles were at hand, as if a captain in y^
war mynding to set his me^ in battle a ray, should cry alarm he
commands y^ laying aside all other cares they should be bent to nothing
else but to fight, so that they should not care either for meat or drink:
for as me^ are wont to do in extreme dangers he will have the^ sell al even to
their walle^ or scryp to furnyshe the^ with weapon. But this battle to which
he calls the^ is not an outward battle, but only under this similitude of
fighting, he admonishes the^ to think that they must sustain many fearful
and hard conflictes and horrible charges of spiritual battles. So a man may
easily see y^ these sentences are not so diverse that there is any contrariety
in them.

33
Whosoever comes to me I will not cast him of. Joan. 6. It is not of him
that vvylls nor of him that runs but of God, that has mercy. Roman. 6.
BEfore that our Lord Jesus spoke this that he will cast of none of the^ that
come unto him, he had said. All that my father gave me, etc. Where he
sygnifyeth that faith is not in the will of men so as any can say that it is
in his liberty to believe or not to believe, or y^ faith is a thing by chance or
at al adventures. But God choseth his faithful to give them to his son, even
as it were from hand to hand. For when he says that all that is given him,
comes, we may easily gather hereof that al come not. We may well say also
that God works in his chosen by so great an efficacy of his spirit when he
so uses his free goodness that none of them falls. For the father
regenerateth his chosen, and then gives the^ to his son to make them
obedient to the Gospel. Faith then being a free gift procedyng from the
goodness of God is the same that opens the way for men to go to the Lord
Jesus, and the obstinate and unbelieving have no access thither, and they that
come to him, come to him after an other manner than by their own force or
wills. And when they have submytted themself under his defense, they shall be
freely received. These two sentences therefore not only do not disagree: but
rather one does confyrme the other. For where Saint Paul says that it is
neither of him that wills nor of him that runs, but of him that has mercy,
it is to show that me^ may run or will or bestow all their force: but yet
they cannot make open the way of God Of necessitye, God must work in it of his
mere mercy, he is no way bound to any man, if he do good to any al this good
co^mes of his mere liberalitye. And when he has ones used this liberalitye it
is so done as he follows his work to the end, as much as belongs to the
salvation of the faithful It is the^ God y^ of his mercy gives his faithful
to his son which come not to him of their own motion but because they are
given to the son, or as. S. Paul says because that God has used mercy
where it has pleased him to use mercy.

34
I am not come to judge the world but to save the world. (...). 1^. I am
come into the world with judgment. Joan. 9.
IT is certain that the son of God came into the world chiefly to this end
to save men. Surely he was not sent hither without cause. Now so it is that he
was not sent to destroy, the^ it follows that he came to do the office of a
savior. For what neded he to come down to cast us away since we were more than
castawayes. Then we must consider nothing in our Lord Jesus, but y^ God
according to his infinite goodness would save us by him yea us, that were lost.
As often therefore as our sins press us, and that Satan eggeth us to
despair or disco^fort, we must hold before us this buckler, that God will not
suffer us to be oppressed with eternal ruin, forasmuch as he has ordained
his son to be y^ salvation of y^ world. And for this cause he says, y^ he
came not to judge and to condemn y^ world, but to save it, y^ wickedness of
them y^ proudly retect God, is worthy to be condemned. But yet he asswageth y^
severity which he might use against such while he stays from pronouncing
judgment against the^, because he rather came to save al. And although he
spoke here of those y^ of a wilful stubbornness despise y^ doctrine of y^
Gospel which was offered the^. Yet for a while leaving y^ person of y^
sovereign judge he offers salvation indifferentlye to all, and gentilly
reaches forth his hand to al, to the end y^ al might be very desirous to
repent. He came to call all, and having forgotten y^ person of a judge he
myndeth nothing else but to draw al me^ to him, and to deliver from death and
destruction those that seem to be altogether lost. But in y^ means season, this
belongs to the proper and natural office of Jesus Christ. For where the
unbelieving and obstinate be more grievously condemned for refusyng the Gospel,
it is by accident, and not by nature. As touching that he came in judgment, as
touching that he is called the stone of offense, as touching that he is
appointed for the fall of many, al these things are accidental: for those
that refuse the grace that is offered in him, deserve to feel him as a
rigorous judge revenging so vylannous a contempt, and so horrible an
unthankfulness. As much may a man say of the Gospel although it be the power
of God to salvation to all that believe it: Yet the unthankfulness of many
makes it turn to the^ unto death. So the ministers are ready at hand to
revenge, to break and throw down the pride of all the enemies of the Gospel:
when the true obedience of the faithful shall be accomplished. 2. Cor. 10. The
Gospel is first and cheiflye appointed to be for the salvation of the
faithful. But the^ afterward the stubborn and unbelieving shall not remain
unpunished, who despysing the grace of the Lord Jesus have chosen to have him
rather the author of death than of life. Behold how the son of God is come
to save and not to Judge or condemn, and yet he came in judgment. Howbeit in
this second sentence this word of judgment cannot be symply taken for the
punishment of the obstinate and contemners of God: for it streatcheth forth
eue^ to the grace of illumination. Jesus Christ is come in judgment, that is
to say, he sets again in good order things that were out of order, which
is done by a marvelous secret wisdom of God and beyond al man's
understanding.

35
If I witness any thing of my self my witness is not true. Joan. 5. Though
I witness of my self my witness is true. Joan. 8.
AS touching the first sentence, our Lord Jesus means not that his witness
it not sufficient to be believed, for y^ in other places he defendes it
strongly, and earnestly: but he speaks as agreeing herein with his
adversaries, as he should thus say well believe me not, yet ar there enough of
others y^ witness of me. He speaks the^ after y^ common fashion of me^ which
bring the^self into suspicion when they bear witness of them self, as though
he would his enemies should take the matter as if his witness were nothing
worth. It is certain that y^ witness y^ any man bears of himself ought in no
case to be received as true and lawful, no, not though y^ thing y^ be he says
be true for in deed no man is a sufficient witness in his own cause. Now
although it is not reason or me^e y^ the son of God should be set among the^:
Yet he had rather give over his right to convince his adversaries by the
authority of God. But yet the witness of our Lord Jesus is of authority
enough of it self and has no need of men's confirmations for as much as he is
not of the common sort of men. And therefore he adds y^ he knows well whence
he came, and whither he must go. He exempts him self out of the common sort of
other men. Although therefore other be suspected in their own and private
causes, and that it is appointed by the laws that a man should not believe or
trust any man that speaks for his own profit or advantage: yet this has no
place in Christ who is far above all the world, and is not reckened to be of
the common sort of men, but his father has given him this privilege that by
his only word he causes all men to obey him,

36
I will do nothing of my self. Joan. 5. No man takes my life from me but I
leave it of my self. Joan. 10.
IN the first sentence our savior Jesus Christ makes answer to the slau^ders
of ye Jews which judged maliciously of y^ work which he had done in healyng
y^ man y^ had been. 38. years sick. They looked only on his human flesh, and
therefore dispysed him although they saw in him works that were in deed
Godly. Wherefore he would have them to go higher and to behold God in him and
in y^ works which he wrought, to the end by that mean they might be moved
to believe him. This then is not symply to say that he can do nothing of him
self, for he is God eternal and almighty. And this belongs not perticularly
to the everlasting word: but to the son of God, in as much as he was
manyfested in the flesh. Such is this manner of speaking when he says Joan.
14. The word which you hear is not mine, but his that sent me. It is well
known that he is the eternal wisdom of God his father which made all the
Prophets and Apostles, and other trustye servants of God to speak. But this
he says to lift men up unto the Majesty of God, which staying at y^ outward
look of Jesus Christ, could not owe such reverence to the word as it deserved,
except they had been well assured that it is God which speaks in his son,
and that the son speaks through his father. All this matter must be
referred to this opposition, to weete, that they that think they have to do
with a mortal man when they accuse the Lord Jesus of his doings which were
in very deed divine, are far out of the way. And therefore he affirms
earnestly that he has done nothing in the healyng of this man that is diverse
or contrary to his fathers will.

And by the other sentence, he means that men have no power on him to take
his life from him, but that he could have thondered upon al his enemies if he
would, and so have consumed al their attempts. But in y^ he dies, it is with
his will, he being able to withstand the violence of his adversaries: but being
also willing to obey the will of his father which had ordered and appointed his
son to die to deliver us. Now then not only he says that men cannot put him
to death but in as much as he suffers them: but also he exempteth him self
from al force of necessitye. But it stands other wise with us, for we must
needs dye because of our sin. Christ in deed was borne a mortal man, but his
submission was voluntary and not a forced bondage enjoined him from else where.
Then let us conclude that he can do nothing of himself in as much as he wills
that al his works be wayed according to his divine power, and that the respect
of his manhood should not dymme their brightness, and also that none of their
dignity should be taken away from them. In y^ mean season he may of him self
in respect of men give over his life, obeying rather the good pleasure of his
father, and burning with the desire of the salvation of his, than to withstand
the furious assaults of his adversaries.

37
Who is he that resists his vvil. Roman. 9. You have ever resisted the holy
ghost. Act. 7.
SAINT Paul asks this question in the person of the proud and wicked which
cannot refrain from barkyng with open mouth against the justice of God. And
thus their affection is very well expressed: for not content to defend the^
self, they put God in their place. Beside, when they have laid the fault of
their condemnation upon him they speak dispytfully against his invincible
power. They are constrained to agree that he is just, but it is with murmuryng
because they can not resist him, as if they would say thus. What reason is
there that God should be angry with us? Does not he whatsoever seems good to
him? who should withstand him, seeing he has formed us such, seeing he does
all after his will and pleasure, what else does he in destroying us, but
revenge him self upon his work? for it is not in our power to war with
him, if we should resyste him yet he would continually have the victory. They
therefore will conclude that it is a wrong judgment if God do destroy the^.
Such are ye murmuryngs of y^ proud. And yet this is true that no man can
withstand the will of God, by which all things are made, yea made with all
vpryghtnesse. If the causes of this good pleasure be hyd from us we must not
therefore inquire why he does thus and thus: we must hear quietly that which
the Lord will say, and we must with all lowliness and obedience subscribe to
his faithful and true judgments. Else what manner of madness were it, and
deuilishe presumption that man full of vanitye should not grant to God more
wisdom tha^ to his own fleshlye reason. And when the things that are done,
like him not, to plead with his Master that he should have done otherwise.
There is also another will of God which is declared to us in his word, which
men cannot be ignorant of except it be maliciously, and by which his grace is
offered unto all. When the unfaithful refuse this grace offered by the Prophets
and servant of God, it is said that they withstand the holy ghost: for this
touches not secret revelations which God breaths inwardly into every
faithful man: but the outward ministerye by which y^ goodness of god is set
before me^

38
Whosoever asks he receaueth. Math. 7. You ask but receive not, Iacobi, 4.
IN the first sentence the Lord Jesus offreth the grace of his Father to
sinners, signfieng that god of his good will is ready to hear us so that we
pray to him. His riches are poured forth to us so that we ask them of him.
But this asking and prayingmust be made in faith, else it is neither asking
nor prayer unto God. They then that being void of al goodness sake not this
remedi to help their poverty or need, shall have punishment due to their
negligence As co^trariwyse as many as shall ask in faith shall not fail to enioi
y^ frut of their prayers. It happens truly many times that the faithful
sleep and God watches for their salvation, and so he preuenteth their desires
and prayers. For we were more tha^ miserable co^sydering our great dullness if
God should tarry till we open our mouths to pray to him. But to speak better,
there is nothing but his own goodness that stirs him to give us faith
which go-before al prayers both in time and order. Yet because he speaks
these words only to his faithful he shows us simply how the heavenly Father
will make us partakers of his benefits. Although he he give us al things
frelye: yet to exercise our faith he commands us to pray to him, to the end
he may grant to our prayers that which notwithstanding flows from his mere
goodness and liberality.

But because faith only is that which obtayneth and goes not beyond the
bounds of Gods will which is declared by his word. Saint James says here very
well, You ask but receive not. and he adds to it the cause, for that you
ask it to the end to bestow it on your desires and pleasures. Is it reason
that men shall make God the servant of their pleasures and fond desires? when
they temper not their desires after the manner that God has ordained but with
an inordinate liberty give them self the bridle to ask things which they
should be ashamed to ask or to open before a man who soever he were. It is
good reason that they should be denied. Certainly there is no fear nor reverence
nor good opinion of god among us when we are so hardy and rash to ask of God
things which our own conscience would not grant us. Then before we shall
obtain we must bridle our desires. The way to bridle them is to make them
obediente and subject to God. To conclude we shall obtain when Faith which is
ruled by the holy and good will of God shall frame our hearts. We shall not
obtain when we ask according to our desires neither should it be expedient
for us to obtain in that sort.

39
By one only offering he has hallowed for ever those that be sanctified.
Hebr. 10. I fulfill the want of the aflictions of Christ in my flesh for his
body which is the Church. Colloss. 1.
AL things that were expedient for our salvation were accomplished and
brought to perfection by the only oblation of the Lord Jesus. And surely no
man can allege any thing against this. And al faithful are fully hallowed and
sanctified in his only sacrifice. If the Lord Jesus be Christ he is also ye
true Priest. And if he be y^ true Priest, then must of necessity his sacrifice
be perfect. For else he should in nothing differ from the Leuitical Priests
which were sinners. And his sacrifice should differ no whit from the old
sacrifice of beasts. Seeing then his sacrifice is perfect, it is also
sufficient, and it must not be offered again, nor any other added to it. God
has no need of men's help, neither must men set to their hands after him when
he has perfected or ended any thing. Then if it be so that all other oblations
that have been added after Christ's oblation are not only unprofitable, but
also abominable, as put to without and against Gods word. What other thing
shall there be for men to offer to God by which they may add some overplus to
the merit of the passion of the son of God? The death of the Just is
precious before the face of God, and chefly of his martirs which have shed
their blood for the testimony of his truth. Yet their blood is not so precious
as that it may deserve any thing to fill our redemption as though it had not
been altogether accomplished by our Lord Jesus. But now Saint Paul says that
he supplies that which lackes in the passion of Christ for the Church. True
it is that y^ faithful martirs suffer for the church, as also the son of God
the chief of martirs suffered for the Church: but yet there is a diverse reason
of their suffering: For though the martirs die as brethren for their brethren:
yet there is no one whose blood is shed for the remission of sins, which
thing the lord Jesus did for us. And he therein did set forth nothing for us to
follow but for which we should give thanks to him. And as the son of God only
was made the son ^^man to y^ end he might make us children of God. So he
only being without fault has received punnishmente for us to the end we might
obtain by him and without any desert of ours y^ grace which we could not
deserve. So we may say, y^ y^ faithful have receued crowns: but they have not
given the^. Of their strength and constancy have been taken examples of
patience, not gyfts of righteousness. Their deaths also were particular, and
there is not one that by his death has cleared any man's debt. Shall we then
say that Saint Paul would say that any thing that belonged to our salvation
lacked in the passion of christ which had need after to be accomplished and
supplied by the death of any other, as if that which Jesus Christ suffered
sufficed not for the redemption of men? it were an execrable blasphemy. But
saint Paull so speaks because y^ body of y^ Church must be made perfect by
the affliction of the faithful when the members of the body are made like unto
their head. Let us then see how the holy martyrs suffer for the Church. Those
that god has chosen he has also appointed and ^idestinated to be made like to
y^ Image of his son, that he may be the first borne of many brethren. We
know that between the head and the members there is such unity, that the name
of Christ contains sometime all the bodi. As when Saint Paull makes mention 1. Corinthians. 12. of the Church, he concludes at the length that it is with Jesus
Christ as with a man's body. As the Son of God once suffered in himself so
he suffers daily in his members. And in this sort the passions are
accomplished which the heavenly father has appointed by his ordinance unto the
body of his son.

Moreover we must not seek another more faithful expounder of that which
Saint Paul says than him self whenne he adds to it that he suffers
for the Church according to the dyspensation or commission that was given unto
him. For he was not appointed to be a minister of redemption, neither did
he sheadde his blood to deliver the faithful from everlasting death. But we
know the ministry was committed to him to edyfye the Church and not to redeem
it. And this is it that he says in another place that he suffers al things
for the chosens sake, that they might obtain the salvation which is in Jesus
Christ. And 2. Cor. 1. he says that he suffers al thing for their comfort and
salvation. Then let us take this for the conclusion, that the son of God only
has suffered for the remission of the sins of the faithful. The Martirs also
suffer for the Church, but it is only for the confirmation of the same.

40
Preach the gospel to every creature. Mark. 16 Cast not your pearl before
Svvyne. Math. 7.
THE Apostles had commission to Preach the Gospel to al creatures that were able
to hear and receive it, and that without accepting of any person, people, or
nation, forasmuchas the Lord Jesus was com to take away all difference between
the Jews and Gentiles, yt the Jews on the one side should not shut up
salvation among themself, and that the Gentiles on the other side should not
despair as shut out and banished from the eternal ki^gdome. He will have his
kingdom published every where that the Gentiles with the Jews may be brought
to the true obedience of Faith, and that the Gospel may be a seal to all
faithful shepheardes and ministers wherwyth their doctrine should be sealed.
Under the Law the Prophets had limittes appointed them within the bounds of
Jury: but after that the fence was broken the son of God would that the
ministers of his Gospel should go farther of to sow and spread the doctrine of
salvation throughout all the regions of the world. First the birthright abod
among the Jews: yet afterward the heritage of the happy life was made common
to the Gentiles. So the prophecy was accomplished of which the Prophets make so
often mention that the Messiah was given to the Gentiles for a light, to the
end he might be the salvation of God even to the ends of the earth. To this
purpose he said, Go and preach the Gospel to every creature. For after
that peace was proclaimed to all the householde folk, the same message came
also unto strangers, and to those that were far of. Although that charge
were given to the Apostels: yet it behooved them also to keep this decree, and
even at this day it behooves all ministers to keep it, to weete, that they
give not holy things to dogs and that they hurl not pearl before Swyne.
The treasure of the heavenly wisdom ought to be kept for Gods children
only, and not to be thrown abroad to the proud contemners of God. They have
commandment to preach the Gospel to every creature, and Sayncte Paul
affirms that the preaching thereof is a savor of Death to the reprobate. And
there is nothing more certain than that it is offered every day to the
unbelieving and obstinate by the commandment of God as a witness against
them, to make them the more with out excuse. Because the ministers or the
Gospel and all they that are called to the office of teaching can not discern
between the children of God and Swine. Therefore their charge is to offer the
doctrine of Salvation indifferently to all. For though at the first they see
many self wylled stubbourne and unapt to be taught: yet Christian charyty will
not suffer us to account them as people altogether desperate. Yet in the mean
season we must see who they be that Christ calls dogs and Swyne. We must
not at the first take all those for such that are either profane or unclean
or that are void of the fear of God and of true religion. But those that by
sure and manifest tokens have already showed a stubbourne contempt of God,
so that a man knows that their malice is out of all hope. Here then dogs and
Swyne are they which have already been as it were glutted full with a poisoned
dyspysyng of all Gods goodness, and will not be reformed.

And so we must deny the Gospel to none but to such as so proudly have
retected it when it has been offered them that a man knows that they
themselves of their own stubbournesse have condemned themselves.

41
God will that all men should be saved. (...). 2. There are but fevve that are
saved. (...). 14.
IF the Gospel be the power of God to Salvation to all beleuers, it is
certain that al they to whom the Gospel is offered are also called to the hope
of everlasting and blessed life. Moreover as the calling is a teaching of the
secret election, so God admits those to the possession of eternal salvation
which he makes partakers of his gospel. For the Gospel openneth unto us the
righteousness of God which is a certain entry into life. But how comes
this to pass that all men are not saved, seeing God wills it? for who can
let the will of God? which as it is very good and very just, so is it
almighty. This question might have some color if Saint Paul spoke of every man.
But yet thereto a man might make answer. For although we may not wey the
will of God by his secret and hydden Judgments, yet when he shows it to us by
outeward signs and testymonyes, a man may say that he has in himself
decreed that which he will every man should do. But because this serves
nothing for the expoundyng of this sentence, we must understand what Saint
Paul means, to wete that there is no estate in ye world shut out from
salvation, and from the blessed life: but rather God would that the Gospel
should be offered to all. And if we understand that the preaching of the Gospel
is quickening, in that it reueleth to us the righteousness of God which is a
certain way to give an entrance into life, we shall not think that strange
which saint Paul says that Gods will is that al men should be saved seeing he
would have all come to the knowledge of the truth. But here he speaks of
sorts of men, of estats and conditions of them, and not of every man a part.
For the intent of the Apostle is none other but to contain Princes in the
number, and that men should not considre what manner of men Princes were at that
time: but what God would have them to be. Salvation comes to us no otherwise
but by Gods free liberalitye. Now the same God which has made us partakers of
the happy life and of eternal salvation, may sometimes stretch his grace even
to them. The same y^ already of his goodness has drawn us unto him, may one
day bring the^ likewise with us.

But the whilst how many are there that by their unthankfulness and
stubbournesse make themself unworthy of this salvation? What could God have
done of all that which belonged to the salvation of men which he has not
done? And behold the greater part stoutly and proudly reject the grace of God.
Is not this agreeable to Gods righteousness that such should feel him a
rigorous Judge, whom they would not acknowledge or accept for a Savior.

If we compare the great number of those with the little number of the chosen
and faithful, we shall perceive how true this sentence is that there are very
few of those that be saved. How many Mahometes are here beneath in the
world? how many Jews? And how many are there which vaunt them of the name of
Christians, yet are they no Christians? And among the faithful how many
Hypocrites are there? and what shall we make of the rest of other men? but a
little grain hid under a great heap of chafe. Then a man may well say that
Godds will is that all men should be saved, yet there are but few saved. God
stretches his hand and arm to all men upon earth: but y^ more part draw back
as though they had not to do with God nor with his bou^ty, with his grace nor
with his salvation.

42
God has shut all in unbelief to the end he might shevve mercy to all.
Roma. 11 He that vvil not believe shall be condemned. Mar. 16.
The Apostle signifies two things by this former sentence. First that there
is nothing in man whereby he deserves to be preferred before other beside the
mere grace and goodness of god. Wherefore they that already have some hope of
salvation must not despair of other: for whatsoever they are now they have
been heretofore as all the others now are. If by the only mercy and goodness
of God they are come out of unbelief they ought likewise to leave some place
to others. Yet this is not to say that God so blinds all men that their
unbelief ought to be imputed unto him: but he by his providence so ordered
the matter that all should be gylty of incredulity to thend he might keep al
men short and bound under his judgments, and that is to the end that
salvation might come from his only goodness and all deserts should be trodden
under foot. Secondarily that God in the dispensatio^ of his grace is not let
from bestowing it on who^ it shalseme good to him. Let us then say that he has
shut us all under unbelief to the end he might have mercy on all. That is to
say, to the end that none of those which shall be called to salvation should
think to obtain salvation but only through the mercy of God.

Then seeing it is so that God in bestowing his grace, is not let from geuyng it
to whom he will, we may also save that he is not let to exercise his
judgments wheresoever it seems good to him. The Gospel is the power of God
to salvation: but that is to the faithful only. And whosoever believes it
shall be saved. But as promise is made to draw mankind unto faith: so is there a
terrible threatnyng of destruction against all the obstinate and unfaithful,
to as^o^ne them. These ar they that refuse salvation that is offered the^,
which pluck upon their heads fearful ruin and condemnation. And they are
not only wrapped in the common and general destruction of all mankind: but
also they bear the fault of their own unthankfulness.

43
Judge not and you shall not be judged. Mathe. 7. Judge just judgment, Joan.
7.
WHEN the Lord Jesus says judge not, he does not precisely forbid to judge:
but his meaning is to heal a sickness which is naturally almost in all This
we see ordinarily that every man geues him y^ head but every man busyeth
himself to judge other men straight. And hardly shall a man find any one that
is not tyckled with desire to inquire of other men's faults. Al will confess
that it is an insufferable evil to slatter the^self in their own vices, and to
be so nere markers of the offenses of their brethren. But there is a plage yet
more dangerous that diverse while they condemn other, themself will have leave
to sin. See then what our Lord Jesus does in saying Judge not, to wete, he
represseth the flesh and froward appetyte of checking, tawntyng and
backbyting: yet is it not meant hereby ye the faithful should have their eyes
blind filded to y^ end they should discern nothing: but they ought to bridle
themselves least they should be carried away with to great a desire to judge.
For when any one coueteth to judge his brethren, he cannot but be over
rigorous. Thus when Christ commands that we should not Judge, he means
that we should not curiously inquire of the doynages of our brethren. But in
the mean season he will not have us to be without judgment or discretion in
such sort as we should not be able to put a dyfference beetwene the good and
the evil or to say what is just and right, and what is wrong: but he would
there should be a wise moderation used, and that to judge well and ryghtly a
man should look simplye to the deed, and not to the person. It behooves us to
mark why the Lord Jesus spoke thus. He had to do with the Jews which did
interpret his works maliciously and with a perverse affection though they
were forced to grant that they were divine. He sets before their eyes
circumcision to which they bear reverence and that of right. When they did it
on the Sabbath day they knew well that the law of God was not broken, for
as much as the works of God agree very well one with another. What reason is
there that they did not say as much of the works of Christ but that their
spirits were occupied before with a folyshe judgment which they had
conceived of his person. Wherefore there shall never be right judgment given
if it be not pronounced according to the truth of the deed: for as soon as a
man sets the persons before his eyes, he directs also his senses to them,
so that forthwith the truth vanysheth.

44
When you pray speak not much. Mathe. 6. Pray without ceasing. 1 Thessalonians. 8.
5.
OUR Lord Jesus reproves a fault in Hipocrites which think they are able to
persuade God by much bablyng and folyshe rehearsal of words. And the continuing
in prayer that is so much praised and commanded in the holy scripture is not
contrary to this doctrine: For when the faithful man conceaueth a prayer and
makes it with a holy and good affection, his tongue goes not before his heart.
Moreover the favor of God is not gotten by an affected bablyng of words: but
rather a true faithful heart shoteth out his affections as flying shaftes which
have power to pearce even unto heaven. This forbydding of bablyng and vain
repetyng of words in prayer, does not let the continuance of prayer, not that
God on his behalf has any need y^ a man should make him any rehearsalls, or
that a man should offer unto him any remembraunces, or when a man has spoken
to him on^e that he has need to be moved the second time: but this taryeng
still or continuyng in prayer is of duty requisyte in us. Every man ought to
consider well his necessities, and how he has continually need of the succor
of God. It is true that he could give us al necessary things before we should
open our mouth to pray to him: and surely if of his goodness he prevented not
our prayers, yea our desires we should be more tha^ miserable: but he will so
exercise our faith, and the end and use of our prayers is, that casting our
playntes and groans into the fatherlye bosom of God, we might be well assured
that he would forsake us in nothing.

45
Bear the burdens one of another. Galat. 6. Every one shall bear his own
burden. Galat. 6.
THIS nature teaches us, when we see any man laden with a burden which he
cannot bear or under which he falls down, to unload him in some sort,
either else to ease him with the least hurt y^ may be. If there be any
gentleness in us, we must chiefly show it to the bearyng the faults of our
brethren, which faults ar properly called lodes or burdens. But when we are
commanded to bear y^ weakness one of another, it is not meant y^ by ^auoryng
or clokyng we should noryshe the evils or vices of our brethren and
neighbors: but rather y^ we should unload them. Now y^ must be done by soft
and quiet correction. There are many adulterers and whoremasters that would
have Christ to be bawd, Many thieves that would that he were their hider, Many
folks of evil life y^ would make him defendour of their wicked deeds, and y^
the faithful should serve them with their shoulders to discharge them of their
own vnclea^nesse. But we see wherefore we are appointed to bear y^ burdens of
our brethren, to wete, to the end that in supportyng them we should endeavor to
set them again in the right way. Now this that he adds afterward serves
for y^ interpretation of that that was said before. Then we shall be priest and
ready louyngly to unburden others when every man shall well look on himself to
see what manner of one he is. And when he shall have diligently examined his own
work not deceauyng himself by thinkyng that he is any thing, or is worth
ought. We have nothing of our own whereof we may bost but we are so void of al
good that al our glory is but mere vanity. If we think diligently hereon we
shall wax more gentle and meek toward others. Whence comes this pride that
makes us exalt our selves above others? whence comes the proud and cruel
sharpness? but hereof that every one will be set a lofte, and look upon all the
rest as being underneath at his fete: but yet because in comparyng our selves
with other we make other by estimation to be of very small value, we are sent
back to the tryeng of our selves to the end we should not measure our selves
by another man's yard, to y^ end that none of us should please himself because
others diplease him: but turnyng his look from other, every one ought to
search out his own conscience, and to consider lively his own work. That is
no true pray^e which we seek to attain by the dysaduantage of another man's
good name: but that which we get without making comparison of their base
renown with our greatness, and to take from us all pride, the conclusion is
that every one shall bear his own burden. Gods judgment is hereby set before
our eyes before whom every one must give account of his life, and there
shall be no comparison made, but every man shall there carry his own burden: for
this is that that deceaueth us. He that has but one eye or he that is
pooreblynde, being among the blind thinks that he sees well: but one shall
not acquyte another from his sin.

46
Carry nothing on the way neither staff nor vvallet nor bread nor money.
Luke. 9. You shall carry nothing on the way but a staff. Marc. 6.
THE difficultye is in this that Saint Matthew and Saint Luke say that it was
forbidden them to carry a rod or staff. And Saint Mark says, they were
suffered to carry a staff. Before this dyfficultie be resolved we must see
what the purpose of our Lord Jesus is. He would that his Aposties should in
a little time visyte all the country of Iewrye, and that they should spedely
return to him. And that this might be done he forbyddeth them to carry with
them any baggage which might let them from making haste. And this
commandment must be restrained to this vyage. They might well have had
wallets, staves, shoes, garments, gold and silver in their houses: but to the
end they might be the lyghter he commands them to leave behind, every
burden y^ might lode them. But as touching the staff Saint Matthew and Saint
Luke mean such staves as might lode or hinder them that should carry them.
But Saint Mark means a staff which they carry commonly that take Iourneyes
in hand, and they carry them only to stay them up and to help them out of
the myer or an ill way, or to leap a dyke as the custom and manner in old
time was to carry a staff to Journey wythall. As appears by that which is
said in Genesis. I passed Jordan with my staff. Jacob confesses by these
words that he was not laden with riches when he came into Siria.

47
Jesus tarried in Ievvry and baptized. Joan. 3. Jesus did not baptyse. Joan. 4.
ONE of these places serves to expound the other. For when it is said in the.
4. of John that our Lord Jesus baptized more Dysciples than John, the
correction is also added to wete, though Jesus baptized not, but his Disciples
baptized, and this baptyme is called the baptyme of the Son of God, and that
to the end we should understand that the baptyme ought not to be esteemed after
y^ person of the minister but the strength thereof depends wholly on him that
is the author of it, in whose name it is given, and on his holy ordinance. And
this serves to comfort us, that we know that baptyme is no less able to
wash and renew us than if it were administered to us by the very hand of the
son of God. If we ask why he stayed from the administration of the outward
sign, the reason is easily given, to were, because he would leave a testimony
to all ages and generations that the baptyme is in nothing diminished when it
is offered by a mortal man. Wherefore Christ not only baptyseth inwardly by his
holy spirit: but we ought as much to esteem yt sign which we receive at the
hand of a mortal man as if Christ himself streatched out his hand to us from
heaven. Jesus Christ the^ baptized and did not baptyse. He baptized forasmuch
as the baptyme that was mynistred by the hands of his Dysciples was aduoutched
to be his, and esteemed such as if himself had baptized. He did not baptize,
because he did not admynister the outward sign but caused his Dysciples to do
it.

48
Thou shall hate thine enemy. Mathe. 5. Love your enemies. Math. 5.
WHen God speaks of our neighbors, it is certain that he co^prehendeth all the kind of man: for as every man is given to himself as often as any
particular commodityes part one from the other, the mutual pertaking which
nature her self enioyneth us, is forsaken, to the end then that we might be
kept in bond of brotherly love, God testifyeth that al men be our neighbors
because that nature common to us al makes us al friends among our selves. As
often as a man beholds a man, because it is his flesh and his bone, so often
it behooves him necessarily to behold himself as in a glass, but because the
most part depart from this holy fellowship, yet notwithstanding the order of
nature is not broken by their lewdness, because we must look upon God who is
author of this unity and conjunction. And therefore this commandment by which
we are appointed to love our neighbor, is general. But it is marvel how the
Scribes fell into this absurdltie to restrain this word neighbors unto
weldoers, and those which by their pleasures and services that they do
deserve to be loved. They measured neyghbourhode according to the affection of
every one. Wherefore they said those only were to be taken for neighbors
which for their good deeds are worthy to have friendship borne unto the^, or
at the least such as do pleasure for pleasure. Common reason counsels
every one so, and for this cause the children of the proud world were never
ashamed to confess and show openly their hatred having some reason to make it
of value: but the love which God commaundes and recommendeth in his law does
not look upon that that every one deserves: but it stretches forth unto the
unworthy, the overthwart and unthankful. Now when Jesus Christ says, but I
say unto you love your enemies, he makes not a new law or ordinance: but
he brings again the law of his father into his true and natural meaning
correcting the false and pernerss expositions and gloses of the scribes, by
which they had corrupted and falsified the pureness of the law of God, he
leaves then this holy ordinance in his perfect state. Thou shall love thy
neighbor: yet he will show how it shall be duly accomplyshed, to wete, when we
shall love not only those that do us good: but also those that procure our hurt.

49
Take heed thou tell it to no body. Math. 8. Tell all the things that God has
done to thee. Luke. 8.
CHRIST forbids the leper whom he healed to tell unto other what was happened
unto him. And the reason is this, the convenient time to tell it was not yet
come. True it is that this miracle ought not to be hid or suppressed: but
there was a certain cause why the Lord Jesus would not that the brute of
this miracle should be so suddenly spread abroad, or at the least would not
have it done by y^ leper. And touching that the leper could not hold his
peace, although it seem that therein he did show some sign of acknowledgyng
the benefyte: yet he was so far from deseruyng any praise thereby, that he
was rather worthy of rebuke, because he did not obey the commandment of the
Son of God. If we were willing to reknowledge the healyng of his leprosye to
him that had healed him, he could not have done it better than by vsyng simple
obedience which before God is better worth than all offrynges and sacrifice and
it is the beginning of the true service of God. And as touching that he says
to the possessed with a spirit whom he had also healed, report all that God has
done unto thee, we must likewise note the reason why he gave this
commandment. All the miracles that Christ did could not be long hyd, neither
had it been reason to suppress the power of God by which his will was that al
ye world should be prepared to life: but sometimes he would that men should
hold their peace a while because the oportunitye was not yet come. Sometime
also he commanded his miracles to be published to y^ end he might be taken for
y^ true minister and Prophet of God, and to have authority to teach, calling his
miracle the work of god. For it was requisite that ye people which as yet were
rude should be instructed, forasmuchas they as yet knew not his Divinity. And
though Christ be ye ladder by which we go up to the father: nevertheless
because he was not yet manifested he began with his Father til such time as he
had a more tipe opportunity.

50
If any man strike thee on the right cheke turn the other to him also. Jesus
Christ smitte^ by the servant of the high Priest ansvvered. If I have il said
bear witness of the il: but if I have said well, why do thou strike me?
This first sentence was expounded here above. The su^me is that our Lord
Jesus would fashion the hearts of the faithful to keep a measure and
vpryghtnesse, who (although they be provoked) ought for all that rather to
appease the injuries by patience than by yealoing again wrong for wrong to
styre up men which already were to much styred. The way to quench fire is not
to put to it such matter as is mete to kindle it more. To repress one wrong by
another wrong, and one outrage by another outrage what is it else but to set on
fire y^ which already burnt to much. He will then have us so to be measured in
our passions that when any outrage is don unto us we should be ready to suffer a
new wrong rather than to wreak us of that which has been don unto us.
Notwithstanding when Christ answered so unto the servant of the bye Priest, it
seems he fulfilled not that which he appoints and commands his faithful
to observe for he turns not his right cheek to him that struck him on y^
left. But it is to be understand, that in christian patience it is not always
requysite that he that has been stricken and wronged, should put up the wrong
don unto him without speaking a word: but first he must patientlye suffer
the wrong that has been done him. Furthermore he must forget al revenging
lust, and endeavor to ouerco^me the ill by well doing. The wicked are butte to
much stirred by the sprite of Satan to hurt and endomage, and of themself
they are tomuch provoked though they be not otherwise egged forth. Therefore this
were an il interpreting of Christ's words to say that a man should by new
prouocatio^ styr those to il doing which are already overmuch infained by their
wicked affection. For y^ meaning of his words te^d to nothing else but y^ every
o^e of us should be ready to suffer y^. ii. wrong rather tha^ to reue^^e y^
first. This then lets not but y^ a Christen man that has been stricke^ and
outraged wrongfully may co^plain, so y^ his heart be void of al ra^cor, and his
hands clean from al revenge

51
I am not come to bring peace but the svvearde. Marc. 10. I give you my peace,
I leave you my peace. Joan. 14.
Because the greater part of men, not only are enemies to the gospel: but also
resist it maliciously, it is not possible to profess Christ without fighting
and without the hatred of many. All the faithful therefore are warned to
prepare the^self to fight, because they must needs fight for the testimony of
the truth. But the Prophets every where promise peace and quiet state under the
reign of Christ. Hereupon what could a man hope for, but that out of hand
whersoeuer a man were al things should be quiet? And seeing y^ son of God is
called our peace, and that y^ Gospel reconcileth us to God, what ca^ a man say
thereof but that there is a brotherly agreemente appointed to be among us. And
therefore it seems not that this agrees with the oracles of y^ Prophets that
strife, bralles, and wars should be kindled in y^ world where peace and the
Gospel is preached. And besides it is much less agreing with y^ office of
Christ, and with the nature of the Gospel. But the peace of which the Prophets
make mention is only among the true servants and the faithful of God, and in
Godly consciences, in as much as it is joined with faith, and reaches not unto
the unbelieving and stubborn, though it be liberally offered unto them, and they
can not abide to enter in favor and covenant with god. And thereof co^mes it
that the message of peace rayseth in them troubles and greater storms than
before. For Satan that reigns in the reproved, is mad as soon as he hears
of yt name of Jesus Christ, and the ungodliness of the proud and wicked is
sharpened when the doctrine of the son of God is set before them. So the
naughtiness of men causes that Christ which is author of peace is made an
occasion of troubles. Thus our lord Jesus Christ may well be said to leave us
peace for in that he went to his father, he forsook us not: but left us the
good savor of his spiritual presence. It ca^ not be but that peace is with us,
and that we be always happy by his blessing which is the frut that we reap
when we yeald true and perfect obedience to his Gospel, which because it takes
away the silthinesse of the wicked, and that they cannot abide to be cleansed to
be brought to god is rightly called a sweard sent to the wicked to waken their
consciences and to stir up troubles against them.

52
When you have done all things, say, we are unprofitable servants. Luc.
17. We have follovved thee, what shall beco^me of us then? Math. 19.
BOTH we and all that we have belong to God by right, and he possesses us as
slaves. Therefore what service soever we endeavor to do him, yet is there
nothing that binds him as though we deserved. For seeing we belong to him, it
is certain that he can owe nothing unto us. We are no less bound and
beholding unto him than bondmen and slaves were in old time to their masters,
which were in such state that they got nothing for the^self: but were held
and kept under the bondage of their masters with all their labors, their
force, and diligence, yea even unto blood. If such power be granted to one
mortal man over another man, that he may make him work day and night, and yet
thereby he shall not be bound to recompense him with like how much more shall
it be lawful for God to require of us all that we can labor and do in all our
life as far as our power and abilitye can stretche, so that notwythstanding
he be no way^ bound unto us? Although it be a froward arrogantnesse to
imagine that god owes any thing to me^, as though they deserved at his hand:
yet there is no fault more common than such pride, for every manne would
call God to a reconing. And this is the cause why men have imagined
deseruinges, and this opinion has had place almost in all times. And this is
that that made the Apostels to ask this question, we have followed thee what
commodity then or recompense shall we have? And it seems that they have some
color to ask it seeing ye scripture so many times promises hier and
recompense to works, to which by this means it seems to attribute some
worthiness or desert. But true it is yt we are so subject to the rule of God
y^ we owe to him both our self and all y^ is in us. Now then the hyer is not
promised any other way but of the mere and good pleasure of God. For they that
by mutual relation join the desert with the hyer are greatly deceued because
that God is not moved by the worthiness of the works to reco^pe^ce them: but
by his gentleness and free goodness. True it is that by the bargains of the
law God is bound to me^ but it is on that condition that they perform all that
is there required of them. But because this bond is voluntary it is certain
and sure that man can ask or require nothing of God as though he had deserved
any thing at his hand By this means the pride of the flesh falls down flat
on the ground. For although a man had fulfilled the law: yet he could not
bring in any reckoni^g to God, as if he were bound to yield unto him some
overplus, for he should only have paid that which he ought. And in this sense
it is said that we be unprofitable servant, for God receaueth nothing of us
that comes from elsewhere, but only he gathers up the fruit of his demayne.

Now the Apostles vaunt that they have left al and followed Christ. But what
was that all? for seeing they were handy crafts men, and poor as touching the
goods of this world, and also despised. Scarcely was there any thing in their
houses to leave behind them. It was then a vain boaste, as we see ordinarily
how free men are to preyse and value the services that they do to God. But
howsoever the case stand, if we had forsaken Kingdoms and rych possessions to
follow Christ, yet al our services be they never so exquisite and heaped
together deserve not y^ least of his graces, neither ca^ we bring to pass but
y^ we shall remain unprofitable servant.

53
If any man cleanse himself of these things he shall be a vessel sanctified to
honor. Timot. 2. God works all in all. 1. Cor. 12.
THIS sentence is always true that it is not of willer nor of y^ ru^ner but of
God that has mercy. If a man allege that it is in the power of man to
cleanse himself and to make himself a vessel sanctified to honor: it is a
vain objection, for Saint Paul speaks not here of the election of men to
show who is the cause of our election as he does in the. 9. Chapter to the
Romans: but only he will that we resemble not the in^dels which we see to be
borne to destruction. It is the^ a folly to gather of these words that it is in
the power of man to associat him self in the number of the children of God,
and to make himself the cause of his own adoption. If the reprobate be
vessels of shame and dyshonoure, they have this dyshonoure enclosed within
them. But yet they disfygure not the house, neither is the master of the house
dishonored by them, which in the dyuersytye of members ordayneth and appoynteth
every vessel to to the use that it is worthy of. It behovs to learn to make
our self meet for more honest vsages. For we have as it were a glass before
our eyes in the person of the reproved to behold that there is a detestable
unhappiness in man when he serves not the glory of God, this only warninge
is to us a strong buckelar to repulse those that will have men to be the cause
of their own predestination, as though Saint Paul had given a rule to men of
that which they should do before they were borne, yea, before the
foundations of the world were laid. Moreover if a man will gather hereof that
man has free choice enough to prepare him self to be fourmed to give
obedience unto God. Although it have some likelyhode: yet they that so say do
argue very weakly, for here an express commandment is given to y^ faithful
to to cleanse the^self from y^ filth of y^ infidels. Forasmuch as they must be
sanctified unto God.

There is a like commandment every where in the holy Scriptures. We see
clearly hereby that we be called to holiness. There is a difference between the
calling and the office of Christians and between their faculty and power. It is
certain that the faithful are required to purge themself: but God witnesses
sufficiently that it is his office to purge when he promises to send pure
and clean waters, to the end we may be made clean. And therefore we must
desire of God that he will purge us of our filthiness rather tha^ to prove our
own strength without his aid. Now hereof we will take this doctrine that there
is no goodness in men which proceeds not of God. And we may boldly pronounce
that it is God that works all things in all. True it is y^ Saint Paul
stretches not this sentence to the general providence of god but he speaks
only of the liberalyty that God uses toward us when he bestows sombenefit
on eueri one of us. So that we may gather of this sentence that there is no
good in men nor any^ thing worthy praise but that which proceeds from the
goodness of God.

54
They shall be al taught of God. Joan. 6. Search the Scriptures. Joan. 5.
OUR Lord Jesus to confirm that which he had said, to wete, that no man co^mes
to hi^ except his father draw him, alleges y^ witness of Esaias 54. Chapter.
Where y^ Prophet makes mention of ye restoring of y^ Church, and promises y^
her children shall be taught under y^ scholing of God. And hereof a man may
rasily gather y^ the Church cannot be set again in good order unless y^ God
taking y^ charge of instructing y^ faithful bring the^ to him. This mea^ of
teaching stands not only in y^ outward voice: but also y^ secret strength and
working of y^ holy ghost. So y^ this instruction of God is the inward
lightening of y^ heart. Esaias shows openly y^ the^ y^ Church is truly bylded
when she has children taught of god. And this co^seque^ce makes well to y^
purpose, y^ me^ have not yet eyes meet to behold the light of life, until
God have opened them. It is certain that all the sermons should serve to no
purpose, if god taught not inwardly by his spirit. Nevertheless he would not
take away the mean which he himself had ordained, to weete, to hear and
read the Scriptures, as though it were not necessary for me^ to be instructed
by y^ outward ministry, but y^ it should not behous the^ only to wayt for
reuelatio^s from above. But when Christ says. Search the Scriptures, he
reproves y^ fond vauntyng of the hypocrites which said they had life in them
and yet they meddled only with the dead letter. Truly lyte should be sought in
the Scripturs saing they be appointed for us for that use and to that end: not
withstanding what booteth it to think that the scripture brings life, and the
whylest to go away from the natural meaning of them, and to put the light of
life by perverse opinions. How may it be that y^ law should quicken without Christ
which only quickens it? Beside, this place teaches us that if we would have
true knowledge of God and of Jesus Christ his son we must take it of the
scriptures. For if we forge imaginations of God after our fantasyes, and as it
shall seem good to us we have but a vain Imagination, and a shadow in stead
of God. But the whilst let us remember how we must search the scriptures. If
we go to to them thinkyng to find any thing in them by our own diligence or
wisdom, we shall bring away with us nothing else but false and vain opinions. But
we must resign our spirits to god, to ye end that he which is ye author of ye
scriptures may make us well to understand the truth of them.

55
Flesh and blood cannot possess the Kingdom of God. Cor. 15. We believe the
resurrection of the flesh.
Among the articles of our faith we believe that our bodies shall rise again:
without this the preaching of ye Gospel were vain, for if our bodies rise not
again, christ is not rise^ again and if he be not risen again, what shall
beco^m of our hope? This is the argument which Saint Paul makes. 1. Corinthians.
15. then every man shall rise again in his own body, and the flesh of every
one that shall have been corrupted and shall have slept in the earth shall be
fully restored and joined again to his soul, when it shall have put of al
weakness and corruption to be made like unto the glorious body of Jesus
christ. Though there be nothing that the understanding of man repulseth more:
yet faith is not deceued when she holds assuredly on the power of God joined
with his promise. He that has made man of nothing, can easily make him hole
again after y^ he has been wasted. Now to y^ end this should not seem so
strange to us, y^ spirit sets before our eyes an ordinary experience. After
that the corn is cast into the ground it seems to be lost for it rottes and
wastes in the ground but afterward it springs up fairer. So when the body
has been corrupted it tarieth the time appointed by God to come out of y^ earth
and to be altogether perfect.

So then even as the corn by means of the sede takes again a new shape, and
that more fayrer: so the faithful which dies and goes to rest with the sede
of Jesus Christ which is the spirit of God, is raised again by the same
spirit which raised the son of God from death. Moreover God has given a
visible certayntye hereof in Jesus Christ, so that is manyfestly set before our
eyes which otherwise seemed unto us altogether incredible. Therefore to
understand perfectly what our resurrection shall be, we must still look upon
Christ who is the myrrour and substance of it. Like as he rose again in the
self body in which he suffered: so we also shall rise again in the self same
flesh which we carry about with us. And also as after his resurrection he had
another glory much greater than he had had before: so we shall be far other
after our rysyng again. And this serves to expound the other sentence, that
flesh and blood cannot possess the kingdom of God, to wete, in the same
quality y^ now they are in, and until this corruption be changed to
incorruption. Before we be able to receive this heavenly heritage, our bodies
must be renewed, in as much as they are subject to corruption they cannot enter
into the kingdom of God which is incorruptible, unto which they shall have
no access till Christ have fashioned us a new after his own Image, otherwise
our flesh shall not be partaker of the glory of God til it be renewed and
quickened by the spyrite of Christ.

56
And he is the atonement for our sins, and not only for ours. but also for
the sins of the whole world. 1. Joan. 2. I pray not for the world,
Joan. 17.
THE sum of the first sentence co^mes to this point, that y^ faithful should
be thoroughly persuaded that the clensyng gotten by Jesus Christ extends unto
all those that have received the Gospel by faith, and that is to the end a man
should not think that this benefyte is restrained to a few people only, or
to certain ages. A man may replye, how may this be that the sins of all
the world are blotted our. There at certain frentrycke spyrites which under
this color receive all the reprobates to salvation, yea the devil himself.
But we ought not to tarry about the refutyng of this monstrous opynion. If
a man say that Jesus Christ has sufficientlye suffered for the faults of all
the world but that his death has profyted the faithful only this is
somewhat, but it is not all. For here is another meaning in the words of
Saint John, that is to say, that this benefit is beco^me common to the whole
Church, and therefore the reprobate ar excluded. When he says of all the world
it is spoken of the^ that should believe, and which were scattered in diverse
countries of the world. For then we are made truly to understand what the
grace of Jesus Christ is when it is told us that it is the only salvation of
all the world.

As touching y^ other sentence where Christ says that he prays not for the
world, this word world is taken in another meaning, to wete, for the
reprobate. And therein he shows openly that he will ask nothing which
agrees not with the good pleasure of his father. He reco^mendeth unto him
those only which his father loves of his own good will. For he says he
prays not for those that are cut of from the kingdom of God, because he
has not care but only for his own sheep which he had received at y^ hand of
his father. A man will say that here is an absurdity, for the best rule we
have to make our prayers by, is to follow Jesus Christ and to have him for our
Master and leader. Then we are appointed to pray for all generally, moreover
the Son of God himself prayed afterward indifferently for all saying,
forgive them, for they know not what they do. Very true it is that we must
pray for all men: Yet for all that such prayers ar restrained to the faithful
and chosen only. We ought to desire that this man and that man, and every man
might be saved and so to comprehend all mankind because we cannot yet dyscerne
the faithful from the reprobate. In the mean season nowithstanding when we
desire yt ye kingdom of God should come, we also pray that he confound and
beat down his foes. Behold the only dyfference that there is, we pray for y^
health of all those whom we know to be formed after the Image of God, which
have one nature common with us. And we leave to the Judgment of God the
destruction of those which he knows to be reprobates. But as touching our
Lord Jesus Christ, there is another manner of reason to be alleged. Faith and
love make him to pray so: but this is not all, he mounteth above all men, he
enters into the inner chamber of the heavens where he goes even unto the
secrets of his father, and having presentlye before his eyes his fathers
hidden judgments, he knows well for whom he should pray, desyryng nothing
that is against the will of him, nor making any prayer or request for those
that are cast back from him, he is the propitiation for the sins of all
men, yea truly, of the chosen and faithful, he is not so for the reprobate,
because his Father has cast them of.

57
It is easier for a cable to pass through a nedells eye then for a rich man
to enter into the kingdom of God. Mark. 10. My yoke is favorable and my
burden light, Mathe. 9.
VERILY the yoke of our Lord Jesus is favorable: yet it will not seem so to us
according to y^ fleshly felyng, because of the rebellion of our flesh we
shall ever shun this yoke as combersome and hard to bear. But then it shall
beco^me easy unto us, and we shall bow our necks quietly under it, when
being clothed with myldnesse we shall be made like unto the son of God. And
therefore it is that he says learn of me for I am gentle and lowly of heart.
He will have us bear his yoke, but to the end the vneasynesse should not
astonne us, he says learn of me, sygnifying thereby that this yoke will not
be troublesome when by his example we shall be brought to myldenesse and
lowlynesse. To this also belongs that which he adds, you shall find rest,
for as long as the flesh shall kycke against it we shall do nothing but
braye and storm, and they that refusyng to take the yoke of the Son of God,
go about to appease God by another mean, do but labor in vain.

But if so be that among other, the covetous will not bow their neck under
the yoke of the Lord Jesus, what lets that this sentence should not be
true? to wete, that it is an easier matter for a cable to pass through the eye
of an nedle, than for a rich man to enter into y^ kingdom of God, not that
riches of their nature hinder us to follow God: but in as much as our nature
is perverse and naughtye, hardly can it come to pass but yt they which are
rych and have great abundance of goods should straye ercedyngly out of the
way. Covetousness is condemned by this sentence as a deadly pestilence:
notwythstandyng there with all is showed what hynderaunce riches bring. And
this must not seem unto us new or strange that he says that the rych shall
hardly find an open place to enter into the kingdom of heaven: for it is a
vice almost common to all to trust in their richesse. So then yt rich warned
of the danger whereunto they may fall must take heed. The poor co^tentyng
themself with their low state ought not to covet that which may bring them
more loss or trouble than profit or ease. By this mean, they which have
great wealth, are as it were held tied by Satan that they should not aspyre to
heaven: but covetousness and all other vices of men, let not the easynesse of
the yoke of Christ.

58
The abolishyng of the former commandment comes by means of the weakness
and unprofitableness of it. Hebr. 7. Do we abolyshe the law by faith? no,
rather we establyshe the law.
WHEN the Apostle to yt Hebreues says that the first ordinance ceased
sygnifying that the law and the office of Priesthode were at an end because
this law was weak and unprofitable, he shows evidently y^ he speaks in
respect of ceremonies forasmuch as he adds thereunto the office of
sacrifycing. The ceremonies had no certayntie in themself, and of themself
they help not a whyt to salvation: for as touching that the promise of grace
was tied unto them, and that which Moses testifies in sundry places that God
should be apeased by sacrifyces, and yt by them sins should be blotted out, it
belonged not properly to the oblations and sacrifyces: but it proceeded from
another thing. For even as all ceremonies were referred to Christ: so they
borrowed of him their power and workyng, or to say better, they could nothing
of themself and did nothing: but all their virtue depended only upon the
Lord Jesus. Seeing then the Jews aledge them against Christ, the Apostle
applying his purpose to their falyshe opynion, he also denydeth them from
Christ. But what? are they separated from Christ there remains nothing unto
them but this weakness, and vnprofytablenesse of which he speaks. To be
short, a man shall find no commodity in old ceremonies til he be come to
Christ. Let us say then, that yt law is called unprofitable when it is
without Christ, of this sort is the taking away of the first commandment.
The first laws and ordinances are abolished by the latter. The law had been
publyshed long before Dauyd. Then he rayned when he brought forth this
Prophecye of the creatyng of a new priest. It is the^ a new law which
abolysheth the first. Now seeing the first is abolished by yt latter that came
after, a man might say yt faith which came after, did abolyshe the law that
went before Yet we see what Saint Paul says in this place, that not only
the law is not made vain and unprofitable by faith: but rather it is
co^fyrmed and establyshed, that as often as the law is set against faith, the
fleshly sense takes hold byandby of an opinion of repugnaunce, as though one
were contrary to the other. Now this perverse imagination has place chieflye
among those, that having no right understanding of the law, like nothing else
in it but the righteousness of works, and leave the promyses. And this was
said in reproach to Christ himself, yt he endeavored to abolish ye law by his
preaching. This made him to protest y^ he came not to abolishe ye law: but to
fulfill it. And this suspision belonged as well to manners as to y^ ceremonies.
For seeing ye Gospel makes an end of y^ ceremonies of Moses, it was thought yt
it went about to destroy or overthrow the ministry of Moses. Beside,
forasmuch as it brings to naught all righteousness of works, it is thought
likewise that it is contracye to so many witnesses of the law where God
affyrmeth that in the law he has showed to the Israelites ye way of
righteousness and salvation. Wherefore this that Saint Paul says here, is not
referred only to the moral law^ but to all the law generally. For first, the
law of manners is truly confyrmed and established by the faith which is in
Christ, in as much as it was given to the end y^ it should admonish a man of
his iniquitye and so should bring him to Christ without whom it is imperfect,
and cannot but farther provoke y^ desire of ill doing, and so to pluck upon
man a greater condemnation. But when a man is come to Christ, he fyndeth in
him y^ perfect righteousness of y^ law which righteousness is beco^me ours
also by imputatio^. Seco^darilie there we find sanctification by which our
hearts ar fashioned to y^ observing of the law, True it is that this
observation is yet imperfecte, howbeit it leauelleth at the butte. There is a
like reason touching ceremonies which cease and vanyshe by the coming of
Christ: yet notwithstanding they are truly strengthened by him. If a man esteem
them by the^self, they are but fygures and unprofitable shadows. The^ only a
man shall find that there is some strength in them when they look to a better
end.

59
Go not to the Gentiles. Mathe. 10. Go through all the world. Mathe. 16.
THE first charge that Christ gave his Dysciples stretched no further tha^ to
the country of Iewry, his will was y^ the Jews being styred up to hope for
salvation at hand, should beco^me attentyue hearers of Christ. Afterward he
commanded them to Preach even to all the ends and corners of the earth. But
for that time he would that their voice should be as it were shut within the
land of Iewrye. And the reason thereof is because his father sent him to be
the minister of circumcision to perform the promises that had been made of
old time to the fathers: as it is said in the. 15. to the Romans. Well, is
it so that God entered into a special league with the line of Abraham? then is
it not without cause that Christ at the first kept in grace among the chosen
people till the proper and fytte time to publyshe it were come. But since his
resurrection he has poured forth upon all nations the blessyng that for the
second time had been promised. For, then the Veyle of the temple was broken and
the wall of debate broken down At the first the dignity of the byrthright
tarried among ye Jews, yet afterward the heritage of life was made common to
the Gentiles. So Christ was appointed to be a light unto the Gentiles, and
salvation unto the ends of the earth Therefore after that peace had been
Preached to the householde folk, y^ message of the same peace came also unto
strangers.

60
Be ye wise as serpents Mathe. 10. If any among you think to be wise, let
him be made a fool in this world. 1. Cor. ^.
Because the Apostles should be sent as sheep among wolves and wild
beasts, they had need to be wise. For if they had not had wit to take good
head to themself they might have been devoured of wolves, and ye rage of wild
and cruel beasts had let them from doing their duetye. They were sent
with this condition that they should have store of enemies. Their wisdom then
ought so to be tempered that they should not be more fearful than need was
they should, and to slack in executing there office. For we see it come
ordinarilye to pass that they which will be accounted very wise and ware, are
for the most part fearful and slow in their work. True it is that because
of the dangers that are laid on every side, it behooves greatly the
Dysciples of the Son of GOD to be hedefull in lookyng to themself. But
because there is great damage y^ they should be kept back by s^outh and
idleness, he wills that they should go roundly and frankly where their
vocation allotteth them. First y^ faithful are commanded so to have care of
life that they cast not themself folyshly into dangers and that they take not
on them to presumptuously ouerhard adventures. Then afterward symplenesse is
required at thery hand, to ye end they should not be so fear full and so let
from doing of their duty, but that they should be simple withal, to the end
nothing should be done rashlye. Such is the wisdom y^ God requires, first
in the ministers of his word, then afterward generally in all his faithful But
when Saint Paul says that to be truly wise we must be made fools in this
world, he speaks against the folyshe presumption of me^ that will be wise in
their own conceit. He exhorts us not to disceaue our selves by a false
opinion, attributyng unto our self any wisdom. For in very deed al they which
lean upon their own wit are greatly abused, and it is spoken chiefly against
those which are not content with the simpleness of the Gospel, not that it is
requisite we should altogether refuse the wysdom which is given us of nature, or
that which we have gotten by long use and knowledge of things: but only that we
should reduce it to the true obedience of God, to the end we should not be
wise but by his word. For to be made a fool in this world, is to desire to
give place to the will of God, and to receive with fear and reverence all that
he teaches us, rather than to follow that which to our self seems good and
alowable.

To the end then those two places may be well agreed, we must make a
distinction between the true wisdom and the false. The false wisdom and
that which disceaueth us, is when we content us with our self as touching the
taking of counsel in our business either to govern our self, or to take
order for that we have to do, when we depend not of any other, when we have
not need of the guydyng of another, but when we think we are able enough to
guide our self. And contrariwyse the true wisdom is when we are foles to the
world renouncing our own reason and wisdom, and as it were having our eyes
shut, we suffer God to govern us. And when distrusting our self we rest
upon him setting all our wisdom in him, yelding our self easy to be taught
and altogether obedient. Thus our wisdom must turn to smok, to the end the will
of God may raygne over us, that we be void of our own wisdom that we may
be filled with the wisdom of God.

61
Greet no man by the way. Luc. ^0. Greet one another with a holy kiss. 1.
Cor. 16.
WHEN Christ gave this commandment to the. 70. Disciples, his will was that
they should use such diligence that when they should meet any man on the way,
they should not tarry, no, not to bid god speed them, for fear of being
let, so. 1. of the Kings the. 4. the Prophet Elisee sending his Boy to the
Sunanite woman forbad him to salute any man by the way. Thereto also belongs
that which saint Luke adds that Christ commanded his Disciples to take and
eat y^ which should be offered them, he does not command them only to be
content with little meat: but also while they were in journey to live upon other
men's charges to ye end they should not tarry to bie and to make provision of any
thing for the^self: he will not the^ have them to be discourteous, disdaining to
salute those y^ they meet, but that they should walk so as they should
ouerpasie al stoppes. But as for that which saint Paul says it was a very
common custom among the Jews to salute one another by kissing, as a man may see
in ye scriptures. The greeks also used it oftentimes, but it is very like he
speaks of the accustomed kissing by which they saluted each other in the holy
asse^blies. For a man may easly judge y^ eue^ in y^ Apostels time in y^
administering of y^ supper they used y^ kiss. Sins y^ time certain nations
disdaning this custom of kyssyng, in stead of it have had a Pax which was
offered to be kyssed. But howsoever the case stand, seeing that kyssyng was a
sign or witness of mutual love, Saint Paul's mind is to exhort the
Corrinthians to bear good will one to another, and to use such signs to make
their love known, always provided that there be no uncleanness or faynyng.
Thus a man may see easylye that there is no contrariety in these two sentences.

62
Take heed and bevvare of the Leuaine of the Pharysies. Math. 16. The Scribes
and Pharisees are set in Moses chair, all things the^ which they shall
co^mau^d you to keep, keep them and do them. Math. 23.
THAT which Saint Luke adds to the first sentence in the. 12. chapter, is to
expound it, when he says Beware of the Leuayne of the Pharysies, which is
hypocrysy. But yet this should not be enough if that should not be added which
is spoken in Saint Matthew to wete that Christ spoke of their doctrine. Beside
then that he warns the^ to fly the life and manners of the Pharisees, he
wylleth the^ also to take heed of ye spring of all feigned and false show of
wisdom or holiness, and the matter of al vain pomp and folish boast, which
though before men it seem in show to be a great matter: yet it is nothing
before God. Even as the eyes of the Lord do behold the truth. Jeremy. 6. so
does he instruct the faithful and teaches them a true and perfect holiness
to the end they may cleave to Justice with a pure and sound heart.

Contrarywyse the ordinances and traditions of men leaving aside y^ spyrytuall
service have goodly outward shows as though God would be e^trapped or
disceaued by such inticementes and allurings. Although there be great shows in
outer ceremonies: yet if they be wayed by themself, they are but small trifles
before God. So see we that the leauains of men are puffed up, but before God
they have no strength at al. In the other sentence our Lord Jesus shows with
what reverence we ought to receive the doctrine of God. Out of what mouth
soever it proceeds it behooves us to hearken to it and obey it. Though the
Scribes and Pharisees were ill livers and that a man should in no wise follow
their life: yet must he frame his manners and life according to the rule of
the law, which is hard at their mouth. It was necessary for him to reprove
many faults in the^ to the end all the people should not be infected with them.
They were ministers of the doctrine, but to the end the doctrine shuldnot be
corrupted through their faults, the Lord Jesus wills the faithful to be
diligente hearers of their words and not followers of their works.

But now we must see whether with out making any conscience a man ought to obey
all that which the Doctors of ye church co^mau^d and ordain. For it is certain
that ye scribes of y^ time which S. Luke calls Doctors of ye law did
wickedly and falsely corrupt ye law by false interpretatio^s and gloses, and did
lode the poor souls with unjust laws and with many superstitions depraved
the pure service of God. And lo here the Son of God will have their doctrine
kept as though a man should not resist their tyranny at al. But it is very easy
to resolve this doubt: for the meaning of Christ was to make difference
between the holy law of God and their profane works. To sit in the chair of
Moses is nothing else but to teach (by y^ law of God) how a man should live. So
that a man may say he is set in Moises chair which commands not of himself
or of his own mind, but by ye authority of God. So if a man mark which is y^
leuain of y^ Pharisees, and what y^ fastnes and pureness of y^ chair of Moses
should be, which does not admit but ye holy ordinances of God, a man shall
find that there is no co^trariety in these. ij. places.

63
There shall be one shepherd and one flock. Joan. 10. He shall divide the
sheep from the goats. Math. 25.
THE difficulty shall be easyly resolved when we shall understand that in the
first sentence mention is made only of all faithful which should be gathered
together in one flock. And in the second it is showed that at y^ last the
sheep shall be separated from the Goats where now they are myngled one with
another. As touching y^ first, even as we believe and confess that there is
one holy universal Church: so it necessarily behooves that there should be a
body of one only head. There is one God says saint Paul, there is one faith,
there is one baptism, so we must be one as also we be called to one self hope:
so it is said Ephesians. 4. Now albeit it seem to be divided into many flocks: yet
the faithful which are scatred here and there through all the world, ar shut
within one park and closed within one hedge and closure, for one self word is
preached to al, they use al like sacraments, they have al one self rule of
prayeng to God, they have al in one manner that which is requisite for the
profession of their faith. Now the mean by which all the flock of God is
gathered together, is when there is but one shepherd for all, and when his
voice only is heard, when the Church is made subject to Christ only and
obeys his commandment and hears his voice and his doctrine then is it in
good state. But when the Lord Jesus is dumme, when his majesty is trodden under
foot when his holy ordinances are set forth to be mocked at and contemned, what
can a man say of that goodly unity, but that it is a diuilish Sinagoge or
co^spiracy, worse and more execrable with out all comparison than any waste or
spoil. There is no Church but where Christ raygneth, there is no knowledge of
God but where the honor of the shephearde is given unto Christ.

But the other sentence shows that all the disorders that are this day in the
world shall be brought again into good order. There are Hypocrites mired with the
true children of God, they have so^ show to be of the flock and are among the
sheep but when the son of God shall come to restore them, the goats shall
be put apart and cast (...), and the sheep shall be gathered together into the
eternal Kingdom of God.

The state of this Kingdom shall be well governed when the just shall have
obtained the crown of glory, and when the wicked shall be recompensed as they
have deserved. Now this division which shall be of goats from among the lambs
signifies that now there ar wicked mired among the good, yea, in such (...)
that they live as in one self fold. So the faithful must not think their
state over troublesome because as now they be constrained to live with the
goats, yea, and that at their hand they endure terrible assautes and
displeasures.

64
God rested the seventh day from all the works that he had made. Gensi^. 2* My
Father works even till this hour. Joan. 6.
A MAN must understand what the rest of God is, and then he shall easly
resolve this doubt when it is said that he rested the seventh day that is not
to say that he left his works so as he has no more care of them, as if a
master Mason or Carpenter having finished the building of his house should leave
it to him that could ocupy it, not caring any more for it, or as a
shippe-wright afterthat he has finished a vessel should give it over to the
waves of the sea not caring what should betide of it. So the rest or Sabat of
God is not a sluggishnesse or idleness, but a sound perfection which brings
with it a quiet state of rest. God then rested from al his works, that is to
say he ceased from creating of new kinds of any thing. There was so sound
a perfection that nothing could be added. Wherefore it is said that God has
set to the last hand. And that which is recited by Moises is as much as if he
had said, that which God was determined to do was the^ fulfilled. To be short
this is spoken only to show the perfectness of the building of the world,
so that here of a man could notte gather that God so rested from his works
that he has left them of seeing they have no virtue or force nor substance but
in him. In the mean time it is certain that God works and is occupied
continualy in that he vpholdeth the world by his power, that he governs it by
his providence, that he maintains al creaturs in their being, and also
multiplies them. Thereby a man may see how true this sentence of the Son is,
My Father works from the beginning even till now: for if God never so little
wythdrawe his hand, all things shall perysh in a momente, and shall be
strayghtways brought to naught, as it is said in the. 104. Psalm. Besides a
man could not well know that God is the creator and fashioner of heaven and
earth except this be attributed unto him that he gives strength and quickening
to al things, that he sustaineth the world by his high virtue, that he
governs it by his high council and mayntayneth it by his goodness and
stays al things acording to his good pleasure, as well beneath here in earth
as there above in heaven. Lo the^ how it behooves us to conclude, the making of
the world was perfect in syx days, but the governing it dureth for ever, and
God is continualy busied to maintayn and co^serue the order of the same. This
is that which Saint Paul says. Act. 17 that we live and have our mouyng and
being in God. And he not only mayntayneth by a general providence the nature
which he has created: but also he governs and ordreth every part of it. And
chiefly his faithful be governed and kept by him whom he has received under
his defense and safeguard.

65
It is appointed for men that they should once dye. Hebr. 9. Whosoever
believes in me shall never dye. Joan. 2.
Although we had no witness of the Scripture, yet our own fraylnesse doothe
warn us enoughe of the truth of this sentence, that it is ordained that al men
shall once dye. The riches, the honor, the dignity and strength of men, nor
whatsoever there is beside can redeem a man from this condition. And this
argument is infallible: where sin is there is death, al men are sinners, it
follows then that al men shall die, and we need no other reason to prove that
all that went before us were sinners but that by Death they were taken out of
this world, and that we also and they which shall follow us be sinners, but
that it is decreed by the sentence of God that we and they shall die. Death is
the hyer or reward of sin. But now that which is said hitherto extends
unto the Death of the body, for the body is subject to Death because of
sin. Furthermore we must understand how Christ protests so often times that
he is life and how he says else where that Who so believes in him are now
already raised from Death to Life, that they shall never dye. He speaks of
the souls of his faithful which are begotten anewe with an incorruptible
sede, and which have the spirit of Christ dwelling in them by which they
receue continual force. The body is subject to die because of sin: but this
spirit is life because of righteousness. Romans 5. Then Jesus Christ is the life
because he never suffers the life to decay which he has once given, but
conserueth it to y^ end. Seeing the flesh is so frail, what would befall of men,
if after they have once obtained life, they were left to themselves? Therefore
we must conclude that there is a continual and permanente state of life
grounded in the strength of Jesus Christ, to the end he may perfourm that
which he has once begone. This is very true that the outewarde man is marred
and corrupted daily in the faithful: but they are so far from losing by that
mean any of their true life that rather it is so increased by that mean: for
the inward man is there by renewed as it is said. 2. Cor. 3. and (which is more)
Death it self is unto them a freedom from the bondage of Death.

66
He that keeps Israel vvil not slomber nor sleep. Psalm. 121. Rise up Lord
why slepest thou? Psalm 44.
This Sentence is very worthy to be noted, that God is the keeper and defender
of all his faithful, yea, so a keeper that he will make them whole and safe in all sorts. There is great talking of the power of God, but in the mean time how
many are there that in all their talk have this reply in their mouth. God can if
he will, but we are uncertain and in doubt of his intent. So we must not
only attribute power unto God: but also a fatherly care and continual
watchfulness. And we ought to have him before our eyes as our continual
defender which watches at al hours for our salvation to the end we might rest
us fafely upon his holy providence. On one side the Epicures forge y^ God has
no care at all for the world and so they quench al fear and reverence of God.
But on the other side there is danger least when a man has ymagyned that
God governs the world it should be a confounded ymagynation by which a man
were not resolved that God has care for all his faithful partycularlye: for so
our spirits should hang in doubt, and should flote in continual
unquietness. And surely a man can never call upon God earnestly nor with a good
and lively affection, till the certayntye of this keeping be well prynted in the
heart. But now such complayntes are many times in the scriptures, and chiefly
in the Psalms. Lord rise or awake why slepest thou? The judgment of the
flesh makes us so to speak and think that God is laid down, and that he
slepeth when he does not manifestly exercise his Judgments when we are
afflicted and that we feel not the remedies as soon as we have called upon God:
It seems to us that he slepeth, but it is not so. This good Lord suffers us
to lament so and to make him such complayntes in our prayers: yet it behooves
us to be certainly persuaded that he continually and without ceasyng watches
for our profit and salvation: but because our spirits be stowe, we conceive
not at the first what care h^ has of us. The faithful then requyr^ he should
show in effect y^ he is neither forgetful nor a sleep. Al must be resolved
that God has his eyes set on the^ though he dyssemble: yet notwithstanding
because this persuatio^ is of faith and not of the flesh, they cast
familiarlye into the bosom of God this contrary judgment which they have
conceived of the present sight of y^ deed, and by this means they cast out of
their hearts these fylthy affections to the end faith should afterward com
forth pure and clear.

67
The just shall live by faith. Abac. 2 This do and thou shall live. Luke. 10.
THE proud confydence of the flesh is contrary to faith which ye Prophet says
the just shall live. When he has made mention of the destruction of the proud,
he adds also that the life of the meke and just consists in faith. But
there is nothing that makes a man to line before God but righteousness. It
follows the^ y^ our righteousness also consists in faith, and this life
which we have of faith is not to dure only for a while: but is fyrme for ever.
For it is says by which we mount a lofte, it is faith by which we pass over
al dangers of this present life, and ouerco^m al myseries and troubles, faith
is to us an assured port in ye midst of y^ storms and tempests of this
world. To be short, faith makes us to obtain victory against al y^ world as
S. John says in his first canonical. Wherefore let us thus conclude yt they
which are counted just with God, live by faith only. Then let us hold this,
seeing no man can be justified otherwise tha^ by faith, also no man can live but
by faith, for life can not be but where righteousness is. The law verily
contains perfect Justice, so yt if any could accomplish a law he should
obtain life because he should find righteousness in ye law sufficient to
make him live: as also the promise is made in the law that whosoever shall do
y^ things contained in it shall live. And this is y^ which is here said Do this
and thou shall live. But in the mean season we must see how this promise
agrees with the free justification which is by faith. For the reason why God
iustifyeth us freely, is not for that the law shows not perfect
righteousness: but because we fail in keeping it. Wherefore all the scripture
pronounces that there is no man that can obtain life by it. The fault is not
in the law but in y^ weakness of man, and the fault is in our flesh. So a
man may say that these two sentences agree well together: for the law shows
how men may obtain righteousness by their works, and that no man is
justified by his works, for the lack is not in the doctrine of the law, but
in men. Beside, it was mete that Jesus Christ should clear himself of the
false accusyng of ye Jews, and of the slander which he knew well the rude and
ignorante charged him with, as though he had abolyshed the law in that it is
the continual rule of righteousness.

68
The Law administreth death. 2. Cor. 5. His commandment is everlasting
life. Joan. 12.
SAINT Paul calls the law not only ye administer of death but also of
damnation, and that justly. For where men are warned of their duty and they
hear that all they that satisfye not the justice of God are cursed, they are
constrained to find themself gyltye of sin and death They bring therefore
from the law nothing else but such a condemnation: forasmuch as God claymeth
y^ to which a man stands bound to him. And in the mean season he gives not
the power or abilitye to fulfill it. The law only geues the rule of well living,
but the whilst it reformeth not the hearts to the obedience of justice, and
it declares eternal death to transgressors, and therefore it can not but
condemn, or to say better, the office of the law is to show the sycknesse,
but it is in such sort as it gives no hope of healyng. For seeing it leaves a
man to himself, it must needs be that it awardeth him to dye. Lo, how the
law is the minister of death.

But to accord this sentence with the first, it behooves to look upon the
opposition that is beetwene the law and the Gospel. For Jesus Christ in the
second place speaks of his Gospel when he makes protestation that he spoke
not of himself: but his father that sent him he himself gave commandment
to his son of y^ which he should say and speak. And he adds that he
knows well that this commandment is eternal life. To understand this
opposition it behooves us to return to that which Saint Paul says in the
self place. 2. Cor. 3. the law was written in tables of stone. Then it was but
a doctrine of y^ letter. This lack in the law was to be amended by the
Gospel: for so long as it was engraued in tables of stone it must needs be
frail. The Gospel then is holy and vnbreakeable atonement, forasmuch as it
was ratifyed by the holy ghost. In stead then that the law is the minister of
death and damnation, the Gospel by which men are regenerated and reconciled to
God by ye free forgiveness of sins, is the minister of righteousness, and
consequentlye of life. It was said that the office of the law is to set forth
the sickness, but not to show what remedy a man might have to heal it. But
the office of the Gospel is to give to the hopeless a ready remedy. It was
showed that ye law leauyng a man to himself geues and pronounces sentence of
death: but y^ Gospel brynging us to Jesus Christ opens the gare of life. So a
man may say at a word that this is a continual accident to the law to kill,
because all they that abide under it ar under the curse. But in the Gospel the
justice of God is reveled from faith to faith, and therefore it is the power of
God to salvation to every one that believes.

69
The law is the minister of death. 2. Cor. 3. The law of the Lord
refreshes the soul, the testimony of the Lord gives vvysedome to the
ignorante, his commandment lyghteneth the eyes. Psalm. 1^.
HERE before a man might see how the law is the minister of death, not that it
is such in it self, for perfect righteousness is contained in it, and by
consequent life is enclosed in it. But such it is in us which be weak and
not able to fulfill it, and as breakers of it not able to draw any thing out
of it but death, which it pronounces to all those that shall not do ye
things which are therein contained. If now we will agree these two sentences,
we must add to them that which Saint Paul himself adds in this third
Chapter of ye second to y^ Corrinthians to wete, that our Lord is the
spirit. He had said before of the law that the letter kills, but y^ spirit
joined with the letter quickens. The doctrine of the law is litteral and not
only dead but also the geuer of death. Contrarywyse he calls Christ y^
spirit of it, sygnifying thereby that then it shall be quick and quicknyng, when
it shall be breathed in by Christ. Let the soul be joined with the body, and
of those two shall be made a man quycke, garnyshed with sense and understanding,
and mete for all works of life. Take away and part the soul from the body,
and it shall be but a carrayn dead without any felyng at al.

Now a man may accord these praises which Dauyd geues to the law with these
sentences of Saint Paul. For when Christ is joined to the law as the soul
with the body, the praises which Dauyd gives it, belong to it, it lighteneth
the eyes, it gives wisdom to little ones, it refreshes the soul. Take away
and separate Christ from the law, and it shall remain dead and the minister of
death and damnation. Then Christ is the life of the law.

These things verily seem to be contrary altogether one against another, that
the law recreateth the souls, and yet it is a dead letter and gives death,
that it lyghteneth the eyes, and yet it suppresseth the light which is within
having a Veyle set against it that it reioyseth the hearts and the spirits,
and yet brynging a spirit of bondage it astonneth and agasteth. But Dauyd
speaks not symply of the bare commandments, but he comprehends all the
league by which God had adopted the children of Abraham for his people. And
therefore he joins the fres promyses of salvation with the rule of well
living, yea Christ himself upon whom the adoption was grounded. Saint Paul
who had to do with the perverse interpretours of ye law which did separate it
from the grace and spirit of Christ, does but touch the simple ministry of
Moses. Now it is very certain that when the law is not quickened by the
spirit of Christ, it is not only unprofitable: but also it brings death to
ye scholars of it. For without Christ there is in the law nothing but an
vnintreatable rigor which brings all mankind under y^ wrath and curse of
God. Moreover the rebellion of the flesh taryeth remaynyng in us, which
inflameth in us an obstinate hatred against God and his law, and thence
proceeds this weary bondage and horror.

70
Now why tempt you God in laying a yoke on the necks of his Dysciples which
neither our fathers nor we have been able to bear. Act. 15. And his
commandments are not heavy. 1. Joan 5.
OUR own experience and the holy scriptures sufficiently bear witness y^ the
yoke of the law is more tha^ we can bear. Moreover it is clear yt because the
renouncing of our self is as it were a trial of the true observation of y^ law.
We dare not say y^ it is easy for a man to renounce himself: but rather seeing
the law is spiritual (as Saint Paul says) and of our part we are nothing but
flesh, there must needs be a great difference beetwene ye law of God and us.
And where Saint Peter says it is a yoke which not our fathers were able to
bear, he speaks not of y^ only which men have accomplished but also of y^
which they might have done. Neither speaks he of any common persons but of y^
holy fathers: seth he says that such could not bear the yoke of the law, it
appears that it is impossible for me^ to bear it. Here he medleth not only
with the works and will of men, but also with their power and abilitye. With
this also Saint Paul agrees affyrmyng that it was impossible for the law to
give us life, because it was weak through y^ flesh. If any man can perform
the law, certainly he shall find in it the life which was promised in it.
But when Saint Paul says that life cannot be attained by the law a man may
well conclude that in it is required a righteousness so high and perfect as
man can not accomplish. If a man look upon nothing else but the strength of
man's nature not only he shall not be strong enough to bear the yoke of the
law: but also he shall be unable to move his little finger to fulfill the least
jot of it. These sentences are very certain and true, that all the thoughts of
man's understanding are perverse even from chyldehode, y^ all the senses of the
flesh are enemies to God, that there is none that seeks God, and many other
like which are often found in the scriptures A man then may conclude that not
only man's abilitye is weak and imperfect touching the fulfylling of ye law:
but also y^ he has no strength or power at al to accomplish it. What is then
to be understood of Saint John's words who says that the commandments of God
are not heavy? This is the answer, that the hardness proceeds not at al from
the law: but from the fault of our flesh. This is that which was alleged by
Saint Paul, who after he had said it was not possible for the law to
iustifye us, byandby after lays the fault on our flesh. Saint Paul in these
sentences which have been here above alleged compares the law with the
faulty nature of man. David in other places which seem to be very contrary to
the first shows how they are minded and affectioned which are regenerate by
the holy ghost, they take great pleasure in it. And in deed Saint John
restraynes this sentence to the children of God, saying that this comes of
the power of the holy ghost, that it is no grefe to the faithful to obey God.

Yet hereunto a man may reply that although the faithful are governed and
regenerate by the spirit of God, yet have they a hard fight to sustain
against their own flesh. And let them enforce themselves the most they can,
yet scarcely shall they do half their duty. And beside there is this withal,
that they are oftentime shaken, and ar ready almost to fall down under the
burden. We see whereabout Saint Paul that great and excellent Apostle went.
He complayneth that he was kept captyne, and mournes accompting himself to be
in miserable case, in that he can not serve God with a frank will. But
consider why, the law is called soft and easy, it is forasmuch as being
defended with heavenly power we ouerco^me the concupiscence of our flesh. For
howsoever the flesh stryueth, the faithful see that there is nothing that
may more delyght them, than the seruyng obeying, and following of God. But yet
that this may be better understood, it behooves us to Join with these
commandments ye fatherly goodness of God, by which the rigor of the law
is assuaged. So when we know that God bears favorably with us although we
can not fulfill the law with our works, yet this goodness makes us readyer
to obey him. And this is that which is said in the. 130. Psalm. Forgiveness
is with thee O Lord that thou should be feared and redoubted. So a man
may perceive hereby y^ the law is soft and easy to keep. And if it chance
y^ faithful to fall in some sort, yet their heart fayles the^ not because y^
pardon holds the^ up.

71
No man ever hated his flesh. Ephesians. 5. They that are of Christ have crucified
their flesh. Gal 5.
THese two sentences are altogether different but not contrary at all. The
Prophet Esaias willing to show what one man owes to another says. Dispyse not
thy flesh, we are bones and flesh one of another we are of one self shape and
nature. We can use no violence or do wrong to another except we defile our own
shape and nature while we scorn other, the rebuke is on our self. Though
this be spoken of the common nature of al men: yet Saint Paul applying this
sentence to the conjunction which is between a man and his wife, passes
farther forth, showing that there is not between them a coniuntion only by
likeness of nature: but also y^ bond of marriage which makes the^ both one.
He then forms his argument bringing it from nature it self, to exhort
husbands to love their wives. For there is no man but that naturally loves
himself, and no man can love himself unless he love his wife also, in as much
as his wife is his own flesh.

What lets this but that we may say that they which are of Christ have
crucified their flesh? For is not the crucifying of the flesh a hatyng it or
rather tamyng it? to the end y^ it turn not a man away from his salvation.
And this is our true Christendom as touching our life, that we make not a
false profession to be Christians. That is to say, that this faulty flesh be
mortified which is a work of the cross of the Son of God, for it is not the
propre work of men: but by the grace of God we are graffed in the fellowshyp
of the death of Christ, to the end we should live no more after our own
appetite. So then we enjoy the pryuyledge of Gods children when we are buried
with Christ through a true renouncing of our self, and abolishing of the old
man: not that flesh is altogether destroyed: but because it may not have rule,
but rather must give place to the spirit. What contrariety or dyscorde is there
between these two sentences?

72
They have not received the promises. Hebr. 1^ They have obtained the promises.
Hebr. 11
ALTHOUGH god remayn true, though we all should be unfaithful, yet our
unfaithfulness makes the promises to be unto us vain and without effect.
Faith contrariwise makes men to have experience of Godds truth in all his
promises. So it is said that the fathers obtained the promyses of God. But it
behooves us to add that which is there also added. It is said in the same
Chapter that Abraham offered his only son after that he had received the
promises. It seemed that in the death of Isaac all the promises should cease.
For it was said, thy seed shall be called in Isaac. Furthermore we must not
consider Isaac as some private man among other: but as him that had Christ
enclosed in him. But Abraham had so received the promises by faith that he gave
such honor to god that had made the promise that he was able to raise his son
Isaac from the dead. Now then he rejects not ye promysse that had been made:
but he stretches the virtue and the truth of it farther tha^ the life of his
son: for he limiteth not the power of God within so straight bonds, as though
it should be tied or buried in ye death of Isaac: Lo how he was not afterward
disapointed of ye truth of ye promises.

But now let us see how the same Apostle says yt the fathers received not the
promises. He speaks not simply, but by comparison, and shows what
difference is between the fathers of old time and us, where God abundantly
pours forth his grace upon us, he gave them only a taste of it where he
shows himself as it were present to our eyes: he showed them from a far
in the dark the Image of his Christ: yet they were at quiet and never fell from
the faith. The Apostle the^ makes his argument thus. A far greater occasion
of perseueraunce is now a days given unto us, therefore if we shrink we are
doubly inexcusable.

They from far of beheld the spiritual kingdom of Jesus Christ, whose face in
these days is so nere unto us. More over they saluted ye promises from a far,
in stead of that they dwell so famyliarly this day among us: And yet they
continued til the death. What a negligence were it, if we should not believe, yea,
how great were our sickness if we should fail in our faith?

But yet a man might say that they could not believe except they had received
the promises. Upon the which it behooved necessarilye that their faith should
be grounded. This (as we have said already) is spoken by comparison, for they
were far of from this degree unto which God has lyfted us up. Wherefore,
though on self salvation were promised to them and us: yet they had not the
same clearenesse of the promises that we this day enjoy under the kingdom of
Jesus Christ: but they were content to behold it from a far.

73
None is gone up to heaven but he, which came down from heaven, the Son of
man which is in heaven. Joan. 3. O Father, I will that they which thou haste
given me shall be there where I am, that they may see my glory. Joan. 17.
AL men that think to mount up to heaven by the quickness of their wits,
that is to say, who by their own sense think purely to know the mysteries of
God, and to be illuminated with spiritual understanding, are greatly deceived.
The carnal man (says Saint Paul) comprehendes not ye things which are of God.
So then all the finenesse of man's wit is far recoyled back from those
things that belong to God, because man is far underneath God. The Lord Jesus
says that he alone went up into heauenand that the passage is shut against
all the rest. First he humbles us when he shuts the entry to heaven from
al me^. And hither also Saint Paul ledeth us when he says that we must be
fools in our selves if we will be wise in God. But there is nothing that we do
more unwillingly. And when we com to God all our wytts fail us and fall quite
away. But forasmuch as Christ has openned heaven unto us, he offreth us with all the ready remedy, when he says, that that which is denied to all the rest,
is granted unto the son of man. For it is not for his own commodytie that
he went up to heaven, but that he might be our leader and sure guide. Therefore
he called himself the son of man that we should not doubt but the entry into
heaven is common to us as well as to him. He has put on our human flesh,
that we might be partakers of al his benefits, yea he only knows the
secrets of his father. But he admits us to his secrets which otherwise
should be hidden from us.

Now to come to the understanding of the other sentence. The son of God
desires that where he is now there also we should be. And his desire imports an
effect, that is, that we shall be indeed where he is. True it is that he is
with us until the end of the world, and according to his promysse we enjoy
his blessed presence and for ever shall enjoy it. But bysyde that he will also
have us at the last brought to his heavenly Kingdom, and that we then should
enjoy the same glory, to the which he is now raised up. For he speaks of
the perfect blessefulnesse of his faithful. His desire that his faithful
should be received into heaven, shall not be frustrate. Unto this part is
referred that which is added after, namelye that they may see my glory. From
that time forward the Apostels saw the glory of the son of God: but it was
as a little glimpes of light, in respect of that glory which shall be thorowlye
manifested in the heavenly Kingdom, as if one being shut in darkness through a
little cleft enioied a little light The whylest, let us remember that even as no
man can now go up unto the hidden counsels of God, how sharp soever or
subtle his wit be, except the son of man which is Jesus Christ cause him
to go up: so no man shall com unto the heavenly glory, unless the same son of
man heave him up.

74
I come not to call the ryghteous but sinners. Math. 9* Salvation is far from
sinners. Psalm. 119.
THE righteous are welcome to god namely they that with a good conscience do all that they may to obey God acording to his holy righteousness which not
withstanding make not account of their own righteousness, but as of dong. But
here mention is made of those righteous which contentyng themselves with their
own righteousness would not be better by the grace and mere goodness of
God. And that also which Christ says here, is not only to beat back the pride
and hypocrysy of the Scribes: but there is byside a general doctrine in this
sentence, that the grace of the son of God shall not profit us except we
earnestly feel our sins and groan under their burden. And that thereby we be
moved to come to him in all humbleness. On the other part the weak consciences
are lyfted up into a sure trust: for we must not fear that Christ will cast
away sinners, sith he is descended from his heavenly glory to call them.

The contrariety then shall be taken away when we shall understand that there
are two sorts of sinners. The scripture many times uses this word in that
sort, and chiefly in the Psalms, meaning those that of stubbournesse harden
themself in all il and of pride refuse all the graces of God. And to speak at a
word, which in their dissolute and desperate life carry a certain mark of
reprobation. It is truly said of such that salvation is far from them,
seeing they reject Jesus Christ which is author of salvation. Christ then is
not a Savior unto al sinners, as also it is added that he is come to call
sinners to repentance. Pardon is given us, but it is not to nourish and
maintayn sine but to bring us to live well and Godly. For the son reconcileth
us to his father under this condition, that being bought again by his blood,
we should offer our self as lively sacrifices, as. S. Paul says. Tit 3. The
goodness and mercy of God is opened to the end that renouncing all carnal
desires we should live holily. Where there is no repentance there also is no
salvation.

75
I write you not a new commandment but the old commandment which you
had from the beginning. 1. Joan. 2. Again I write you a nevve commandment.
^ Joan. 2.
THE commandment that is spoken of here is of charity and love. It is called
an old commandment because the faithful have heard it spoken of from the
beginning. Long usage ought to make it old, We know well enough that nouelty is
always odious and suspected. Beside, we receue not easily a yoke which before
we have not ben accustomed to. Moreover when we have received any manner of
doctrine, if we see it changed or any thing in it altered, we are troubled. To
the end then we should not hate or suspecte this commandment, to the end
also we should not think that any thing is added to it. It is said that it is
old, not for because that of long time since this commau^deme^t was given to y^
fathers: but because there is eue^ at this day non of y^ faithful but has
learned it, eue^ from his first e^tri^g into y^ knowledge of ye Gospel. Beside,
it behooves us not to take nor receue ye gospel as a doctrine forged of late:
but as proceeding from god, and as his eternal truth. A man must not measure ye
au^cie^cy of ye Gospel by yt space of the time, in which it was brought us. In
it Godds eternal will is manifested unto us. He not only gave us y^ rule of good
and holy life when we were called first to y^ faith of Jesus Christ: but also
he aloweth it in all times, and it has been always abiding before him. In
deed y^ true aunciency, and that that deserves to have credire, and to be had
in reverence among men, is y^ which takes beginning at God. For whatsoever
p^scription of years there be in the inue^tio^s of men: yet can they not have
so great authority as to bury Gods truth. This self commandment is also called
new, as y^ which God (as a man would say) renueth in giving it ordinarily to ye
end ye faithful should abide in it all the time of their life, because there is
nothing y^ they ought to desire more. After y^ children have learned their
first rules they lay the^ aside to give place to more hye and fast doctrine. But
contrariwise this doctrine of brotherly love is never out of season but it has
a continual strength, so y^ it is as well yt latter perfection as yt first
teachi^g. And this is that that Jesus Christ says. Joan. 13. I give you a new
commandment, that is, that you love one another. When the laws and
ordinances are new they are more diligently observed, afterward they slip by
little and little out of the remembrance of men, and at length are clear out of
use. To the end then that Christ might the better print the doctrine of love in
the hearts of his faithful, he recomme^deth as new. He would we should
continually remember this commandment, as if it were an ordinance newely
decreed. So by that which has been said here before, a man may see how the
commandment of charity and brotherly love is ancient and also how it is
new.

76
Give almose and behold al things are clean. Luc. 11. And if I give all my
substance to succor the pore, if I have no love I am nothing.
IT behooves us to mark who they be to whom Christ directs this saie^g. and
to what purpose. He had reproved the Pharisien hypocrites which did apoynt
cleanness to be in outward washings: saying, you cleanse those things that are
without, and the whilst, that which is within you, is full of theft, of deceit
and malice. O foles has not he that made that which is without made also that
that is within? So, according to his custom he minds to wtdrawe them from
ceremonies, to bring them to true love: saying openly that it is not water that
cleanses as well men as the meats: but it is weldoing. Not that he would
diminishe the grace of God by these words, neither does he reject y^ ceremonies
of the law as vain and unprofitable: but speaking to those that with signs
and bare figures did arrogantly mock God, he showed that the lawful use only
sanctifies the meat. But have we a will to know how we shall use our meats
well and ryghtlye, that shall be when of our plenty we shall relieve the need of
the pore. Wherefore it were far better to give almose of our overplus, than
to be to scrupulous in washing our hands and vessels, and in so doing to let
pass and forget the pore. When he says that al things are clean when we give
almose, this signifies not that in almose there is any satisfaction by which
we should be cle^sed from our offenses. For Christ debateth not here with
what price we should bye the forgiveness of our sins: but he shows that
they that distribute a part of their bread to the pore shall eat their bread
purely. But saint Paul says that though he should give al his goods to be
employed to the relieuing of the necessity of the pore, nevertheless if he
have not love, all that is nothing, And thus where is the cleanness of which
mention is made before? He himself soluteth sufficientlye this question when
he says, If I have no love. Love then makes almose pure: and almose well and
charitably distributed makes us to use well and holylye the meats which God
has given us. There are then almoses which are given without love. If a man
consider by it self the almose done to the poor and chyeflye when a man
vnclotheth himself to clothe other, it is worthy of great praise. But because
often times one kind of ambition goes before and comes forth of another
kind of ambition, and not of a true liberalitye, or else when he himself which
is lyberal is destitute of other parts of love (for the inward liberalyty it
self is only one part of Christian love) it may be that this work that
otherwise is co^me^dable, though it be fair before the eyes of men and greatly
praised, yet it shall be nothing before God.

77
Rebuke before all me^ those that sin. Timo. 5. Reprove thy brother betvvyxt
him and thee alone. Math. 18.
SAYNTT Paul speaking of the accusation that ought to be made against the
Elders of the Church, will not have it received under two or three witnesses.

For seeing they must reprove the faults of other they should easily com to be
hated of other, and their doctrine should be easly rejected, if a man should easly
admit the accusers that would blame them. Yet lest y^ il lyuers should take an
occasion thereof to sin and to exempt the^self from al correction, he wills
that al they that lead a dissolute and offensive life should be openly
rebuked. And forthwith the reason is added, That other may fear. Whenever
any order is taken for the good, the wicked take hold of it and by that means
will have a privilege or freedom from punishmente. He moderateth then y^
which he had said of false and unjust accusations, to the end y^ none should
think y^ under this shadow it should be lawful for him to sin. That is to
say, it behooves that babbling tongues should be repressed, y^ y^ elders falsely
accused should not be wrongfully blamed and defamed. Yet if there be among the^
an il liver he ought rygrously to be punished and corrected. And why? y^ when
other see y^ they which are of degree and dignity are not for borne, they being
warned by such example should be the more in fear For why should a man give
more liberty to those whose sins may most hurt, tha^ to those whose faults
shall not be of so great offense. By the way, this must be understood of those
sins and faults which give open occasion of offense. For if any of the
auncientes or ministers commit any light fault and no notable crime, he
should rather be rebuked a part, than blamed openly. Now this is so far
from contrarying the sentence of our Savior Christ, that it rather serves it
for an exposition. For when by the first sentence we know how a man should
behave himself in rebuking open sins, we may also understand by the second
how a man should use himself in reproving the faults which as yet are secret
and hid. Christ having showed how we must bear the weakness of other,
shows afterward how and to what end and how long it behooves us to suffer
them. He gives us a mean, which is, not to offend to much, or to give
occasion of evil to the weak: and yet it is fytt their syckenesse should be
healed. He gives this commandment to his faithful so to spare one another
that notwithstanding they endeavor to correctvice And this is worthy diligently
to be noted, for when we spare or bear with me^, it can hardly be but y^ we
shall forbear to reprove them boldly. We do al (welnyghe) declyne to one side
or to the other, either we are content to disceaue one another by dangerous
and deadly flattery, either else we are to sharp in pursuing faults and
sins when we should redress the^. He there sets forth three degrees of
brotherly correction: but hereit shall suffice to show that as a man ought to
reprove openly those sins which are open or known of al. So as touching ye
sins y^ as yet are secret, we must prove this remedy, before we pass any
further namely whether by warnyng given a part to the offender a man may
withturne him from his offense. But if he cannot be wo^ne by such a mean,
other remedies are spoken of also. The difference then between open faults and
particular sins takes away al difficultye.

78
I say not that I pray to my father for you. Joan. 16. He entreats for you.
Romans 1.
SAINT John in the second Chapter of his first canonical, says, if we have
sinned we have an advocate namely Jesus Christ y^ just. We are yet very far
of from the perfection of righteousness, and beside we do ordinarilye make our
self faultye. But herein are we comforted that we have a ready and sovereign
remedy to appeace god, by having recourse unto Jesus Christ his Son. And
this is a thing whereon our consciences may rest, this is that wherein
stands the righteousness of men, and wherein is grounded the hope of their
salvation: otherwise our tongues and mouths ar defiled and our prayers sin.
But ye son of God is our mouth, out of which we speak things pleasyng
unto God: he is our altar whereupon we offer our prayers in a sacrifyce of
swear savor: he is our eye with which we behold God a merciful God unto
us. So he speaks and entreats for us, not that we must account or measure
this increacyng according to our fleshly understanding. For we must not think
that he is on his knees to make any request or supplication, or that he has
his hands joined together and lyfted up to pray: but because he presents
himself continually with his death and resurrection which are in stead of a
perpetual intercession and have the continual efficacye and strength of a
lively prayer to get us grace at his fathers hand, and to make him grant our
requests. But he is so our advocate, that we must ask nothing but in his name,
and when we shall ask or make request in his name, then the treasures of
heaven must be opened and liberally dealt out. For God will deny nothing that
shall be asked in ye name of Jesus Christ his Son. How says he then that it
shall be no more nedeful that he should entreat for his Dysciples? And what
need is there to pray in his name, if he take on him the charge to be our
advocate or intercessour. And Saint Paul says in this eight of ye Epistle to
the Romans that he entreats for us. Saint John calls him our advocate.
For answer, It behooves to understand that Christ says not here symply yt
he will not be our advocate, he means that his father shall be so bent to do
good to his. Disciples that he will give them of his own accord and without
much a do, all that they shall require of him, for the great love that he
bears them. He will prevent the advocate or intercessour which (if this were
not) should speak for them. And to conclude he adds, the father himself
loves you because you have lover me, and have believed y^ I came forth from
God. Yet the father can hear and grant no prayer, neither can he receive any
as pleasyng unto him but through his Son. So we are taught that when God has
once be gonne to love us, his love is so great that he even preuenteth all that
which is necessary to bring us unto him.

79
My God my God why haste thou forsaken me. Psalm. 22. I am not alone for my
father is with me. Math. 27.
This was the chief fight, Joan. 16.
and the hardest of al ye to (...) that our Lord Jesus suffer (...) for he was
so far of from aid or favor at his fathers hand to ease him in his last
dystresse, that he rather felt him something removed and gone from him. For not
only this good Lord offered his body for the ransom of our atonement with God:
but also he suffered in his soul the pains which we had deserved, and by
this mean he was truly made the man of sorrows, as Esaias says, Chap. 53. And
therefore we must not stay only at the utter torment, for it behooved Christ to
present himself be fore the Judgment seat of his father, bearing upon him
our condemmatio^, to the end he might make amends for us. Now there is nothing
more horrible than to find God a Judge whose wrath surmonnteth all the deaths
that a man can deuyfe. Seeing then this kind of trial was offered to (...) Lord
Jesus y^ God was against him, and that by y^ mean he was as it were appointed
to distructio^. Fear and honor took him, yea, such as had an hundred times
six allowed in all the men in the world: but he abode a vanquysher by a
wonderful power of the holy ghost. This fear made him to make this our cry,
My God my God why haste thou forsaken me, not faynedly nor after the opinion of
other: but the inward heaviness of his spyrite was so violent and burning
that it made him so to cry. Now then, not only he suffered the natural death,
not only his soul was separated from his body: but as Saint Paul says,
Act. 2. he fett y^ panges of death, that is to say, he was pressed with
marvelous anguysh. It had been a very small matter if Christ had escaped with a
natural death only: but it was expedient he should feel the rygour of Gods
judgment that he might be our true intercessoure to his father and that he
might stand beetwene him and us to keep the wrath of God from falling on
our heads. To do this it was needful he should abide the assault of all the
powers and force of hell and the horror of eternal death. And this is that that
is said in the Articles of our faith, that he descended into hell when he
suffered so many vylannyes, so many iniuryes and outrages, when he swet blood,
when his soul was payned even unto ye death, when he was shamefully hanged
beetwene two thieves as one forsaken of God and of me^, without help favor and
comfort, when he yielded his ghost upon the Cross, bearyng the curse of the
anger of God which is the true hell, felyng condemnation upon himself, the
pains and grieses that we our selves had deserved for our sins and
iniquityes. To be short when he was counted as a worm of ye earth, and not
as a man. May we not well say y^ he went down into hell which had well nigh
swalowed him in.

Sinners had deserved to be altogether swalowed up and confounded by the just
judgment of God, before which they could in no wise stand. Seeing the^ he
represented ye person of al sinners, and presented himself before God to abide
the judgment for them, it was nedeful y^ he should feel this distress in
his conscience as if he had been forsaken of God, and eue^ as though God had
been angr^ with him, so horrible and fearful is the judgment of God, Albeit
he was in all things pleasyng to his father and albeit he had no way offended
him: yet he was accounted on the Cross more wicked than thieves: for Barrabas
was quite and he condemned. Al duties of humanitye were denied, yea such as were
offered to other which should be put to death for their misdeeds. He showed
then such extremity of anguyshe when on the Cross he made this outcrye. My
God my God why haste thou forsaken me? It is no marvel then if it be said
that he descended down into hell, that is to say to the deep gulfes of al
miseries, and myscheuyng. For he suffered the death which by the wrath of God
was laid upon il doers. Is not this a terrible thing for a man to feel himself
forsaken of God, to find no favor or suttour at his hand when he calls on
him, when a man looks for nothing else of him but that he has conspired to
destroy him.

Now seeing it is so that he spoke not this word after the opinion of other but
as he felt it in deed, how is it that he says in this 16. of John, that he
is not alone but that his father is with him? Although it seem that therein is
some absurditye, that such a word of dyspayre should come out of the mouth of
the Son of God: yet when he felt the death and destruction according to the
felyng of the flesh, he ceased not to have a fast faith in his heart, by
which he beheld God present, of whose absence he complayneth. For a while his
God head gave place to the weakness of the flesh in as much as touched our
salvation, to the end he might accomplish all the parts of our redemption.

There is also a dyfference between the felyng of nature and the knowledge and
understanding of faith, Wherefore these two things may well agree, that Christ
conceived in his spirit that God had forsaken him, and that according as the
felyng of man told him. And yet for all that he had this fyrmnesse of faith yt
God was gentle and favorable to him. Which thing he shows when he makes
this preface that he has recourse to God as to his God, and that, before he
make any mention of the temptation, which he beats back strongly and fyrmely
by the buckler of faith.

Furthermore in this fearful careful carfulness, his faith abode safe and
whole so that complaynyng to be forsaken he trusted to the nere aid of God.
But we must mark to what purpose he says that his father is with him. For
albeit he might well have spoken this word even in his anguyshe: yet it
behooves us to mark the circumstance of the place. He had said before that
the hour was come already that every one of his Apostles should be scattered
abroad and should leave him alone. He adds thereunto by and by this correction.
Though I be not alone, but my father is with me. He sygnifyeth that though all the world should forsake him yet should he be nothing abated thereby. His
truth and his glory are grounded in him and depend not on the worlds believing
it, or not believing. If al ye world forsake him, yet he cease not to abide
whole. For he is God not having any need at al of the help of any other. Let
him be left alone yet his father will take his part: so that he shall not need
to borrowe ought of men. Whosoever shall have this well prynted in his heart shall
not cease to abide fast though all the world shoke, yea and the very forsakyng
of al other shall not over throw his faith. For he which contenteth not
himself with God only he does him not the honor that belongs to him,
howsoever it be although the violence of the extreme anguyshe, made this cry
and this vehement word to come out of the mouth of the son of God, My God
my God why have thou forsaken me? yet was, it ever true that his father was
with him. Wherefore we ought not to think y^ his father was at any time against
him or angry with him: for how should he be angry with his well-beloved son in
who^ he was well pleased. Or how could Christ appease or quench the wrath of
God and make an atonement between God and men if he were angry with him.

80
The world cannot hate you. Joan. 7. Because you are not of the world but
that I have parted you from the world, therefore the world hates you. Joan
15.
CHrist in this first sentence speaks of his kynsfolke that as yet were
fleshly (for it is there said of them that they believed not in him) he said to
them, my time is not yet come, but your time is always ready. And he adds,
the world cannot hate you, he shows wherein he dyffereth from them.

They might and had libertre to show themself at al times to the world and
without danger, because y^ world was friendly and favorable to them. But as
for him he is afraid of his person, and not without cause, for that the world
is his deadly enemy. Thereby he openly declares that they were fleshly. For
whosoever will have peace with y^ world he must consent to vice and to al manner
of wickedness.

Touching the other place, he speaks to another sort of folk, to were, to
his Apostles which were begotten a new, and by that begettyng, parted from
the world. Now the true felicitye of the faithful stands herein, because that
by this mean they are delivered from destruction. The^ he makes here a
dyfference beetwene, those that are not regenerated and the true faithful,
which though they study to have peace with all men: yet they look on y^ which
is lawful not geuyng themselves over to y^ corruptions of ye world to please
it. This notwithstanding is not to say that al they which are hated of ye
world are therefore well-beloved of God: For we see this come to pass yea
ordinarilye, that there is strife beetwene the worldlynges, and one of them
hates another, forasmuch as the world is full of hot debate within it
self. But here Christ goes about to show that the world hates nothing in
the faithful but that which is of God. Now the diuersitye of the persons well
considered in these two sentences shall make us to know that there is no
dysagreeing. The one sort cannot be hated of the world because they are of ye
world. The other cannot be loved of ye world because they be not of it.

81
As for me I take witness of no man. Joan 5. And you also shall bear
witness of me Joan. 15.
BYCAVSE the Apostles of Christ should be the instruments of ye holy ghost and
he should speak by their mouth he tells them that the witness which the
holy ghost shall bear unto them, shall not be of such sort as they shall have
it for their private profit, or that they alone should enjoy it: but they
themselves shall spread it a great way further abroad.

Thus he joins together these two things that faith is by hearing, and yet
the certayntye of it is by the seal of the holy ghost. A man should deceive
himself to think that naturally a man conceaueth faith by only hearing. On the
other part a man ought to cast away the perverse opinion of a heap of
fantastical and stubburne spirits which disdain preaching, and yet in the
means season have their mouths full of revelations, and do nothing but vomyte
out heavenly Oracles. So the^, besides that, y^ holy ghost must seal the grace
of Christ in our hearts, the ministers must declare it us. So our Lord Jesus
says y^ John the Baptist had borne witness of him and pronounced of his
Apostles that they shall be his witnesses How the^ says he that he will not have
ye witness of man? The answer is this, Christ uses the witness of John the
Baptist, not that he on his behalf has any need of his testimony: but in
respect of us it is expedient for us to have so^ confirmation that way. Men
borrow witness one of another because they cannot mysse such an aid. There is
a far other manner of reason touching God and his son Christ. A man may well
say that virtue needs not to be aided or stayed by any others: But what has
man in himself wherewith he may uphold the truth of God. And Christ himself
afterward adds that he brings forth the record of John the Baptist
because of them. He sygnifieth by these words that he looks not so much unto
himself as to the profit and health of men, when he styrreth preachers of his
gospel and Herawlds of his word whereby he assures us of his good will which
he shows to be wonderful in this that he tempereth and moderateth al
things for our profit and salvation. The son of god the^ takes not witness
of any man in respect of himself, and yet he takes it in respect of us.

82
The nations do naturally the things that are of the Law. Romans 2. Flesh is
not subject to the law of God. Roma. 8.
SAint Paul not content to condemn men by the word and to pronounce y^ just
judgment of God against the^: will also convince them by evident reasons, to
the end he may stir the^ to love and seek the son of God. What shall it avail
men to pretend ignorance, even those that have not the law? for by their works
and their own doings they declare sufficiently that they have some rule of
righteousness in themselves. This is it that he says the Gentiles or Pagans
do naturally the things yt are of ye law. For there was never nation so much
ennemy to humanity but has had some ordinances and laws to keep them in some
discipline. Seeing then all nations are inclined of their own accord to give
and to make laws for themself, not forced thereto: it appears that there is
a certain vnvnderstanding of righteousness and equity naturally emprinted in
the minds of men. By this mean they have law without ye law. For though they
have not the law given and written by Moses: yet are they not altogether
destitute of the knowledge of equitye and right. For otherwise they could not
discern between virtue and vice, neither should they praise virtue nor punnish
vice. Lo what is to do naturally the things that are of the law, yet
notwithstanding this lets not the other sentence to be true, that flesh is
not subject and cannot stoup to the law of god For seeing there is in men some
sede of religion although they be corrupted they are naturally styrred
forward to some kind of righteousness to thend they might be the better
convinced, and that no man should be able to say that ignorance should excuse
him. But the corruption that is in them causes that how many thoughts,
meditatio^s, affections, or wills soever they have, so many hatreds have they
against God. He has openly declared his will in his law. The fleshly thoughts
altogether withstand it. It follows the^ that they make open war against the
will of God. This proves that it is an intolerable blasphemy to say that
nothing is done but that which is allowed of God.

83
Cyrcumcision profits true^ye if thou perform the law. Romans 2. If you be
circumcised Christ profits you nothing. Gal. 5.
CYRcumcision was a sign of our Lords league by which he had separated
Abraham and his sede for his heritage, it seems to the Jews that they had
somewhat to bost of when they were Circumcised: but because leaving the truth of
the sign, they stayed only at the outward aparance, Saint Paul shows that
by the bare sign they have nothing that they may attribute to themselves. The
truth of Cyrcumcision did consyste in the spiritual promise to which Faith
must necessarily be adjoined. The Jews despised the one and the other, both
Faith and y^ promysse. Al then that they had was but a fond and vain trust.
Wherefore applying his purpose to this so gross an error, he leaves to speak
of the chief use of Circumcision. They thought that Circumcision was of it
self a work mete to purchase righteousness To speak then after their opinion
he says that if a man look upon the work in circumcision, he that is
circumcised must show himself a perfect and sound servant of God. The work
then of circumcision shall be perfection, as if S* Paul should say. If you will
have Circumcision profit or serve for any thing it shall be when you perfitly
keep y^ law. As much may a man say now a days of our Baptism if any man
leaning to y^ trust of the water of Baptyme think to be justified because he
has received the outer sign as though he had already holiness by that work,
and that by that means he should not regard the end of Baptyme to were, that
by it the Lord calls us to holiness of life. What should then beco^me of
the promise and grace which Baptime testifies and seals unto us, it were to
content us with a vain sign, and not to care for that which is sound and fast
in the Baptyme. Here then he speaks not of Circumcision purposely what it is
worth in it self: but he speaks to those that did falsely interpret the
signs, and sends the^ to the truth. Here he means that men must observe
the law before Circumcision (...) profit him.

He tends to another end in this place of the Epistle to the Galathians where
he says, behold I Paul declare unto you that if you be^ Circumcised Christ
profits you nothing, he speaks not only of the outward cutting (...) the
ceremony but, he strives against the perverse doctrine of false Apostels which
said that it ought to be kept as a (...) of God necessary for all faithful and
that in the same was a certain desert: These gloses and Diuellyshe inventions
made Christ unprofitable, not y^ the false Apostels denied Christ or would that
he were altogether cast of, and taken away, but they made such a partnership
between his grace, and ye works of ye law, that they did ascribe unto him but
ye half part of salvation. But the son of God will not be so divided and yet
he can nothing at al profit us unless we receue him al whole. To be short, it
is impossible to mingle the grace of Christ and meritorious works together.
Circu^cisio^ the^ profits if a man join ye truth to it: on ye other part if
we go about to join Circu^cisio^ with ye grace of Christ as if by it a man were
helped to get salvation, not only it is unprofitable but also it diminishes
the grace of Christ.

84
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God and him only thou shall serve. Deuteronomy. 6.
Abraham rising up worshipped the people of the Land. Genesis. 2^.
IT is not needful to heap up many testimonies of Scripture to prove y^ only
God is worthy of worship: for it is clear enough and easy to be known. And
though in this first sentence this word alone be not added to the first part
but only to the second: yet it were a triflyng and more than childish
cauillation to say that God ought to be served only. But as touching
worshipping there are other to whom it may well be offered, as men speak of the
worship of service which is given to saints that are dead and to their Images
and Idols, and to their bones and relics, but we must look upon the deed
rather tha^ upon a word or two, as often as the service of God is spoken of. This
sentence is manifest and plain and is sufficiently understood of it self.
Thou shall honor the Lord thy God and shalt serve him only: and if it have
need of an expounder, why was the Devil (when he would have made christ to
worship hi^) repulsed by this self se^te^ce, but because y^ son of God gave,
to understand that no other ought to be worshypped but God? The Scripture
appoynteth and commands that God only should be worshipped served and
honored. We must see to what end. If man take away or break how little so
ever it be, of Gods glory, to give it to creatures, it is a heinous robbing of
Godds service and honor. And se^we not plainly that this is done as often as we
acknowledge these benefits to com from creatures of which God would be
acknowleged ye only author? Now even as to speak proprely, religion is
spiritual but y^ outward profession of religion belongs to y^ body: so not
only ye service and inward obedience are due to God alone: but also we must
join to it the outward witness. This then is certain that only God ought
to be honored.

Notwithstanding the Scripture leaves not to use the same word in many places
in another meaning. As in this sentence we hear that Abraham worshipped the
people of the land, of whose inahbitants he went about to bie a piece of
inheritance for a buryi^g place. Now by this manner of speaking Moises
signifies, that Abraham did reverence to the people as custom is to do in
bowing the knee, or by some other countenance or gesture of the body.

This reverence is done both to men and to God, but the end is very diverse. Men
one to another bend their knee when they meet, or bow down y^ head or put of
their cap: and this is don for good manners, or civil honors sake: but if
they do it one to another for religion or conscience sake, it is Idolatry and
an outrageous sacrilege: for religion suffers no other service or honor to be
done but that which belongs to God. Moreover it was the common fasshio^ of
those of ye East which were to full of ceremonies as it appears by ye
histories. Therefore we must not mesure this honor which Abraham did to this
people according to the manners of the people of these parts which are not so
ceremonial.

85
Eve speaking of Cayn her son said I have gotten a man of the Lord* Genesis.
4* Not as Cayn which was of the wicked and killed his brother. ^. Joan. 3.
Howsoever this place of Genesis may be expounded, a man might think that Cayn
was blessed of God. First if it be expounded, I have gotten a man with the
Lord, this is as if it were said by the benefit or grace of god, as if Eve
imputed it to the blessing of God that she had offspring, as it is said in the.
126. Psalm, The fruit of the womb is a gift and blessing of God.
Secondarily if a man say I have gotten or possessed by the Lords help, it is
as much to say as God has don me this good turn that I have a man. In this
manner Eve should give thanckes to God for that he had begone to raise
posterity of her, where she was worthy never to have children, as well as she
deserved to be everlastingly destroyed. Thyrdely if a man expound it. I have
possessed a man of God, it should be as if Eve did promise herself already to
have the ouercommer of the Serpent which had been promised. So the Faith of
Eve should be praised in that, that she had embraced the promise by Faith
that the head of the Devil should be crushed by her sede. Fourthly if a man
receive this exposition which is the most allowable of al, I have gotten or
possess a man unto the Lord, it should be as if Eve ioyed in herself for the
child that was born unto her, offering it to God as the first fruit of her
generation. Howsoever this be taken, it seems that in the birth of Cayne
there is matter of reioicing for asmuchas he is of the Lord. Eve truly not
knowing what a one her Son Cayn should be, either prayseth the Lord or
gives him thanks, or acknowlegeth the benefit of god but y^ end showed
evidently that S. John spoke very well, when entreating of brotherly love he
would have us abhor and fear the example of Cayn which was the murderer of
his own brother who is as a patron of all the wicked which are filled with
cruelty, hypocrisye, envy, euel will and hatred and such as can not but show
that they are possessed of the Devil. Cayn then was had through the Lord, for
was his mothers desire in conceauing. But the whyleste he was of the wicked
which is the Devil, in that he had a perverse heart, and hate bare rule in
all his life: and having killed his brother for no other cause but in as much
as the works of his brother were Just, he showed manifestly that the Devil
who is the Father of murderers possessed him.

86
Did our Princes know truly that this is very Christ? but we know whence
this man is. Joan ^. If they had known him they had never crucified the Lord
of glory. 1. Co^ 2.
SOme of the Jews knowing what deadly hatred the gouernoures and chief of
them bare to the Lord Jesus, and seeing that he preached openly, and
notwithstanding no man laid hand on him: they ask this question, how might it
be that our rulers had known that this fellow is the true Messiah? Herein
there is some sign of knowledge, because that although they desired to put him
to death, yet they do it not. These Jews askyng this question think it to be
a work of God: yet can they not lift up their eyes to Gods providence. So do
fleshly men. For as often as they see before the^ any strange work of God they
wonder at it, but it comes not in their mind at al to consider the power of
God and to take profit of it. And as for these men that say they know whence
Christ is, they know but who are his fleshly parents: but when they should
ascend unto the wonderful wisdom and infynite goodness of God whence he was
sent us, they are together blind.

A man sees hereby how not only me have their eyes stopped when they should
judge of things y^ belong to God: but also they have this fault as it were of
nature, y^ is to say, they are very wittye in forging themselves lettes to keep
the^ from coming to ye knowledge of god.

Satan truly offers very often occasions of offense by which many turn
away from the son of God. But though their way were plain and very smothe,
yet so it is that every one will lay stomblyng blocks before his own fete.
There neded nothing but y^ unbelief of the governors to withdraw all this
preace of people from Christ: but is this let taken from them? yet deuyse they
a new occasion to keep them from coming to the faith. The example of the
governors ought to move them: yet so far are they from following that which
is good and right that they stomble even at the first step So if the Lord
conduct not and guide our steps until the end though we have somthyng well
begone, yet afterward we shall stroy and loose stomach. But Saint Paul
speaks of another manner of knowledge in this second Chapter of y^ first to
y^ Corrinthians. This knowledge comes not of fleshly sight, for so Pilate,
Judas, y^ scribes, and Christ's very enemies which were led and driven with a
mad rage to put him to death, might well have known hi^. There was another thing
in him wherein y^ wisdom of God shine clearly, the which notwithstanding the
great ones could not comprehend. To crucify our Lord Christ, of one side were
the governors of the Jews which were in reputation of holiness and wisdom
above all other, on the other side Pylate and the Empire of Rome. Herein a man
sees manyfestly the blyndnesse of al those which are not wise but after the
flesh. But for the better understanding hereof let us note that there are to
sorts of ignorance, the first is that which proceeds from an unadvised zeal,
and does not symply reject y^ which is good, but it rejects it because it
thinks it to be ill. But although no man so synneth of ignorance that the
whylest he is not gyltye before God of a naughty conscience because hypocrisye
is ever myxed withal, or some pride or dyspisyng: Nevertheless it happens
sometimes that al Judgment and understanding is so cloked in the wit of man
that nothing appears but mere ignorance, not only to the eyes of other, but
also of themself. Saint Paul was such a one before he was lyghtened. For he
hated Jesus Christ and his doctrine in that he was carried away with a fond
zeal not knowing what he did, and yet he was not without hypocrisye nor
without pride, so that he was inexcusable before God. But his vices were
altogether covered with ignorance and blyndnesse, so that himself perceived
them not nor felt them.

The second manner of ignorance is more like to a stubbornness and wilfulness
than a mere ignorance: for they that of their own accord rise up against God,
ar as it were freniticke me^. They have eyes and yet they see not. These
governors were such, and we must not marvel that Saint Paul so speaks of
them, for if they had well known the wisdom of God, they had never crucified
Christ. For the Scribes and Pharisyes did not so know that the doctrine of
Jesus Christ was true but that in the mean time they erred as doltyshe people.

87
There are many Antichrists even already, wherefore we know that it is the
latter time. 1. Joan. 2. Brethren, we pray you be not sone moved in your
vvittes, and be not troubled, neither by spyrite nor by word, nor by
Epistle as from us, as if the day of the Lord were at hand. ^. Thessalonians. 2.
IT is certain that among other tokens the coming of Antichrist is an
infallible mark of the latter days. Now the Apostles by y^ latter days or ye
latter time note the reign of Christ which is from his first coming, unto the
day of y^ resurrection, as it is showed. 2. Peter. 3 and as Saint Paul says. 1
Cor. 10 y^ ends of ages are come unto us. And else where he foretells y^
from the beginning there shall be a turnyng back, which shall be as a general evil.
After y^ he sets forth the adversary of Christ to be head of al Apostasy
which shall sit in the temple of God attributing Godhead unto himself and y^
honors that be due^ God. During this time or during the reign of Christ which
is y^ latter time there shall be many Antichrists: For since Christ, as many
heretykes as there have been and authors of sects, so many members were there of
the kingdom which is contrary to the Kingdom of Christ.

But yet it is not in us to make the time nere at hand or to limyte it in
certain years or ages after our folyshe fantasyes and dreams. And neither
must we folishly receive at others hands such prognostications, least we might
be unadvisedly asto^ned through such reports, or that we should promise our
self vaynely some light or sudden passage to the resurrection as though we
should be exempt from the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. There are many
places in the holy Scriptures which bear witness y^ the day of the Lord is at
hand, yet it behooves us to consider in what meaning it is spoken, to wete, in
respect of God, with who^ a thousand years ar as a day. But in the mean season
God will have us wait for him from hour to hour and continually, so that we
appoynte him not a certain space of time. And so he gives us this warning.
Watch, says he, for you know neither the day nor the hour. Moreover these
false pronosticatours which are repulsed by Saint Paul in stead of y^ they
should hold the minds of men in doubt, to the end the tarrying should not be
tedyous to them, they would have me^ assured that the son of God would come
very shortly.

88
Who confesses me before men I will acknovvledge him also before my father
which is in heaven. Math. 10. Have we not Prophesied in thy name? But then I
will say to them, I knevve you never. Math. 7.
THE strength and valiau^tnesse of Christ's Dysciples ought to tend to this
end, that they should be always ready to confess his holy name. The greater
part of me^ make small account of this confession, yet the son of God does put
it among the chief exercises of true religion and that of good right. For if
earthly princes call their subjects to bear weapon for the defense of their
glory and honor, and to augment their riches: what reason can there be yt the
faithful of Christ should not at the least employe their tongues to maintain
the glory and honor of their heavenly King. There is not one Christen man
alone, whom the son of God will not have to be a witness of his truth.

But to inflame our zeal he adds to it a syngular promise yt if we make
confession of him before men he will likewise aduoutch us before his father
which is in heaven. When we shall have confessed him here beneth in earth,
deserve we that he should aduoutch us in heaven? Who is the son of God? And
who ar we? He will bear witness of us. And what a vyllanny shall this be of us
to refuse to bear witness of him. If we make comparison of our^ self which
are mortal men and of no value with God and his Angels, and all his heavenly
glory, how much more excellent is that which Christ promyseth us, than that
which he requires of us? For though the unbelievers are men and perverse men,
yet Christ our Lord esteems the witness which we bear of him before
them as if God with his Angels were present to hear our witness. How then
ought this promise to move us to make confession of him here beneath before
men seeing he will aduoutche us in heaven before his father?

But in the second sentence our Lord Jesus summoneth the hypocrites before
his Judgment seat. For whylest they occupye any place in the Church, they
flatter themselves, and wythall they abuse other. He pronounces then that the
day shall come in which the flower shall be pourged and the straw and chafe
shall be parted from the good grain. They shall boaste yt they Prophesied in
the name of the Son of God, that is to say, done the office of teaching
under his authority or leadyng: but they shall at the length know that what
fair confession so ever they have made outwardly, it shall be for all that
nothing in effect, howsoever men esteem it.

They shall have confessed him with their tongue, so Christ will confess also on
his part, that all the fair profession that they shall have made, has been but
lies and vanitye. And behold what the confession of Christ contains, that he
never accounted them for his, no not when they boasted themself to be the
pyllers of the Church. The Lord knows well those that be his says Saint
Paul, let them that call upon the name of the Lord withdraw the^self from al
iniquitye. Let us the^ make a distinction between the true confessiand the
false, and we shall know who they are that Christ aduoucheth and who they be
that he casts of,

89
Blessed are they that fear the Lord. Psalm. 128. Fear is not in Love. 1.
Joan. 4.
THERE are two sorts of fear, the first proceeds of Faith which makes us
apprehend the presence of God: and this apprehension can not be without fear:
notwithstanding that fear is not without comfort. The wicked also may have
fear and horror of the presence of the lord but that fear makes them to
remayn confounded.

There is a goodly example of both in the resurrection of the Son of God.
The Soldiers that kept the tomb feared. The holy women also that came to
anoint his body were afraid. But let us hear what difference there is between
the one fear and the other. The Soldioures which were inured with tumultes
and strife were for all that so astonnied and swallowed up with fight that
they fell as half dead, yea not having strength or power to rise. The women
likewise feared but comfort followed by and by after which raised the^ up from
their fear and flyghte so that at the last they began to hope for some better
thing. And truly it is very convenient that y^ high majesty of God should
indifferently make al to tremble, as well the good as the ill, to the end that
all flesh may keep scilence before his face. But after that the Lord himself
has humbled the faithful, forthwith he appeaseth their fearfulness least
being ouercharged they should fall under the burden, and not that only, but
also he heals by the mildness of his grace the wound and hurt which he
himself caused. But as touching the reprobate and proud they are suddenly
flyghted, and wyther by little and little in their tourmentes: as men out of
their wits are agaste for a little while: yet are they not touched to the
quick, for by and by they forget that they were in fear, not that the
remembrance of the fear is altogether out of them, but because this lively
apprehension of Gods power is fallen from them.

Now as touching the first Fear which proceadeth of Faith, it makes us to
walk in all reverence and obedience unto Gods Justice. And therefore it
makes us happy because God will never forsake those that obey him in fear and
lowlynesse. This is contrary to the common opinion of al men that they that
seat the Lord are happy and principally in this life. For how many Epicures
are there which vomit out blasphemies, saying that God favors the wicked
when they prosper in their wickedness. Moreover the prosperity of the wicked
troubles and makes the weak to waver: beside, they faint in trouble and
unquietness. And although the dispisers of God are not very well at their ease,
and that the state of the good is in some sort good and tolerable: yet so it
is that the more part have their eyes blind or shut up when they consider
Gods providence. But howsoever it be, this is very certain that happy are
they that fear the Lord.

Now if it be so that true charyty (which can not be without Faith, and is
not but of the holy Ghost) causes us to know that we abide in God and he in
us: how is it said that fea^e is not in love? but that love drives out al
fear?

We must remember the second kind of fear which brings nothing but
trembling and horroure. There is in deed a seruyle fear which is altogether
contrary to willing reverence. When we love not God francklye as our father but
ar chiefly constrained by fear of punnishment: but Saint John means
another thing: his mind is to show that when we know by Faith what the love
of god to us is, we have peace in our conscience which is contrary to this
fear. And though we cannot yet altogether drive fear away, because we can
have but a little taste of the love of God toward us, yet whennesoeuer we
have recourse to God as to an assured port free from all fear and danger of
wrack and of all storms and tempests fear is truly driven away because it
gives place to faith. Fear then is not in love, not that it moves not our
hearts, but because it troubles us not nor lets not our rest which we
obtain by faith. So a man may say of those two sayings that there is in
them diuersitye, but no contrariety.

90
Touch me not for I am not yet gone up to my father. The women handled his
feet and bent themself down before him. Joan. 20.
A Man may easily agree these two places, Math. 28.
if we look upon the affection of Marye Magdalene and on the manner of the
other wemens doyngs. Christ suffers these to touch him to the end his
resurrection might be certaynlye known. And therefore Saint Matthew adds
that the women, bowed down before him which was an argument or a sign of an
undoubted knowledge. Also he suffered his Dysciples to touch him and specially
Thomas to put his fyngers within the hollownesse of his wounds. And that he did
because it was nedeful, to put them out of al doubt of his resurrection. But
when he saw that Marye stayed at his bodily presence and looked for no other
happier manner of enjoying him than that he should be conuersante in earth
with them, a man ought not to marvel if he were willing to moderate and
correct this unadvised zeal. Wherefore let us take this for a certayntye that
Christ forbad not Marye to touch him till he saw that she Importunely desired
to keep him still in the world. The reason is added thereunto which
sufficiently shows that which is very worthy to be noted, to wete, that he
is not yet gone up to his father. Now he will make Marye to understand that she
ought to suspende her affection til time he were received into the heavenly
glory. Beside this he shows what the end of his resurrection is: not such
as Marye devised it to be according to her fantasye, to wete, that after his
resurrection he should tryumphe here below in y^ world, but rather that by
going up into heavenly glory he might take possession of the kingdom that was
promised him and being set on the right hand and in the glory of his father,
he might maintain his Church by the power of his holy spirit. Mary then did
ill, forasmuch as contentyng her self with the half of the resurrection of
Jesus Christ she desired to have him present in the world. And as for us, if
we will not fail to find Jesus Christ, we must lift up our spirits a
lofte. Moreover, as many as endeavor to go to him have need to unwrap
themself of all earthlye affections of the flesh.

91
Bevvare you do not your righteousness before men to the end to be seen of
them. Math. 6. Let your light so shine before men that they may see your
good works and may glorifye your father which is in heaven. (...)
CHrist warns his faithful to do good works simply before god, not having
care for their apparau^ce before men, which is a warnyng very necessary, for it
is always to be doubted least ambition thruste in it self among the virtues:
and it comes to pass often times that there is not so commendable work but
by ambition is corrupted. Christ speaks now of almose, now of prayers, and
both are good testimonies of the honestye of a man: but when a man deals
almose or prays only to this purpose to be seen of men, what beelongeth to
such an almose man or to such a prayer, but only that he be esteemed of
men? We see then that here he goes about to cure the syckenesse of ambition,
by which men seek for glory at men's hands for their well doing. But the
whylest the Christian virtues can not be in a man except they shine unto other.
This cannot otherwise be. Even as a man filled full of vices cannot be so close
but that he shall be an ill example to other: so the virtues can not so abide in
a virtuous man but that other shall perceive them. Yet a Christian man being as
it were hyd in hymselfs ought to desire that men should so see his virtues that
all the glory should be given to God. So not only these two sentences dysagree
not in themself but also the second serves to expound the first. For this
second exhortyng the faithful to al good works takes from them al
ambitition and pride sith it will that the whole tend to this end y^ God be
glorified. Good works can not but shine though we hyde us as much as we will.
Saint Paul says. 1. Cor. 8. The faithful procure good not only before God:
but also before men. This shall be said else where by Christ himself, that it
behooves us to withdraw our self into secret places and into our closets
when we will do any good work: But it is said only to take away and to correct
ambition. But here he sets forth before us another end, namelye the only
glory of God to be our mark. So it is not enough to do good works, but we must
look to what end we do them. An il end will make that the works which of them
self are good shall be corrupt, not in themself, but in the person of him that
does them.

92
A good sheaphearde gives his life for his sheep, but the hierling runs his
way. Joan. 10. When they shall persecute you in one town fly to another.
Math. 10.
THE Lord Jesus as the chief shepherd and Prince of Bishops, shows with what
affection he loves his sheep when he says that he gives his life for them,
which thing he did in deed so that al they which refuse to be kept and
defended of this so loving and so gentle a shepherd show themself very
unthankful, and are worthy to die an hundred times, and they offer themself
to al wretchedness. Then afterward he shows of what sort the hierling is,
and he that is not the true shepherd, and to whom the sheep belong not. If
the wild beast come upon the sheep he leaves the whole flock for a pray and
runs away. They which are the true ministers of Christ in who^ he works by
his holy spirit endeavor to follow him that sets them a work: among which
there have been many that have notspared to shed their blood for the safety of
their sheep and that as well before his coming as afterward But there is a
perfect patron in the person of Christ which must serve for a certain
rule to all the ministers of his Gospel, but the hierling which thinks that
the sheep belong not all to him, cares not for the scattring of them, no not
when he should see them in the Wolves throat. Such a one then has nothing in
him that belongs to a good sheaphearde: for his flyghte shows that he has
respect to his belly and not to the flock. Let him bear a good countenance
as long as he will while there is quietenesse in y^ Church: but when time is to
abide blows, he can not hyde the untrustiness and slouthe that is in his
heart. Now seeing Christ condemns such a vilannous flighte, and good cause
why: how comes it to pass that in another place he appoynteth his Apostels
to fly from town to town when they are persecuted? It is easy to answer.
In geuyng them this commandment his mind is not that they should becomme
hierlinges and should set aside all carfulness for their sheep, or to
forsake their charge as if they were well and wholly discharged: but he
suffers them yea and he appoynteth them when they are hu^ted from one place to
fly to another: but not on the co^ditio^ yt they should sleep or rest the^, or
leave al: but to ye end to endeavor to employ themself from well to better. For
this happens but to often that they which have suffered one persecution would
be willing to rest as foiled Soldiers. But Christ gives no such time of rest
to his servant, but his commandment is that they should not cease till
they have ended their course. And we must mark that he hiddeth them not to
fly into Caves or secret places: but when their labor profits not in one
town, he would that they should withdraw them self unto another, where other
manner of people are for y^ salvation of y^ which they may busy themself
again. Having this resolution we may easilye soil this doubt, to wete, if
all that fly ought to be holden for hyrelings.

Thus a man may say that we ought not without difference to condemn al those
that fly: yet the whileste every flight is not lawful. Some to precise and
straight have condemned flyeng away as if it were a kind of denial: if it were
so, a part of the reproach should fall on Christ and his Apostels. And on the
other side, if it were lawful to fly for every occasion, what difference were
there in the time of persecution between the good sheapheard and the hierling?
A man may keep here a good mean. Let not the shepherd leave his place for
fear, nor let him by his flight betray his flock, nor let him give example of
fickleness, yet let him not wtoute good aduysement throw himself into
dangers. If all the Church be persecuted, or if men seek to put to death a
part of it, it were il don of the sheephearde to absente himself whose duty
was to offer forth his own life to save others. But sometime it may comme to
pass that by abse^ting himself, he may appeace the rage of the enemies, and
so he may by departing provide profitably for all the whole Church.

93
Thou art perfect in beauty above the sons of men, grace is poured forth in
thy lips. Psalm. 45. There is in him neither favor, nor beauty and we have
seen him that he had no fassion or form. Esaias. 53.
Whosoever was author of this 45. Psalm spoke so of that which was worthy
syghte in Solomon, that the whylest he looked higher up, to wete to the
description of the excellency of the King of Kings which is our Lord Jesus
Christ. Among other things he prayseth the beauty of the face of a King and
so begins. Not that beauty for it self ought greatly to be esteemed, seeing it
has no place among the virtues: but because that in the face often times is
showed a witness of a good and noble natural disposition, as by Salomons
look only it might appear that he was endued with excellent graces. It is
not nedeful for us to pass further forth to declare other virtues and graces
contained in this Psalm. It is enoughe to show that this beauty did more
fully shine in the face of Jesus Christ, than in any other, which was a proof
that he was filled full of all graces beyond and above al other. But where Esaias
says that in Christ was neither form nor beauty, he mente not to take from
him the glory which was ever given him of his father, but he shows to how
euel and hidous a form he was brought for the love of us. When he bare our
langes, al his beautye (after the opinion of men) was laid down: yet that
notwythstanding he was lyfted up unto high glory before his father. A man
then ought not to judge of the glory of Christ according to the respect of men,
but to apprehend by faith all that which the Scriptures teach of him. And when
it is said that there was neither beauty nor shape in him, this is not to be
understood only of his person which was despised of the world and at the
last judged to shameful Death, but also of his whole reign which in the
Judgment of men had neither form nor magnificence, nor apparaunce of beauty,
nor any thing to tourn the eyes of men on him to behold any goodly ornament
upon him: for although Christ were risen again. yet y^ Jews ever considred him
crucified and in infamy.

94
He shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever and his reign shall have no
end. 1. Cor. 15. And then the end, when he shall have given the kingdom to God
the Father. Luke. 2.
THE Prophets in many places have foretold and promised ye yt kingdom of
David should be continual yet did it flourish only in the time of David and
Salomo^ his son. The third king after David, that is to say Roba^, had but
one tribe and a half of ye twelve: and so the strength and the riches of his
kingdom were greatly diminished. After Roboam the kingdom ceased not to be
troubled and endaungered by mani overthrows, till that at the last it fell
down altogether: but the Angel declares here, that when this Kingdom shall
be once stablished in the person of Christ, it shall not be subject to
ruin, but shall be endelesse. But it behooves us also to mark that though God
ought chiefelye to be keeper and governor of Christ's Kingdom and of the
Church, and to see that it should never decay on earth so long as the Sun
and Moon should last, yet the true continuance beelongeth to the blessedness
and glory to come. The faithful then succeed so in contynuall order one after
another, that at the last they must be received into heaven where they shall
reign without end. Now this seems to make against this eternitye, to
were that the Son shall once give up the kingdom to the Father, and that
which is added by and by after, when the father shall have made all thing
subject to his son, the Son also shall make himself subject to the Father.
How may a man agree these two things, that the reign of Christ shall have
no end, and that which is spoken here y^ Christ shall be brought into
subjection. It behooves us to note that al power was given to Christ, in that
that he was manifested in y^ flesh. True it is y^ such a majesty belo^ged not
to a man which were only a man: but y^ father has exalted and glorified him in
ye same nature in which he had been abated and humbled, and has given him a
name unto the which every knee should bend and bow. Bisydes we must note that
he has been so appointed sovereign Lord and King that he is as it were Gods
Deputy and Lieutenant for the government of the world, not that he works,
and that in the mean time the father does nothing but is idle: for how might
this be seeing the son is y^ wisdom and counsel of the father? seeing he is
of one self substance and being with him, yea truly one self God? But y^
reason why the Scripture testifies that Jesus Christ now has the Empire or
rule as Deputy of his father, it is to the end we should not think that there
is another Lord, Governor, Protector, and Judge of the quick and Dead: but
y^ we should have al our senses stated on the beholding of him. We acknowledge
God for our conductor, and Governor, but it is in ye face of Jesus christ a man.
Yet ye son shall then restore the Kingdom which he has receued to y^ end we
may cleave wholly unto God. And in this doing he will not depart from this
Kingdom, but he will tra^sport it from his manhood unto his glorious Godhead:
for the^ y^ access shall be open to us from which now we are put back by mea^s of
our weakness. So Christ shall beco^me subject to his father: for then ye veil
shall be taken away and we shall openly behold God in his glorious majesty, and
ye man hode of the so^ shall be no more between both, to make us see the face of
God as through a glass.

95
I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Math. 10. I gave
thee to be a light unto the Ge^tils to the end thou might be my saving
health eue^ to the e^ds of the earth. Esai. 49.
Saint Paul in the. 15. Chapter to the Romans, says that Christ was
appointed to be ye minister of Circumcision. He himself testyfieth here that he
was appointed to be the minister of heavenly grace only for the Jews. Hereon
he argues that he ought not to succor strangers: but this is not to say
that the grace and virtue of the Lord Jesus was continually shut in within so
straight bounds, but because the reason of the time so would that he should
begin with the Jews, and for that time give himself only unto them, for the
wall was not broken before the resurrection, so that the Son of God himself
might proclayme peace unto the Gentiles which were banished from the Kingdom of
God. This is the reason why he forbode his Apostels to sow their doctrine any
where but in Iewry only, yea for that time. And therefore he says here truly
and justly that he was not sent but for y^ Jews until at y^ length y^ ge^tils
should succed also in their order.

For a time he gave himself to the Jews, but after that by his resurrection
he had broken the wall, he shows in deed that he was not only come to preach
peace to those that were at hand but to those also that were far of: and he
was apoi^ted to be y^ light and saving health of y^ Gentiles as well as of the
Jews. So the travail of Christ and of all the Church had not their efficacy
toward the Jews only but also toward the Gentiles. And moreover seeing that
the Jews did take no profit of the preaching of the Gospel, but did
obstinatly reject our Savior Christ, therefore the Gentiles were put in their
place. Lo now how Christ was given to be the light of the Gentiles, and how
his saving health was manifested even unto the fardest ends of the world.

96
We were by nature the children of wrath as others. Ephe. 2. Otherwise your
children should be unclean but now they are holy. 1. Cor. 7.
IT is certain that al men without exception are worthy of conde^natio^ til
they be quit by ye son of God without whom there is no righteousness or saving
health nor excellency, for when. S. Paul says that we were children of wrath,
he means that we were lost and worthy of eternal Death. For this word
wrath signifies Gods Judgment, as though he said that we were condemned
before God. And we were such by nature, that is to say from our birth and from
our Mothers womb. And if the Jews were for a while the blessed seed yet as
touching nature they were like unto other: the difference was only herein, that
God dealing graciously with them delivered them from destruction: but this was
a remedy that followed the il. But how soever man eauyl, the Holy Ghost
pronounces that there is neither Jew nor Greek but are al by nature subject
to condemnation: And if we be of nature worthy of condemnation, it follows
then that sin has the first and chief place in every one of us, for God is
not angrye but against sin. And the other sentence of the seventh Chapter
of the first to the Corinthes, tends to a diverse end: for it is spoken of
the holiness of Marriage. The band of marriage is singular: The wife is the half
part of the houseband, there be two in one flesh, there the housebande is the
wives head, there the woman is her husbands fellow in all things. It seems the^
that a faithful man cannot dwell with an unfaithful wife, or contrarywyse, but
that by so strict a knotte the faithful must be polluted: but Marriage
leaves not therefore to be holy, neither must thou fear the infection, as
though the believing part were defiled by the unbelieving. And behold the
argument is brought from the effect. If the Marriage were defiled the children
which should come of it should be unclean: but they be holy, it follows then
that the Marriage is holy. Even therefore as the unbelief of the one of the
twayn, either of the father or of the mother lets not but that y^ children
are borne holy, so also it lets not but that the Marriage is holy.

How then shall we agree this sentence with the other that of nature we are the
children of wrath? or with this sentence of David? Behold I am conceived in
sin. As it has been said before, there is an universal increasing of sin
and Damnation in the seed of Adam. All then from the first to the last are
shut in under this curse whether they be descended from the faithful or from
the unfaithful: for the faithful get not children according to the flesh in
as much as they are regenerate by the holy ghost There is therefore in all one
equal state and condition of nature so that they are subject as well unto sin
as to eternal death. But where the holy ghost gives here a special pryuilege
to the faithful, that proceeds from the benefyte of the league: and when this
grace follows, yt former course of nature is blotted out, and they which
before were profaned and foul of nature, are now sanctified and hallowed to
God by grace.

97
Clensyng it in the lauer of water by the word. Ephe. 5. The blood of Jesus
Christ cleanses us from al sin. ^. Joan. 1.
WE must not let pass that which was said before, to wete, that the Son of
God gave himself for his Church, to the end he might sanctify it from al
vnclea^nesse, which thing is done through the forgiveness of sins, and by
the regeneration of the spirit, the sanctifycation is inward but he adds
an outward sign in which the co^fyrmation appears, that is, that the pledge
of this sanctification was offered in baptism, but it is not meant that we
should make us an Idol of baptysme. We are washed and clean says Saint Paul
by baptysme, but it is because God in it gives us a testimony of our washyng,
and in y^ same instante does that which he represents unto us. For if the
truth were adjoined to the sign, this were no fytt manner of speaking to say
baptysme is a washing of the soul: for who is so blockheaded to grant that ye
outward sign which is water has in it y^ power to cleanse the ordures of the
soul, if there were nothing else in the baptysme but water. And a man could not
truly say that baptysme is the washyng of souls. The true and only washing
of them is the blood of our Lord Jesus, which is applied unto us by y^ power
and grace of y^ holy ghost. And we must beware yt we give not over to the
outward sign, to the figure, or to ye minister, y^ which belongs to God
only. The minister ought not to be accounted y^ author of this washyng, nor
water to be esteemed as the washyng of souls, for y^ belongs only to y^
blood of the son of God. Beside, we must take heed y^ we in no wise trust
either in ye element, or in ye man, seeing y^ only and lawful use of ye
sacrament is to lead us straight as it were by the hand to Christ, and there
to stay us. So. S. John says, that it is the blood of Christ that washes us
from all vnclea^nesse, he excepteth nothing to the end y^ no part of our
washyng how little soever it be should be attributed to any thing else. For
this is y^ cause of our clensyng y^ Christ has blotted out al our offenses
with his blood, to the end y^ faithful should be assured y^ they are pleasyng
unto him, because he is appeased toward the^ by ye sacrifyce of ye death of
his son. And this sacrifyce contains under it clensyng, washing, and
sanctification, wherefore y^ power and workyng of al these things belongs
only to y^ blood of Christ. But albeit it be God y^ cleanses by the blood of
his son, and that it is not lawful to transporte his glory to ye sign, or
to impart it to the figure, nevertheless there is no inconvenience or
absurdity in saying y^ God uses y^ sign as an instrument, not yt ye power of
God is enclosed in y^ figure but because according to the conceiui^g of
smalnesse and weakness he dystributes his virtue by such an aid. And God so
works by y^ sign that the whylest all the virtue and efficacye of the sign
depends on the spyrite of God, and that is to the end we should not fear
that any thing is taken from the holy ghost which belongs unto him: for there
is nothing thereby attributed to the sign more than that it is an inferior
instrumente unprofitable of it self, saving in as much as it borrows his
virtue else where.

98
Who can forgive sins but only God. Marc. 2. Whose sins soever you have
forgiven they are forgeuen, and whose soever you have kept they are kept.
Joan. 20.
CHrist having healed the gowtye said to him, man thy sins are forgeuen
thee. The scribes and hypocryte Pharisees hearing it, although he had spoken
nothing but what the Prophets were wont to say when they bare witness of the
grace of God, they murmr notwithstanding, and blame Christ as though he had
spoken blasphemy and of a myscheuous desire to slander they ask this
question, who beside God only can forgive sins? But although this came out
of malicious mouths: yet most true it is that only God has power and
authority to forgive sins, as he only can condemn, so only he can quyte.
But when in this. 20. Chapter of Saint John Christ gives charge to his
Disciples to forgive sins he gives not over unto them that which is propre
to himself. It is propre unto him to remytte and forgive sins, which honor
he resygneth not to them, in as much as it belongs to him: but he will have
the^ bear record in his name of the forgiveness of sins and offenses: so
that it is he ye reconcileth men to God. To be short it is he alone to speak
fytly that forgeueth sins by his Apostles and ministers. How comes it then
to pass that he aduau^ceth so hyghly their dignity, seeing that he appoynteth
them only for witnesses and declarers and not for authors of the benefyte. This
is done for the great establishyng of our faith. As in deed there is nothing
that more profyteth us, than that we resolve and persuade our self that our
sins come not into Judgment or account before God. Zachary in the first
Chapter of Saint Luke calls this knowledge of y^ forgiveness and pardon of
sins the knowledge of sins.

Now seeing the good pleasure of God is such to use the witness of men for to
allow this forgiveness of sins, then we shall quiet our selves, when we
shall know that it is God himself that speaks to us in the person of his
ministers. For this cause Saint Paul says, we exhort you to be reconciled
to god, as if Jesus Christ himself made obtestation by us.

The faithful then ought to be so resolved, that what they hear touchi^g the
forgiveness if sins, is ratified, and ought nolesse to esteem the
reconcilyng or atonement which is declared unto them by the voice and word
of men, than if he himself stretched his hand to them. Now mark two things
which it behooves us to remember. First that a treasure is offered us, but it is
in little vessels, those are men, which are sent us to offer and open this
treasure unto us in the name of another, not as their own riches but as his
that sent them us. Next that we ought to esteem this treasure no whyt the
less because it is in dyspiseable vessels, but rather we have occasion to
give thanks unto God in that he has dealte so favorably with men that they
represente his person and the person of his Son, when they hear witnesses of
the forgiveness of sins: so God only forgeueth sins, yet he confyrmeth
that which men appointed by him declare unto us touching the forgiveness of
sins.

99
Call no man on earth your father for there is but one that is your father, who
is in heaven. Mat. 23. Honor thy father and thy mother. Exodus 20.
THe Lord Jesus had showed before y^ this honor belonged to no other to be
called Lord but to God only. If this seem to hard forasmuch as he himself has
appointed men to be our Masters and teachers, y^ answer is easy. True it is ye
Christ himself when he yet dwelt on the earth chose his Apostles and appointed
the^ to y^ office of teaching and if the strife be for the title, it is very
certain that when Saint Paul named himself the Master teacher of the Gentiles,
his mind was not wickedly to steal from Christ the honor y^ belonged unto
him. Neither is Christ's meaning any thing else but to bring every man under
him from the greatest to the smallest, to reserve his right wholly to himself.
He cares not then with what title they be adorned which have the charge of
teaching, only his will was to keep al me^ wtin these bounds that no man should
usurp any rule over ye faith of his brethren. Now in the same sense the
honor of the name father belongs to God: for men have not given to themself
that name, but it has been granted them of God. And it is not enough to say
that men which have children are fathers according to the flesh and that God
alone is father of the spirits. True it is that sometime a man shall find this
distinction in y^ scriptures as in the. 12. Chapter to the Hebrews. But seeing
Saint Paul calls himself very often a spiritual father, it behooves us to
see how this agrees with ye words of our Lord Jesus, lo then what we must say.
The honor of father is falsely given unto men when by that name the glory of
God is darkened, that is when a mortal man seperates himself from God to be
accounted a father, seeing that al degrees of kyndred depend of God only by
Christ, and those degrees are so knytte together, y^ to speak fytly God is
alone the father unto al.

The whilst God wills and commands us to honor our fathers to reverence
them, to obey them, and to love them, and this commandment is confyrmed by
threats, and by promysse. The threate is that al stubborn and dysobedient
children to their fathers should be punyshed by death. The promysse is that
they that shall honor and obey their father shall live long on the earth. Yet
notwithstanding we must have this resolution before our eyes, that a man never
ought to turn aside from the will of God.

Now touching that the fathers have rule over their children it is for this
reason, because God has chosen them, impartyng to them some part of his
honor. The subjection then that children owe unto their fathers ought to be
unto them as a stayre to lead them to the reverence and obedience of God, who
is the chief father. But if the fathers will make their children to withstand
God, they are no more their fathers but strangers, which would turn them
from this true obedience, which they owe to their true father.

100
Abraham beeleued in God and it was imputed to him for righteousness. Gene.
5. Was not Abraham our Father Justified by his works when he had offered
his son Isaac upon the altar? Romans 4.
SAINT Paul to the Romans the. 4. Chapter, (...). 2.
to show that Abraham was not Justified by his works, makes this argument.
If Abraham were Justified by his works, he may beast of his deserte: but so
it is, that he has nothing whereof to boast before God. It follows then
that he was not Justified by his works. But this is his glory, and the thing
he may boaste of, that he embraced the goodness of God by faith.

Faith makes a man to come out of him, and leads him to God. So the glory
of Abraham was not in his works nor in the worthiness of his person: but in
the mere goodness and grace of God. For when a man will truly boaste
himself, he must bring nothing of his own, but the knowledge of his own
myserye, through which he may come to seek the goodness and mercy of God.
And surely the righteousness which is of faith is the only reskue that the
poor sinner has being destitute of all works. So then Abraham, in the
promise that was made to him did apprehend the goodness of god which was
offered him, by which he felt that righteousness was imparted unto him.

Let us now show how he was Justified by works. It is a thing easy for
every man to know that Saint James entreats not how me^ obtain
righteousness, for if we look narrowly to his meaning, we shall find that he
medleth not at al with the matter of Justification: but he goes about to show
what yt profession of faith is worth without works. The proves which he brings,
ar to be applied to this sentence, that faith is but dead without works: and
that good works are ever joined with faith. To solute at a word this doubt,
we must understand y^ double signification of this word Justify. When S. Paul
teaches y^ we are Justified by faith, he sygnifieth nothing else but yt we
obtain this co^moditye, yt we are accounted to be just before God. But S.
James looks to another mark, namely whosoever says he is a beleuer it
behooves he should show by works ye truth of his belief. It is certain that.
S. James minded not to show whereon the trust of Salvation ought to rest,
wherein Saint Paul rests only. This word then Justification, according to
Saint Paul, is the imputyng of free righteousness before God or before his
Judgment seat. And according to Saint James it is a declaration or approuyng
of righteousness by works or by effects, and that before men: as also a man
may gather it of yt he says, Show me thy faith without thy works, and I
will show thee my faith by my works. In this sense a man may confess
without gaynsaying yt man is Justified by his works, as if any man should say
of some other yt he is beco^me rich since y^ he saw him bye a good and rich
inheritance, forasmuch as his riches which before were hidden were set to
sight. This is ye conclusion. Before God me^ ar Justified by faith, y^ is so
say counted Just, before me^ they are Justified by their works, that is to
say declared or approved Just.

101
Joan. 18. I spoke nothing in corners, I spoke openly to the world, I have
taught in the assembly and in the temple. Math. 10. That which I tell you in
the dark tell you it in the light, and that which you hear in your ear,
Preach it on the houses.
THe doctrine of salvation is offered to men to diverse ends. Christ speaks
to many after such a sort as though his word were unto them a language
altogether strange and barbarous, and as though it served to no purpose but to
beat their ears with a disordred and confused sound. True it that the word of
god is ever clear of it own nature, but y^ light of it is choked by the
darkness of me^. As touching the law though it were covered with a veyle, yet
Gods truth was manifestly showed forth in it, saving that many had their eyes
blinded. Touching y^ Gospel it is not veyled but unto y^ reprobate, as. S
Paul witnesses, whose eyes and understandings ar blinded by Satan. We must
then hold this, that the word of God, is not dark but in as much as the
world darkeneth it by his stubborn blyndnesse. But though Christ say that it
is not given to al to hear y^ secrets and mysteryes of the kingdom of God,
and that therefore he grants yt grace to none but to his Dysciples: yet
notwithstanding so it is y^ he will that that which he has said to the^ in
darkness or in their ears, should be publyshed openly. He will yt his Gospel
be spread every where, and that it pass over all the lets and stoppes of men.
This is a proverb or a common saying, y^ there is nothing so hid, but at some
time it is opened: but this ought to be specially restrained to ye doctrine of
salvation which be victorious, as y^ son of god promises, whatsoever men
obstinatly go about, to oppress it. It is certain that Christ preached
sometimes in ye temple, but because his doctrine was rejected it was yet as it
were hid in certain dark corners: but he affirms y^ the time shall come yt
it shall be high and clear, and published over al. which we know ca^e to pass
in S. Paul very shortly after, for a man never heard thonder sound louder in
any part of ye world, than y^ voice of yt Gospel was heard throughout al y^
earth. So then when the Gospel had no great blase or show of magnificence, it
seemed that Jesus Christ spoke as it were in the dark and in the ear.

In the mean time notwithstanding true it is that there is nothing said in
corners. It behooves us to mark to what purpose he makes this protestation.
Cayphas the Priest calls him to accounte as if he had had to do with a
seditious man that had divided the Church by Scysmes and factious gatheryng
Dysciples together, and as if he had had to do with a false Prophet which had
endeavored to corrupt the faith and true religion. Christ having exercised the
office of a teacher enters not into a new, neither will he let slip any
thing that belongs to the defense of the truth: but he shows that he is
ready to maintain that which he taught. But in so saying he debateth not what
is lawful or not lawful, as if it be lawful to Preach secretlye or openly
but his mind is to repulse the proud vnshamfastnesse of the Priest that
inquired (as of a thing doubtful) of a thing which was very openly known.
So, to make these two places agree, where he says, he has spoken nothing in
secret, it ought to be referred to the very substance of the word which
has ever been like though the form and manner of teaching has been diverse.
He has oftentimes taught those that were particularly his. He has many times
taught in the temple openly, but he has taught nothing pryu^ly, as touching
the substance, but that which he has taught openly. He did not this of
craft, as if of set purpose he would have kept close or hid from the people
things which he said to very few in secret. Wherefore he might boldly protest
with a safe conscience that had freely spoken, and purely published the su^me of
his doctrine.

102
The son shall not bear the vvyckednesse of his Father. Ezechiel. 18* I will
visit the iniquity of the father upon the children even until the third and
fourth generation. Exodus 20.
IT seems there ar many places in holy scriptures which show y^ God sometimes
punysheth the innocent, which thing is greatly against al equity, and chiefly
against ye equity of God, who is not a God willing or allowing iniquitye. And
yet a man might think yt this were signifieng by these words y^ God will visit
yt iniquity unto the third and fourth generation. What has he deserved y^ is
not yet? If a man consider y^ condition of mankind this doubt shall easily be
soyled. No man can look for any thing else but yt the wrath of God should fall on
his head, and yt should come to pass of very right: for we are al sinners and
unworthy of yt favor of God. If God leave us as we are what occasion have we
to complain to him? It is not enough to say that children shall abide
temporal pains for the sins and offenses of their fathers. For this is
farther extended, and the revenge or punishment which he threateneth here can
not be restrained to the present life, but as it is a sign of his love when
he blesses his servants children, so when he leaves the sede of y^ wicked
in his curse, it is a witness of his vengeance on them. In this manner, seeing
al yt nature of man is worthy of condemnation, they to who^ God shows no
favor can look for nothing else but the destruction which is prepared for the^.
What ca^ a father forsaken of the holy ghost do but live wickedly? Likewise his
son forsaken of God, what can he do but follow ye trace of perdition? And
they y^ shall follow, what shall they do but go after into ye same ruin? By this
means a man may see yt every one perysheth by his own iniquity and not by yt
unjust hate of God. Touching yt the children are punnyshed for the offenses of
their fathers, it is because they follow the^, and though they be warned yet
they amend not. But as touching that Ezechiell says in his 18. Chapter, that
the son shall not bear the wickedness of his father, that was a common
proverb in ye mouth of the Israelites, that their fathers had eaten sower
things, and their teth we^ on edge with it. They signified thereby that their
fathers had committed y^ fault and that they endured ye il and pu^nyshment
without deserving it. But the Prophet Ezechiel pronou^ceth yt they suffer for
their own faults, and yt it is in no sort agreing with the justice of God that
the just and innocent child should be pu^nished for y^ faults and offenses of
another. Neither is it meant by this sentence yt he visits the iniquity of ye
fathers in their children: for touching that the curse falls upon their head,
it is because they follow y^ conditions and the tracte of those that went
before them. And therefore are punished as their fathers were. And although God
leave them in cursednesse, before they come into the world, yet he does the^ no
wrong neither ca^ they accuse him of unrighteousness.

103
Psalm. 5. Thou shall destroy the^ that speak Lies. Genesis. 12. Abraham Lied
and was not destroyed.
GOD so often forbidding Lieng in the holy Scriptures, and witnessing that
Liars are not welcome unto him, shows sufficiently how he will punish al
Liars: for seeing y^ truth is in such sort natural to him that without it he were
not God, (...) should he leave Lies unpunished, seeing they he altogether
contrary to his righteousness and truth? And hereupon we gather that a man
ought not to excuse any manner of Lie with what fair color soever a man cover
(...). It is not enough to reject or condemn Lies that are domageable, or
joined with forswearing, but those also that are called pleasant Lies or Lies
for recreation, or those that may serve to save the life of any ^an. As truth
cannot be but of God, so a Lie what one soever it be cannot be but of the
Devil. In this place of the fyft Psalm, David speaks more specially, he
sets forth the judgment of God upon those that give themself to deceyte
Lieng and unrighteousness And therwithal he comforts the faithful to the end
that as often as they shall have occasion to bear the oppression of the
unrighteous they should wythdrawe themself toward God who abhors all
unrighteousness. For it is a good consequent. God hates all the unrighteous,
it follows he will punish all the unrighteous.

But as touching Abraham who lied saying Sara his wife, was his sister. Truly a
man can not excuse his fault, for God had had other means to save his life
than by his endangering his Wifes chastitis by help of a Lie. He excuses him
self after, that he has not lied, and that he forged nothing contrary to the
truth. This was surely a great fault, for it was not long of him that his Wife
was aba^doned over to adultry. If he were careful of his life (which thing was
lawful for him and right) at ye least he should have cast his care on God.
True it is that the providence of God lets not the faithful from prouidyng
for them self: but it ought so to be done that they pass not the limits
which God has set for the^: It is their certain that Abraham offended: but
what reason were it to put this holy patriark in ye rank of ye wicked, which
have al their delight in dealyng deceiptfullye with their neighbors, and lying,
yea, before ye eyes of god. Abraham's ly, and Isaacks his sons, and the lies
of al other faithful are worthy of blame, yea, and of punishment: but where
faith has place, there is also forgiveness of sins. And God suffers not a
faithful soul so to straye in such impiety, yt at the last dystruction should
follow, yet notwithstanding ye grace that is given to the faithful shall not
let the truth of this sentence, that will destroy al Liars.

104
Thou have laid the earth from the beginning O Lord, and the heavens are the
works of thy hands, they shall perysh but thou art everlasting. Psalm. 21.
Hebre. 1. The earth abides for ever. Ecclesias. 1.
WHEN it is said the earth abides for ever, it is in respect of me^ yt their
vanity might be rebuked and their pride beaten down. One generation passes
and another comes on, and the earth serves for a continual dwelling place
for men, even to the end of ages. The seasons have their ouerturnings, and the
nights follow after the days, there are diverse chau^ges and wonderful, which
a man sees to com ordinarily: and all that does not make the earth to waste or
to stir out of her place The ^louds of the sea rore and swel, as it were to
swallow al up and yet the earth cease not yearly to bring forth her fruits,
and to serve me^ for their abode. Such is Gods excellent workmanshyp, such is
his wonderful goodness toward mankind. For how comes it that the earth is
above the waters, but that God would of purpose prepare a lodging for men. The
Philosophers themself confess, that seeing the Element of water is above ye
earth it is against al order of nature, that in all the world there is left any
one country dry and habitable, as also it is said in the. 28. Chapter of Job*
that God represseth the violence and flowinges of the sea, to the end the earth
should not be covered, and so follow an horrible confusion. Yet this abides
true that heaven and earth shall perish. And it is spoken in respect of God, for
if a man make comparison of all the world with God, it is but a figure that
vanishes away. In respect of us what is the au^ciency of heaven and earth? Our
life passes, or rather flies very fast away But how many ages of me^ are
passed while the heavens keep their nature by continual moving? how many
generations have perished since the earth abode fast? Nevertheless there is
another aunciency nor excelent ornament that keeps Heaven and Earth from
perishi^g. And this shall not be a sufficient exposition to say that there shall
be only a change which shall be as a certain kind of ruin: for though
Heaven and Earth shall not be altogether brought to nothing, yet the change of
nature shall consume y^ which is mortal or corruptible, so y^ the Heavens and
earth shall beco^ altogether other than they are. If this content not, let us
hear what. S. Paul says. Romans 8. Every creature is subject to vanity not
of it own accord* but because of him that made it subject in hope. For also
the creature shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption to be in the
freedom of the glory of the children of God. We know y^ al creatures mourn
and trauail, as to bring forth young even till now. Heaven then and earth shall
peryshe in as much as man throwyng himself down headlong plucked all the world
with him into disstruction.

105
He will not break the broken read. Esaias 43 Mathe. 12* Thou shall broose them
as the potters vessel. Psalm. 2.
THE Prophets describe in many places the softness and gentilnesse of Christ,
and by such similitudes as this is which is here set forth, they declare y^ he
shall hold up ye feeble and weak. He will not break altogether those that are
half cracked: but rather will ease and strengthen them so that he will conserve
and increase the good that is in them, and will help their weakness. For
where there is any spark of true religion he keeps it, and makes that to
shine which was half put out: where if he would use rygour we should be
brought to naught. We are lame and do but halt and stagger, we are broken and
taken out of our place: yet he casseth us not suddenly away as altogether
unprofitable, but he long suffers us to the end he might make us more
constant and stronger. There was a sign of this myuldnesse given from heaven
when the Son of God was consecrated and appointed to execute his charge, for
ye holy ghost was sent on him in shape of a Pigeon which represents nothing
else but mildness and softness. Now this terrible saying, y^ he shall break as
an earthe^ pot, is not contrary to y^ softness and gentilnesse with which the
Lord Jesus entertaines his faithful: for as he shows himself a loving
shephearde, to those that are quiet sheep: so it beehoueth him to handle the
wild beasts roughly, to the end he may correct or at the least repress
their wickedness and cruelty. Also in the hundred and ten Psalm, after that
the true obedience of the faithful has been praised, Christ is armed with
force and strength to destroy in the day of his anger all the Kings, and all the armies that shall contrary him. And in deed both the one and the other is
proprely attributed to him. The father sent him, that by the ambassade of
reconciliation he should make glad the poor and miserable, untie and let go
the captives, heal the sick, draw the afflicted out of the dark shadows
of Death, and lead them to the light of life. But because many provoke him to
vengeance by their stubbournenesse and unthankfulness, therefore he plays a
new part to dau^t their stowtenesse. He uses (then) a Scepter of iron to
break and broose the pride of rebels: he has his sheephoke to strengthen
and stay his faithful, and in showing them his favorable staff, he turns
their sorrow fullness into Joy.

106
He has set me at large and has de liuered me because he loved me. Psalm. 1*
The Lord has revvarded me according to my righteousness and has yealded me
according to the cleanenesse of my hands. Psalm. 1*
David having protested that he had been drawn out of the low depthes by the
only hand and power of God, confesses at the last, that nothing has moved
him to deliver him but his good pleasure, to the end that all the praise should
be given him. But herewithall also it behooves to note that he speaks of
the good pleasure of God, loking on his calling, and chiefly resting thereupon,
that all the battles that had been set against him were not styrred up for any
other cause but because he had simply obeyed the calling of God. And so the
succor of God was ever ready and at hand, forasmuch as he did not thrust in
himself of his own motion, but had been anointed before by the hand of Samuel,
which was a figure of the free choice of God. But soon after he says that
God has yelto him acording to his righteousness, and according to the
cleanenesse of his hands. It seems at the first sight that he is contrary to
himself. He had attributed al to the good pleasure of God now he vaunteth that
he has been recompensed as he deserved. But a man may easyly agree these two
sentences. He had first protested that he came not into the hope of the Kingdom
but under the admission and conduct of God, and that men had not given their
voices to heave him up to this dignity, neither had he thruste himself in by
his own motion: but forasmuch as the good pleasure of God was such. Both were
necessary. First it behooued that God should prevent his servant with his free
favor and grace, and that he should choose him to be King, and then after
seeing David on his part obeyed him with a good conscience, and received the
Kingly dignity which god had offered him. whatsoever his enemies devised to
overthrow his Faith, he followed constantlye the right course of his calling.
Then not only these two sentences do not dysagree, but one of them very well
answers the other: Moreover David does not here present himself before God
as being armed with whole and perfect righteousness, he offers not here his
whole life to be examined, whether there were any thing in it to be found fault
wythal or no, and that therefore he ought to obtain grace and to be accoumpted
just. But willing to defend his innocence before God against the selau^ders
and false reproouinges of his enemies, he affyrmeth that in this case he had
borne himself purely and vpryghtlye: forasmuch as he had enterprysed nothing
farther than God commanded him and whatsoever conspyracye his adversaries had
made against him, yet he kept himself with the bounds of his calling.

107
Math. ^ I will not henceforth drink of this fruit of the vine, until I shall
drink it new with you in the Kingdom of my Father. Act. 10. We ate and drank
with him after that he rose from the dead.
TRVE it is that Christ after his resurrection had no need to eat and drink,
he had in deed taken his body again, but it had such quality that it was no
more subject either to hunger or to thyrst. But when it is said that after his
resurrection he ate and drank, it is to show what care he had to provide for
ye rudeness of those that were his, abacing himself so low that albeit he was
adorned with heavenly glory yet he did eat and drink as if he had been a
mortal man, and that was to the end his resurrection should not be dark or
doubtful unto us. If curious men ask what became of that meat, the answer
is, that as it was made of nothing so it was easly brought ^o nothing by the
power of the Son of God. The meat which is taken for the nourishment of the
body is digested: but we know that Christ took that meat to nourrish our
faith. If a man replye that only he seemed to eat and drink, what had such a
semyng prostted? It is not the^ nedeful to such scapes or stertyng holes: for
when it is said yt the son of God was not by his own need to eat and
drink, but was willing to help the weakness of those that were his, it is
enough to cut of all the triflyng gloses of men. But when in the other place
ye Lord Jesus speaks by an Allegory he warns his Disciples as well of his
death that was at hand, as also of the heavenly life which he calls new. For
how much nerer the death of their Master, was so much the more ought they to be
confyrmed, to the end they should not be altogether dyscouraged. Moreover seeing
his purpose was to set forth his death before their eyes in the holy Supper as
in a glass, it is not without cause yt he says he shall shortly depart out
of this world. Now because they were troublesome news he adds straight after
a comfort that they should not be afraid to dye, seeing that after death that
shall have a far better life. His death was nigh, but from thence he should
pas to happy immortality, and should not live alone in the Kingdom of God, but
his faithful bear him company in this heavenly life. By this mean he
leads his faithful as it were by ye hand to the Cross, and from thence he
lyfteth the^ up to ye hope of rising again. If a man say that eating and
drinking belongs not to the Kingdom of God, it is to no purpose, Christ
means nothing but that his Disciples shall be very shortly deprived of his
presence, so that he shall live no more with them till he and they together shall
enjoy the blessed and heavenly life. He says that then there shall be a new
manner of drink and meat. And this is spoken symplye and without a figure in
Saint Luke til the Kingdom of God come. Lastly this cannot be understood of the
time be twyrt his resurrection and his ascension during which he ate and
drank with his Discyples as it has been said before. It was then a state or
mean condition between the course of the mortal life and the mark of the
heavenly life And then the Kingdom of God was not yet opened, and therefore he
said to Mary I am not yet gone up to my Father. And withal the Disciples were
not yet entered into the Kingdom of God to drink of the new wine with y^ Son
of God being made partakers of one self glory. Then to take away al show of
contrariety that might be between these two sentences, that he will not drink
and yet he has dronken he speaks not preciselye of eating and drynking, but
of the conversation of this present Life.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London, in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Crane, by Lucas
Harryson. Anno. 1563.


