A Sermon very notable, fruictefull, and Godly, made at Paul's cross the.xii.
day of Noue^bre, in the first year of the gracious reigue of our Sovereign
lady Queen Marie her most excellent highness, by James Brokis Doctor of
Divinity, and Master of Bailye College in Oxforth, with certain additions,
which he at the time of uttering, for auoidyng of tediousnes, was feign to
omit.

Iaco. i. Suscipite insitu^ uerbu^, quod potest saluare animas uestras.

Receive you the word ingraffed, which is hable to save your souls.

Anno Dn^i. 1553.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum

Set forth at the request of such, whose aucthority could not well be
withstand.

DOMINE, filia mea Math. ix, ^^.
modo defu^cta est, sed ueni impone manum tuam super eam, and uiuer.

Lord my daughter is even now disceassed and deadde, but come, late thy hand
on her, and she shall line.


THese words of the Gospel of this day, taken out of the.ix. of ^. Math.
although they are the words of one latrus, y^ ruler of the Synagog, literally
spoken. of him to our savior Christ, for the bodily reuiuyng, of the Daughter
of his body, bodeli deceassed, or at y^ lest being* the^ even at the very
point of death, in extremis. as s. Mark terms it: Yet sithen Mar. v.
it may be done without prejudice to the leter, for ye adua^ceme^t of Gods
word, gods truth, gods glory, and may make ye more to edification, I intend
by gods grace, at this present, ^applie the same words in a mistical se^^e, as
syoke^ of an other person, yt is to wit, of our mother ye holy catholic
church, for y^ spiritual reviving, of her spiritual daughter, spiritually
deceassed, this particulare church of England, Forewarnyng you, that when I
shall chance sometime to name the dead daughter, or the dead church, in such
sort, that some man perhaps gather thereby the hole to be dead, I mean
always the dead members thereof only, only the bad, and not the good in no
wise.

WE se by common and daily experience, honorable, and christien audience, that
even very nature itself has given to every natural mother, besides the
pappes and the Milk she nourishes her child withal, a certain natural
inclination moreover to love her child, and that in such hearty wise, that,
though her child coming to years of discretion, do despise, and conte^ne her
wholesome admonitions and Counsels, do straie from her, runnyng on the
Bridle at large, and so do by wilfulness at length, chance on some sodeine
death, Yeat she for her motherly affection and tender love, takes pity and
compassion on her dead child, soroweth, lamenteth and bewayleth her dead
chlide, and if she knew any cu^nyng Physician that could revive her ded child,
she would not cease earnestly to entreat, and desire help at his hand, for
the reuiuyng again of her ded child. If this natural affecte be commonly
to be found in every good natural mother toward her natural child, how much
more is the same or rather a greater affect to be looked for in our spiritual
mother, in our mother the holy Catholic church, toward her spiritual
child? Whose child is this Church of England, with every other particulare
church, and every faithful member of the same: whose spouse, and protector is
our savior Christ himself: whose marriage maker and director is the holy Ghost:
Whose pappes are the two Testamentes: Whose milk is the true sense of the word
of God: Out of those her pappes only to be sucked, of al christian
sucklinges. Whereunto the holy doctor. S Austen seems well agreably to
allude in his treatise upon the Psalms. Ps. cxxx


First, this noble princes our Mother the holy Catholic church, in that she
has to her spouse, and protectoure, such a mighty, and valiant prince, she
can never be by any persecution vanquished, and subdued. For, if that might
have been, vanquished, and subdued had she been, ps. cxxviij
and that long ere this. Saepe enim impugnaueru^t me a iuue^tute mea, et enim
non potuerunt mihi. Oftentimes (says she) have I ben sore assaulted and laid
at, and that from my youth, but never could there any prevail against me.
What persecutions has she suffered, first in tholde time before the coming of
Christ, when she was rather a Synagog the^ a church: rather kept under by
bond fear, then dyrected by burning Charity: rather tought by darcke
shadows, then by bright verity, by figurative promises, then by manifest
performance: by the sleyng letter, then by the quickenyng spirit. What
persecution (I sai) suffered she then, being continuallye afflicted, one tune by
the Cananites, Iudicu^. ij. Iudic. iij. Iudic. vi. Iudicu^. x. Iudic. xiij
an other time by the Moabites, then after by the Madianites, again by
Tha^monites, sometime by the Philystians, now by one nation, now by another?
What persecutiones has she suffered again sins that time, sins the coming of
Christ, what by Nero, what by Domitian, Eccl. hist. passi.
what by Seuerus, what by Diocletian, What by Maximinian, what by the Goths,
what by the Hu^nes, what by y^ Vandales, and other? Of whose cruel torments
may well be verified, that S. Austen writes. Ligabantur: includeba^tur:
coedebantur: De ciuita. dei. lib. xxij. ca. vi
torqueba^tur: ureba^tur: laniabantur: trucidabantur. The Christians they were
bound, imprisoned, whipped, racked, broyled, mangled, and otherwise bereft of
their life. And yet like the Israelites under Pharao, Exodi. i.
the more they were tormented, the more always they increased For this is the
propretie of the church (as S. Hilarie says) Libro. vij de trinita.
then to vanquesh, when she is dammaged: then to be perceived, when she is
reproved: then to win the victory, when she loses of her company. Hoc
ecclesiae est propriu^, ut tu^ uincat, cu^ loeditur: tu^ intelligatur, cu^
arguitur: tum obtineat, cum deseritur. And this much for this point.

Again our mother the holy catholic Church, in that she has to her
marriage maker and director, the holyghost the spirit of truth, she ca^ never
be divorced from Christ her most benign Spouse, nor yeat at any time be
led out of the way of truth. For, who^ the holy ghost has ones coupled
and ioigned together in Matrimony, who can afterward sunder, and separate
again* And do not the holy Apostle make as it were an open Proclamation and
Protestation, how the holy Ghost by him, and he by the holy ghost has
promulgate and uttered unto the world, the betrowthyng of the church to
Christ, as a loving Spouse to her loving husband? Ego despo^diuos, ij. cor. xi
uni uiro uirginem castam exhibere Christo. I (quod he) in the spirit of God,
in the holyghostes behaulfe, have betrouthed you to one husband, to the end you
may keep yourselues always as a chaste virgin unto Christ. And that she is
by the same marriage maker, and directour, led from time to time into al kind
of truth, it may appear as well by this promise of Christ Io. xiiij*
Ego rogabo patrem. etc. I will desire my father, and he shall give you
another comfortour, the Spirit of truth, to abide with you to the worlds
end, to instruct you in all kind of truth, as by this absurdity, and
unreasonableness, which Tertullian gathers to ensue of the contraire.

Age nu^c, omnes errauerint: deceptus Tert. de prescrip. co^rra here.
sit and Apostolus: non respexerit Spiritus sanctus, uti Ecclesiam in ueritate
deduceret, ad hoc missus a Christo, ad hoc postulatus a patre, ut esset doctor
ueritatis: Neglexit officiu^ Dei Villicus, Christi Vicarius, sine^s Ecclesias
aliter interim intelligere, aliter credere, que quod ipse per Apostolos
praedicabat: and quid uerisimile est, ut tot ac tantae in unam fide^
errauerint? Et m^x. Interea perperam eua^gelizabatur: perperam credebatur: tot
millia millium perperam tincta: tot opera fidei perpera^ ministrata: tot
uirtutes, tot charismat^ perpera^ operata: tot sacerdotia, tot ministeria
perpera^ fu^cta: tot denique Martyria perperam, and inuacuum. Go to now (says
he) admit all have erred: admit, the Apostle has been deceived toe: admit,
the holy Ghost has not regarded to lead the Church in the way of truth,
for that purpose being sent of Christ, for that purpose being sued for from the
father, to be the teacher of truth: admit, Gods Baiely, Christ's vicar,
regarded not his duty, suffering the churches otherwise for a season to
understand, and believe, then that he by thappostles preached: and is this
likely, that so many and so great churches have erred in thunitie of faith? And
a little after, mark what absurdities he recites. In the mean time (says he)
it must be granted: yt the Gospel was mispreached: the word of God
misbeleued: so many thousand thowsandes mischristened: so many works of faith
misministred: so many miracles, so many godly gifts miswroughte: so many
presthods, so many ministeries misexecuted: and briefly so many martyrdoms in
vain, and missuffred. And this much for this point.

Thirdly, our mother the holy catholic church, in that she has children to
nourish and instruct, she has authority to make laws, tradicions, and or
dinaunces for them, for the better conservation of order, and the more reverent
ministration of the word of God. For otherwise, why did the Apostle give
tradicions? Why did he say, Haec ego dico, non Dominus. This is i. Cor. vij
my saying, and not the lords? Why did he reprove certain for breaking
customs of preching of praiyng, of cutting heir, not i. Cor. xi.
contained in scripture? Why did S. Ihon the Baptist bind his disciples to
certain fastes, and Math ix Luc. xi. Act. xv
certain Prayers, besides the scripture? Why did S. James by the consent of
the rest, make a decree, that every man should abstein from strangled beasres,
from blood, and from things offered up to Idolles, which no Scripture
commannded? Why durst the Apostle after that decree, make himself so bold as
so say, all things are clean to Ad Tit. i. i. Cor. x
the clean, and whatsoever comes to the shambles, that eat you hardelye? Why
durst our forefathers again, according to the time, be so bold, as (in a
sort) to make a restraint hereof? The holy Doctor S. Augustine in this
behalf, lets not this much to say*

In hijs rebus, de quibus nil cert^ Ad Casu. pres.
statuit Scriptura, mos populi Dei, and instituta maiorum pro legetenenda sunt,
and sicut praeuaricatores diuinarum legum, ita contemptores Ecclesiasticarum
constitutionum coercendi sunt. In such things wherein the scripture does
determe no certentie, the custom of Godly people, and the decrees of the
elders are to be kept for a law, and look how the transgressoures of Gods
laws are to be punished, so are the contemners of the ecclesiastical
co^stitutio^s punishable in like manner. And I never yeat heard proved, that
any such co^stitutio^ by the whole church approved, was ever hitherto by any
good man reproved, But rather taken always as a verity confirmed, no more
after to be doubted, disputed, or reasoned upon: as the same Saint Augustine
again in an other place affirms, saying: Vnde Ad I^^ua. epi. cxviij
haec cur ita facienda sint, disputare, insolentissimae insaniae est. When
things are ones thoroughly agreed upon* and decided, ones ratified, and
confirmed, by the catholic church, afterward to dispute, and reason, why
they ought so to be, it is a poincte of most proud madness, and most mad
proudenesse. Christ he said, who that is not with me, Math. xij*
he is against me. And the church co^uerting ye same, she says: who that is
not again Christ Mar. ix Mat. xvij.
he is with Christ. Christ he said I^iuniate: Fast you, tellyng neither how,
neither when. The Church, she has told, both how, and when. Christ, he
said Mar. xiij. Lu. xviij.
Orate: pray you: and added semper, ever: But that ever I fear me, would be
turned into never with some, if the laws of the church were not. Al other
things for the most part, which our Savior Christ said and commanded,
except the Church had added the time the place, the circumstaunce, and the
manner, would perhaps be observed of some, not al of ye best: I had almost
said, not at al And this much for this point. Furthermore our mother ye holy
catholic church, in yt she has to her children al faithful christians both
good and bad, as it appears by the parables of the net, Mat. xiij.
the vine, the floor, the ten virgins John. xv. Mathe. v. Mat. xxv
and other mo, she cannot be (as some would have her) invisible, hid, and
unknown, (although the Church taken for thonely predestinate, be such in
very deed) For if that were true (as it is as false as they that say it,) How
then could the church be assembled of Christ, to a city set on a high hill,
which cannot be hid? Non potest ciuitas Math. v.
abscondi, supra montem posita. How then could the obstinate offender be
co^uented before the Mat. xviij
church, as Christ wills him to be? dic Ecclesiae: how the^ could the
church be persecuted of S. Paul, as himself witnesses she i. Cor. xv
was? ^secutus su^ ecclesia^ de^: how the^ could Herod lai hand to take and
afflict ce^rtein of the churches me^bres, as S Luke affirms, he did? Misit
Herodes rex manus, ut affligeret quosdam de Ecclesia. Acts. xij
Could the me^bres of a church invisible, hid, and unknown, be taken,
imprisoned, and afflicted of any man, at lest wittinglie? What reasonable man
calling to his remembrance any reason at all, will not think it utterly
unreasonable?

This was the filthy sink, and swillowe of all these tragedies which has
raged well nighe over all Christendom, out of the which has roked of late so
many stinkyng filthy contagious Heresies, as sins Christ's passion has never
the like ben heard of attones: And no merueil* when the hedge is broken, every
man lightely goes over. For this gappe ones opened, that ye church is
invisible, hid, and unknown, and when they fere not the censure, and verdicte
of the visible, open, and known church, they affirm, decree, and define
vncontrouledlie, what ever to each one seems best. And this much for this
point.

Fifthly our mother the holy catholic Church, in that she has to her
pappes the two testamentes, tholde, and the new, Even as all women have given
unto them by nature, sense to discern the good temperature of their own
pappes, from the distemperature of the same* so has the Church given her by
God, authority to discern the true Scriptures from the forged, the
autentical from the Apocriphal. For otherwise why should we allow and receive
S. Marks Gospel, which never saw Christ, nor heard Christ, and disalowe
and reject Nichodems Gospelle, which was conuersaunt with Christ? Why should
we then allow and receive the Gospel of S. Luke being but a disciple, and
disalowe and reiecte the Gospel of s. James, being an apostle? which Mat.
xiij. Math. ij. and in pro
Gospel Origene cites. And S Jerome also, he cites the Gospel of Nazares: but
as a thing utterly Apocriphal: except only one particle therein of the woman
taken in aduoutrie, which particle by the judgment of diverse profoundly
learned, was taken out from thens, and so insert in to the Gospel of S Ihon.
The book of Job, the. ii. last books of the kings, the Gospel of S. Mark,
thepistle to Thebrues and certain other Scriptures besides, are this day all
autenticall, and ever have been, notwithstanding many have douted of thaucthors
of the^* Wherefore more then evident it is, that the Scriptures, as they takes
their verity of the holy ghost, so takes they their approbatio^ not of
thauctours, but rather of the catholic church. In somuche that S. Augustine
he is not a fearde to say: Euangelio Contra epist. quae dicitur funda^me^
non crederem, nisi me authoritas Ecclesiae commoueret. I would not beeleue
the Gospel it self to be autentical, unless thaucthoritie of the church
did advertise, and move me so to do. And this much for this point.

Finally our mother the holy catholic Church in that she has to her milk
the true sense of the word of God, she has likewise authority to judge,
and decise al matiers of controversy in religion. For if the scripture of
tholde law in Moses time was not made the high judge of controversies (being
a thing it self in diverse points called in controversy) but authority of
Judgment was given always by gods own mouth to the learned, and eldres of
the Sinagog, to whose judgment all were bound to stand, and that under peine
of present death, as appears in the book of Deu xvij
Deuteronomi, if we Christians will not be counted in woorsse state, and
condition, then the Jews were, needs must we grant to the catholic church
like authority of Judgment for the decision of al controversies in our
Religion: whom if God did not assist evermore, with the true intelligence of
scripture, then should the scripture stand the Church in as good stead, as a
paier of spectacles should stand a blind Friar. But questionles the
catholic church in this behaulf she is so directed of God the father, who is
verax, true: of God Io. viij.
the Soonne, who is veritas, the Io. xiiij
truth: of God the holy Ghost, who is veritatis spiritus, the spirit Io. xi^i^
of truth: that she being columna, and firmamentum ueritatis, the ^. Tim. iij.
pillar, and foundation of truth cannot be suffered otherwise to Judge of the
truethe, but truly, but sincerely, but vprightely: She can not be
suffered, I say, otherwise to Judge: as may euidentlye well appear, and it
were no more, but only by that brief, and pitthie reasone, which King Henry
the eyghte of most famous memory (GOD pardon his soulle) choked Martine
Luther with all. His reason was this. Sithe^ God, would not suffer his Lib.
regis Hen. viij. co^t. Luth
Church to mystake a book of scripture, for peril of damnable heresies that
may ensue thero^* and like peril may e^sue by the misconstruyng of the
sentence, as by the mistakyng of the book: needs must it follow, that god will,
in matiers of our faith, no more suffer his church to take a false sentence
for true, then to take a false book for scripture. Which reason at a blush may
seem to be grounded in some point, even upon this saying of Saint Hierome.
Qua lege Ad Cal^t
credimus Ecclesiae dicenti hanc esse SCRIPTVRAM diuinam, eadem credamus ei
dicenti hunc aut illum esse sensu^ SCRIPTVRAE diuinae. Nam parum referebat
ueras Scripturas tenere, si vera earum intelligentia Ecclesia frauda^a esset.
By what Law we believe the church tellyng us that this is the true Scripture
of GOD, by the very self same Law let us believe the Church, tellyng us
that this or that, is the true sense of the Scripture of God. for little
should it avail the church to know the true scripture, if she were defrauded
of ye true sense of the same scripture Who so then takes from the church this
authority of judgment, he takes away violently all the certentie of our
faith. For give ones every man liberty to judge of the Scriptures after his
own brain, after his own devise, and pha^tasie, the^ shall you have as many
diverse sects suddenly spro^g, as is diversity of idle brains every where For
in these matiers we se comonlie, the more blind, the more bold: the more
ignorant the more busy: the less witty, the more inquisitiue: the more
fools, the more talkatiue yea, and will take on them scoutche presumpteously,
and arroga^tly the judgment and decision of any matier in controversy: none
comes amiss to them. Whose malapertnes, I cannot see, how it may be more
aptly repressed then with that, or the like taunt which one Demosthenes
servant, and cook to the Emperor Valens, was ones quailed withal: Who, what
time as S. Tripart. hist. li. vij. cap. xxxvi Grego. in Mono.
Basil was conferring with the Emperor of Scripture matters, pertly precing in
uncalled, dasshyng out textes, and chopping in lumpes of scripture beselye, as
it were to reprehende that profound learned doctor, was sharply rebuked, and
chastened of the same, after this sort. Tuum est de pulmentarijs cogitare, non
dogmata diuina decoquere. Sir cook (says he) if is your Office to see to
pottage making, to Cates of the Kitchine, and Cookerie, and not to control
Gods doctrine, neither to entrecounter against holy writ. As who should
say: what you choppelogike, how long have you been a chopper of Scripture?
Meddle with chopping of your herbs and leave your choppyng of scriptures
hardely. Ne suitor ultra Adag. Horac
crepidam. Quae Medicorum sunt, promittant Medici. Tractent fabrilia fabri.
Mete is it for the shomaker to judge of shoes, the Physician of Phisique, the
carpenter of building, the cook of cokery, and every craftesman of his own
Occupatione. So that the Judgment* and decision of high controversies, and
likewise thinterpretacion of most obscure places undecided, ought not
tapperteine to thunlearned, nor yet to every private learned man's spirit, void of
assurance, but rather to ye spirit, which most certainly by promise rules the
hole church, and to the consent of al ye holy doctors, and catholic writers
from time to time: whose ce^sure in this behalf, is not only not to be
contempned, but is also of every good Chrystian earnestlye to be allowed,
earnestlye to be embraced, and followed. For what other thing I pray you, meant
Saint Ciril Io. lib. iij. cap. xxx*
when he said: Probares est humilitas, and animi nobilis signum, doctoribus
credere, ^^ illis, ueluti Doctioribus cedere. A goodlye thing is Humility,
and a sign of a gentle stomach to give credence to the doctors and to give
place to they^^, as to the better learned? What other thing meant S. Jerome (if
at least that work be S. Ieromes, and not rather Bedes, (as Amorbachius
judges) when he sated (expoundyng this text of the wiseman. Be not wise in
Prou. iij
thine own conceit) That man is to be counted wise in his own conceit, whoo
in those things which he might well have learned by thinstruction of the
doctors, presumpteously extolleth himself above other, as a doctor, and better
learned. Est aute^ sapie^s in semetipso, qui in illis quae ex patrum magisterio
recte potuit cognoscere, sese prae caeteris quasi doctior extollit. What other
thing meant S. Clement, scholar to S. Peter, when he said, dilige^ter
obseruandum est, ut lex li. x. reco.
dei cum legitur, non secundu^ propria^ ingenij intelligentia^ legatur uel
doceatur. Sunt. N. multa in scripturis diuinis, quae possunt trahi ad eum
sensum, quem sibi unus quisque praesumit, and ideo oportet ab eo intelligentia^
discere scripturarum, qui eam a maioribus secu^dum ueritatem sibi tradita^
seruat? Diligent obseruacion ought to be had, that, when the law of god is
reed, it be not reed nor taught after every man's own intelligence and devise.
For many things there are in the holy wryt, which may be drawn even to that
very sense, which every man phantaseth and imagines in his own brain.

And therefore of him ought we to learn the true sense of scripture, who
observes the same, according to the truth, by tradition given from thelders
to there successors, evermore fro^tyme to time With this ingin and wepon, as
an ingyne and wepon most sure, fought I reneus against theretike valentinus:
fought Tertullia^ against theretike Marcion: fought Origin against theretike
Celsus: fought Cyprian against theretike Nouatus: fought Iherom against
theretike Iouinian: fought Auste^ against theretike Donatus: breifely fought
all the holy doctors always against all theretikes of there time, even from
the beginning successively hitherto. And with this ingyne and wepon were al
theretikes evermore discumfeted, vanqueshed and beten down flat to the
ground, whiles they were enforced magre there ^eth and spite of there berdes,
tunderstande scripture always, according to thexposition of our mother the
holy church, the holy doctors, and catholic writers, from time to time from
age to age, and this much for this point.

Albeit the process of my matter may seem to require here, some what to entreat
of these ^^ notes, antiquity, university and cocent, whereby as well ye
catholic church, as y^ catholic verity is discerned and known, yet for as
much as these. iii. notes has bin here in this place very cou^n^gly and well
tuned unto you and that tuned but of late, so that the sound of them may be
thought yet so brime in your ears, that they need not to be tuned again at
this present, therefore will I now pass the^ over with silence. What other
notes most specially, S. Auste^ used to tune for his part, to solace and keep
him self with in the lap of his mother the catholic church, he notifieth it
to us in this wise. Multa su^t quae Contra Epis. Manachaei. cap. iiij.
me in ecclesiae gremio iustissime tenea^t: tenet consencio populoru^ atque
gentium: tenet authoritas miraculis inchoata, spenutrita, charitate aucta,
uetustate firmata: tenet ab ipsa sede petri usque ad praese^^e^ episcopatum
successio sacerdotu^: tenet postremoipsu^ catholicae nomen and cae. Many
things there are, wherwithall I am holden by force of good reason within the
lap of our mother the church: I am holden in, by the consent of all
christen people, and all christen nations: I am holden in, by authority,
begone with miracles, norisshed with hope, increased with charity, confirmed
with auncientnes: I am holden in, by the succession of preistes, from Peter's
own sea, continuallye stille even to this present bishoprike: finally I am
holden in, by the name catholic, which is of that property force and virtue,
that never hitherto any sect of heretics, (were they never so unpudent) has
dared to call any of there congregacions, or conuenticles the catholic
church. If than the very name catholic, among al other notes did somewhat
hold in S. Austen within the lap of his mother the church, who will not be
holden in, consideringe both that name, and many other goodly names and
appellacio^s moo* wherewithal she is termed and signified almoost every where
through the scriptures? She is Can iiij
tho^ly spouse of christ, so dereli beloved of hun, that he calls Can iij.
her amica mea, fonnosa mea, colum^a mea, my derelyng, my beutifull, my dove:
accounting always all injuries done to her, even as done to him self, qui
tangit illa^, tangit pupilla^ oc^li Zac. ij.
mei, who that touches her, (says he) touches the balle of mine yeie. She is
the chaste Cant. i
tirtildowe, and will receive no another make. She is the mother Gal. i^ij.
of all faithful, and abhors al bastardes, borne of heresy and infidelity.
She is the garden Can. iiij.
so enclosed, that there may no wild bore lighly enter therein, and destroy
her sweet flowars She is ye vineyard eiect, which bri^geth forth sweet wine,
quod Esai. v.
confortet corhominis, and not such as the babilonical stru^pet bears in her
phial, able to poison the hole world. She is the Ca. iiij.
well spring of clear water, running to everlasting life, and will suffer no
mixture of mudde, and fou^tens dissipate. She is thon Math. xxij.
lie keeper of the carcas, that is to wit, of all truth, whereunto the Egles,
that is, ye high learned of ye church, has always haunted and fed upon. She
is the strong pillar of truth, i. Tim. iij
bylt on a suer rock, against whom, another error, another heresy, another
tyra^nie, no another the gates of hell shall ever prevail. Nec portae inferi
preualebunt Mat. xvi.
aduersus eam. She is the body of Christ mistical, so Collo. i.
joined unto Christ her head, that they have one spirit, and can not be
divided. She is the cote of Christ without seame, desuper conte^ta per totu^,
wherein Io. xix.
is no particion at all. She is the clocking he^ne, under whose Mat. xxij
wings, as her chike^s the faith full are always safe, so if they straye
far abroad, they are in danger to be snatched up of the kyght the deuell.
Breifely she is tharke of Noe, within Gene. vij
whom is life and safety, without whom is present death and drowning. Tha^
from the unity of this our mother the holy catholyke church, wherein is one
god, one faith, one hope, one Baptism, one communion, one sacrifice, one
preisthode, and al one: From this unity, I say, who so ever divides him
self, he is (as S. Cyprian says) an desimpli. prelat.
alian, a profane, an enemy: alienus est, prophanus est, hostis est: habere
iam non potest deum patrem, qui ecclesia^ non habet matrem: he can not now
have god to his father, who will not whytesafe to acknowledge the church for
his mother: he can not be partaker of gods charity, who is an enemy unto his
unity: Non potest particep^ esse Aug. bo. epi. l.
diuinae charitatis, qui hostis est ^nitatis whereunto accords also this
saying of S. Austen: Who so does separate him self Contra donatist. epist.
clij.
from the catholic church, how commendably and how godly so ever he thinks
him self to live, and it were no more but for this one heinous offense only,
that he is separate from the unity of christ, he shall not have life, non
habebit uitam, he shall not have life (says he) he shall be counted as dead, for
the very ire and indignacio^ of god has even now alredie lighted upon him,
yea, and tarieth on him toe: ira dei mane^ super eum. Wherefore in what state
and condition this daughter, this particular church of England, stands at
this present, it is now to be considered. Whereas every good daughter ought to
captiuate her intelligence, and give that to her spiritual mother, which no
good child lightly denies to his natural mother, that is to wit: dreid,
reverence, credit, love and obezau^ce to her laws and ordinances, according
to the wholesome council of the wyseman, saying. Audi filimi Prou. i.
disciplinam patr^s^ui, et ne dimittas legem matristuae, Hear o my son the
discipline of thy father, and leave not undone the law of thy mother, what
shall a man say than of this daughter England, which (for many me^bres of
hers, yea, mo tha^ a good maynie) another d^ed^th her mother, nor reuere^ceth
her mother, nor crediteth her mother, nor loves her mother, nor obeieth her
mother, but rather dispiseth her, spiteth her, taunteth her, checketh her,
reuileth her, and with all terms of ignomime and reproach, that possibly ca^
be imagined, cease not continually to deface her, and as much as in her
lies, to bring her mother to utter confusion and desolacion? O lord god who
seith not y^ miserable, the wretched, and the dedly dampnable state this
daughter England (in a part) stands in? Who saying it, do not inwardly and
hertely lament the same? Yet this not withstandinge, this good woman our mother
the holy catholyke church, for her motherly af fection and tender love, moved
even with the very boweles of pity and compassion, she soroweth lamenteth and
bewayleth the dedly defection of this her daughter, pitifully co^playninge,
crienge out, and saying: Audite obsecro co^fines Angliae, Baru. iiij. thren. i.
Baru. iiij.
audite uniuersi populi, and uidete dolorem meu^. Adduxit mihideus luctum
magnum. Vidi enim defectionem filiae meae, quam super duxitilliaeternus. Filiam
enutriui, Esaie. i.
and exaltaui, ipsa autem spreuit Baru. iiij.
me. Educaui illam cum gaudio and iucunditate: dimisi autem eam cu^ sletu and
luctu. Iccirco ecce ego thren. i.
plorans, and oculus meus deducens aquas. Factasum in derisum omni thren. iij
populo angliae, and canticum eoru^ tota die. Ambulato filia mea ambulato,
Baru. iiij. thren. i.
Ego enim squalida, geme^s et maerore confecta, desolata, darelicta sum sola.
Hear, I beseke Baru. iiii.
you o you borderers of England, hear all you people about, Thren. i.
hear you and see you my grefe. God has sent me great Baru. iiij.
heuines. For I have seen the deadly defection of my daughter England, which
her gostlye enemy has put in to her mind. I have brought up and Esaie^. i.
promoted adoughter, and she has at length set me at naught I brought her up
with joy and Baru. iiij.
gladness, but I lost her again with sorrow and morning. Behold therefore I
morn, and the Thren. i.
very tears runs down by my chekes. I am made a laffinge Thren. iij
stock to al people of England, and their song all day long. walk daughter
walk, Baru. iiij.
go daughter go: thou have forsaken me: thou have leafte me thren. i.
as a lone woman, and as a sorrowful, rufull, and woeful mother. And knowinge
that al poor of life and death is in the only hand of god (which kills i.
Reg. ii.
and reuiueth, sends down to the grave, and fetches up a gain) to him, as
to the most cunninge physician, do she repair, and to him, for the reviving
of her dead daughter, do she besily make her most ernest peticion and
prayer, even with these, or the like words, which I have now taken to my
theme. Domine, filia mea modo Mat. ix.
defuncta est, sed ueni, impone manum tua^ super eam et uiuet. Lord, my
daughter the church of England (as touching the life of lively unity) she is
even now (in aparte) disceased and dead: but come lay thy most gracious
hand on her and she shall reuine. This much before the prayers.

FOR as much as, (derely beloved in our savior christ) this daughter, this
church of England, now (in a part) disceased and dead, has come to her
death by three manner of ways, first for lack of the life of lively unity
with her mother the holy catholyke church, secondarilye for lack of the life
of faieth and good belief, And thridlye for lack of the life of charity, and
good living, sithe^ the first part has been already declared. I entende (God
helping, and your patience suffering) of the two other parts now briefly to
entreat, and finally to declare how God lays his most gracious hand on this
dead daughter, for her resuscitation, and reuiuyng again, and this dooen
(after a plain, homelye, perceiuable sort) I shall commit you to God.

First, as touching the death of this daughter England for lack of the life
of faith, and good belief, No merueil it is verily, if she, (for a good, I
must say for a great number of her members) be sore infected, sore poisoned,
sore soul sick, or rather dead in soul, through misbeleuyng, no merueile, I
say, it is at all. For why, what soever devilish diuises means and ways has
been used heretofore, of the chiefest miscreauntes, misbeleuers and heretics,
that ever were in christ's church, (Tharrains I mean) for thallureme^t of other
to thinfectio^ of their detestable doctrine, if a man mark it well, he shall
find the very selfsame devises, means, and ways, or ye like to have be^
practiced and put in ure of late, here in this our realm almost in every
point. Tharria^s first, for that they could not otherwise lightlye persuade,
but under the color of the word of God, they talked commonly of the
scripture, alleged the scripture appeled to the scripture, bosted of the
scripture, and a nu^bre of textes, they had gathered together for their
assertion, which were in very deed (as Bunderius writes) l. apparaunt textes
mo in number, then the evident plain textes, the catholic es could find out
for the true part. And thereupon Tharrians they had always in their mouths
gloriously, the word of God, ye word of god, the word of God. And with this
their audacitie march g against the church as Tert. says forth with the
strongest in faith they moved: the weaker they we ried: the wekest of al they
e^trapped: the waueryng they sent away with a scruple in their conscience. Et
hac sua audacia aduersus ecclesia^ congredie^tes, stati quosda^ de prescri
moue^t orthodoxos: fatigant infirmos: pusillos capiunt: medios autem cum
scrupulo dimittunt. And has not the like practice been excercised with us
these few years past, by our euangelical brotherhod? have not we be^ likewise
by the^ assaulted with the word of ye lord, urged with ye word of ye lord,
pressed with the word of ye lord, ye when the lord (our lord knows) me^t
nothing less? was other ergo in peruise other Alleluya at Easter evermore
common, then was in their mouths, the word of the lord and Gods book? Of
who^* yet, may not, (think you) the word of the lord, and the word of Gods
book in this point* well be verified? Non mittebam prophetas, Ier. xxiij.
and ipsi currebant: non loquebar ad eos, and ipsi prophetabant: dicentes Ezec,
xiij
Ait dn^s: cu^ dn^s non sit loquutus I have not sent these prophets, (says
our Lord) and yeat they ran, I have not spoken to them, and yet they
preached, saying: the Lord has spoken it: when in very deed, the Lord spoke
it not? Against al soche misconstruers, and misexpounders of the word of God,
hear (I pray you) how Tertullian makes our mother the holy Catholic
Church, to reply. Qui estis uos? quando aut vnde ue de praescr. cont. her.
nistis? quid agitis in meo non mei? quo iure siluam mea^ caeditis? qua
licentia fontes meos transue^titis? Mea est possessio: olim possideo: habeo
origines firmas: ego sum apostoloru^ haeres: Ipsi apostoli, sicut testame^to
suo cauerunt, sicut fidei co^miseru^t, sicut adiuraueru^t, ita teneo. Voscerte
exhaer edaueru^t se^per and abdicaueru^t, ut extraneos, ut inimicos. Who are
you (says she) when, or from whence came you, what make you in my ground
being none of mine? by what aucthorite cut you dou^e my wood? who lice^sed you
to turn ye stremes of my fou^teines? The scripture (says she) it is my
possession, my good, my heritage: I have had possession thereof a long time: I
have good evidence to show for the same: I am ye right heir to thappostles:
thapostles as they willed by their testament, as they put me in trust, as they
gave me in charge, and adjured me to hold, so do I still hold: whereas
thappostles they have always disherited, and cast of you, as bastardes, as
alians, as enemies, and as such* which ought to have no right, no title, no
intereste at all, in the expounding of scripture.

The Arrians again thynkyng them selves never hable to induce the people to
their heresy, whiles the Catholic, good, and godly learned bishops were had
in reputacion, they charged therefore many of the^, with diverse faulse, and
grievous crimes. As among all other they charged the good, and godly learned
bishop Athanasius both with a maime, and also with inco^tine^ce: With a maime, in
that he should have cut of one Arsemius Eccle. hi^ lib. x. cap. xvij.
arm, tharme of a ded man being broughtfurth of purpose, as the arm of
Arseuius, notwithstanding Arsenious himself appeared afterward, having both
arms With incontinencie, in that he should have ravished a certain woman,
who being subornated Trip. his* lib. iij, cap xxiiij,
for ye nones, did like a shameful and shameless harlot, most impude^tly auouche
it to his face: although, as it apered in co^clusio^, she never knew him, nor
saw him before. And albeit this good, and Godly learned Bishop had so well
pourged, and cleared him self of both these crimes, that his accusors
sustained thereby no little shame and reproach, yeat was he (that
notwithstanding) deposed, and sent into banishment. And has not the like
crimination, and false accusation, ben forged also of late years, against
certain of our most catholic, good, and godly learned prelates, worthy for
their stout steadfastness, and steadfast stoutness in Gods quarele, both
to be chronicled in yearthe, and also to be crouned in Heaven* Was not
disobedience laid to ones charge where no disobedience was? perjury to an
others charge, where no perjury was? diverse crimes to diverse of their charge,
where no crime was? And notwithstanding their just purgatio^ and clerement were
they not yet deposed and committed to ward, ye and that some of the^ to most
vile ward to Tharrians also for thallurement of the powers, being dyuerslye*
affected and delighted with change, they used diverse alterations and changes
in their religion. whose mutability, and cha^geableness. Hilary most plainly Ad
Co^st. Augustu^.
declares. of who^, for auoidi^g of tediousness, I will touch but here and
there a piece, of a longer process. Scribendae atque inn^ua^dae fidei exinde
usus inoloeuit, qui post que noua potius coepit co^dere, quam accepta retinere,
nec ueterata defe^dit, nec innouata firmauit. Et facta est fides temporu^,
potius quam Euangeliorum, du^ aut ita fides scribunt, ut uolumus, aut ut
uolumus, intelliguntur. Et cu^ secundu^ unu^ deu^ etia^ fides vna sit,
excedimus ab e^ fide, quae sola est: and du^ plures fiu^^, ad id coeperu^t
esse, ne ulla sit. Annuas, atque menstruas de D E O fides decernimus* etc.
Acustome has grown (saiethe he) to write, to innouate, and to change often
times the Faieth: which custom, after it ones begone rather to make new
Decrees, the^ to retein decrees redy*made, it neither defe^deth thold, nor yet
stablisheth the new: and so the faith was made more according to the time, then
according to the Gospel, whiles Faithes are either so written, as we list, or
at lest, as we list, so understand. And whereas after the rate of one God,
there ought to be but one faith, wear fallen from that faith with is but one, and
whiles mo faithes are made, they have begone to be at that poi^t, yt no faith
at al remains. We make every year, yea every month almost a new faith.
Hitherto s. Hilari. who in the same place recites also. iiii. several
chau^ges which tharrians had of their faith, and al in one year: And have we
not had in like manner of late years often chaunges about ower religion, and
that according to the affection, and fantasy of Rulers? have not we had
change in doctrine change in books, change in tounges, change in aultares,
change in placyng, change in gesture, change in apparaile, change in
bread, change in geuyng, change in receyuyng, with many cha^ges mo, so that
we had still change upon change, and like never to have left chau^gyng, til
all the hole world had clean been changed?

Tharria^s furthermore tallure and entise al other sorts unto them, they
muegled the simple Trip hist li x ca viij
with scismaticall psalms, and Hymns of their own devise: the young petites,
with false and fond Cathechismes, (as did also Iulianus thapostata in his Eccl.
hist. lib. x. cap xxiij. Gre, pres in uita Gre, Naz Guimu^d Trip. hist lib. v.
cap xxxij, Eccle. his lib. x. cap. xxi. Tri. hist. lib. v. cap. xxxix,
time): thelder scholars, with *large exhibitio^s (as did also Berengarius in his
time): the prestes and prechers, with the promotio^s, and dignities of the
church, as many at least as would subscribe to their heresy: the catholics
in the mean time, (which refused subscriptio^s) being either deprived of
such livings there had, other banished, other imprisoned, other at the lest
commanded to silence. And has not the like practizes been put in ure of late
years among us also? Was there not used as well in Sermones, as in Lectures, and
other commune assemblies a certain scismaticall, and singular kind of prayer,
somewhat differente from the common order, and sort of prayer? Was there not
one perilous, pernicious, pestilente Cathechisme among other things set fourth
of late, with a commandment to be readde in all Grammare schools through out
the whole realm, And that also setfurth as allowed by the clergy in Synod.
Lo^di. whereas the conuocacation without all doubt (for the lower house at
least) was never made privy thereunto*

Has not our exhibitiones, (worthily termed ARRIANS, or BERENGARIANS
exhibitions,) been distributed of late to Scholars, namely in Oxfoorth, with
great parcialitie, and respect of persons, more for the Corruptione of
youth, then for any good zeal to the maintenance of virtue, and learning,
none being made partakers thereof at length, but such only, as would be
conformable to al Subscriptions* Which, if it were not a certain kind of
byinge poor neadie simple Soulles to the Devil for moneie, I report me to you.

Has there been any spiritual promotion and dignity, ye or almost any
mean living of the Church, bestowed these few years paste, but upon such
only, as would ernestly setfurth, (either by preching either by subscribyng)
all the erroneous doctrine, falsli termed the Kings procedinges? Has there
been any catholic of late years refusyng subscription, but that has been,
other deprived, other imprisoned, other banished their company, other at least
silenced?

Tharrians over and besides this, for ye better defense of their indefensible
heresy they would admit nothing against the^, but what was other by express
words me^cioned in scripture* other else by their own fo^d judgment to be
gathered of scripture. And thereupon this term (...) signifiyng the
co^substa^tialitie of the Soonne with the father, (which term the Catholic
fathers, inspired by the spirit of truth, inverted in ye counsel of Nice) they
rejected it, as a new term, as a strange term, and as a term no where
hable to befounde through out all the hole corpse of the bible. As in very deed
the term and self word (...) in the same order of sillables, can no where
befound: natwithstanding the thing meant thereby, is easy to be deduced and
gathered of scripture, by the judgment at least of the catholic church.

And has not the like practice bine used of late with us also? has not our
new gospellers exacted of us express scripture for every thing used of old
in the church? has not they caused to be laid down al things which are not
other expressly me^cioned in scripture, other by there own fond judgment
to be gathered of scripture? And has not they thereupon rejected and tau^ted
this term transubstantiacion, as a term new, strange, papisticall, and no
where hable to be found thorough out the hole body of the bible? But albeit
this term transubstantiacion may seem to them somewhat a new term, being not
much above three hundredth year old, yeat is the thing of a far more
antiquity and auncientnes. As Athanasius ones answering arrius, In dispu
said by this term (...) Antiqua res nomen nouum accepit, non uocabulo nouo
nouae rei uirtus accessit. An oulde thing has received a new name, and yeat
for all the new name, it has not received ye virtue of a new thing. And
though this term transubstantiacion, like as this term consubstantialitie can
no where befounde in scripture, (as in very deed the term can not befou^de)
yet in as much as, the thing meant thereby, is easily gathered of scripture, by
ye si^cere and i^cortupt judgment of our mother the holy catholyke church, it
ought of every good christen and obedient child firmeli to be credited and
believed. For yt church, which gathered the thing of scripture and inverted the
term (...) against tharrians: that church which gathered the thing of
scripture and i^ue^ted ye term (...) against ye Nestoria^s: that church which
gathered ye thing of scripture, and invented ye term Ingenitus against ye
priscilianistes: that church which gathered ye thing of scripture and inverted
ye term persona against ye Sabellians: yt very self same church has also
gathered y^ thing of scripture, and inverted this term transubstantiacion
against the sacramentaries.

If you set ought by her judgment in the other points, why should you set
naught by her judgment in this point? Other receue her judgment thoroughly,
other reiecte her judgment thoroughly: other make her asothsaier utterly,
other make her a lier utterly.

Tharrians to be short, and not tharrians only, but all other kind of
miscreauntes, misbeleuers and heretics (for the most part), intendinge to in
duce and bring in, the highest heresy of all, they used commonly first to
make induction there unto by other meaner matters*

And has not the like practice ^ine used of late years here with us also? has
not our new christians, intendinge at length to shoot at the highest mark of
al, shote first at other lower marks? yes certainly. for first butted they at
holy water, at holy bread, at ashes, at palm, at tenebringe, at knocking,
at knelinge, and at other like little ceremonies. Than roued they abroad, at
verities unwritten, at doctors expositions, at man's traditions, at prescript
meats, at fastings days, at holy days, at prayenge days, at bodilye
service, and at such other mean matters, as uncertain marks. Afterward
pricked they fully and holly, most blasphemously at the cross of Christ, at
the Image of christ at y^ sa^tes of christ, at y^ mother of christ, at the
spouse of christ, at the sacrifice of Christ, at the sacraments of Christ, and
there in at last at the most precious bodi and blud of christ, as y^ highest
mark of al, the chefest mystery of our faith, and the greatest comfort, man
has in all this mortal life. Is it than any meruel, good brothre^, if this
daughter the church of England be now (^ a part) disceaced and dead, sithen
at the devices, means and ways to slay and kylle christen souies, used
heretofore of tharrians, has been thus practiced here of ^ate, by some of her
own blood and brood? Against whose recheles and leude impiety, holi^ S.
Austen, if he were now a live, and hard such vndece^t and vnreuere^t words,
such fond and strange opinions, such wicked and blasphemus saiges, as some
lets not to utter of these most holy and blessed sacrament, he would not
miss, but sai unto the^ as he ones said unto Iulianus y^ Contra Iuli pelag.
li. iij cap. iij.
pelagian with his sect. Mira dicitis: noua dicitis: falsa dicitis: Mira
stup^m^s: noua caue^^s: falsa con uincimus. Marvelous things you speak: new
thiges you speak false things you speak: your meruealous sayeinges, we are a
stou^ned at them: your new sayeinges, we will be ware of them: your ^alse
sayings, we will convince them. But for me to convince this heresy, and to
prove thoroughly y^ real presence of christ's most precious body and blude in
ye holy and blessed sacrament, as it is a matter of no small importau^ce, nor ca^
welbe done in so short a time, so do not I intend to take on me such a
weighty province, nor yeat long to stand hereupon at this present. Howbeit
somewhat to speak hereof, more for edificatio^ of the simple, tha^ for
conviction of the froward. I think it for the time expedient. If our saviors
act and deed were thoroughly corresponde^t to his word and promise, (as god
forfende any good christen man or woman should ever or say or think the
contrary), sithen he made this promise in the gospel of saint Johan. Ioh. vi.
Panis quem ego dabo, caro mea est, quam ego dabo pro mundi uita: doubling this
word dabo, after the greek text, to signify adoubble geninge of his body, in
this sense: the bread, which I will give you to eat, it is mine own flesh,
which flesh I will give also to be crucified on the cross for the redemption
of ye world, who ca^ tha^ doubt, but yt our savior christ at his maundie
supper, what time he took bread in his hand, blessed it, brake it, gave, and
said, this is my body: but that he eue^ tha^ made it his own very body in
deed? for otherwise his word and his deed had not ^yne one: otherwise he had
promised a thing, which thing he had not performed. And to the end it
should not be doubted, what body he meant, he added as a declaration, quod
prouobis tradetur. i. Co. xi
These is my body (says our Lord) but what body o lord* tell it us plainly,
the very self same body (says he) that shall be betrayed for you. How could he
have expressed his mind more plainly, more evidently, more simply, than to
say, this is this: this is my body: yea and that body toe, which shall be
betrayed for you? If this be not plain inoughe, I can not tell, what is plain
enough. This believed plainly upon our saviors plain words first the holy
doctor S. Damascene, li. iiij. ca. xiiij.
who says: Non est figura panis and uinum corporis and sanguinis domini.
Absit. N. hoc: sed est ipsu^ corpus domini deificatum, ipso dn^o dicente: hoc
est corpus meum non figura corporis, sed corpus: non figura sanguinis, sed
sanguis. The bread and the wine it is not a figure only of the body and
blood of Christ, (god for fend that) but it is our lords own body, joined
unto the godhed, our lord him self saying, this is my body: not a figure of
my body, but my body: this is my blude: not a figure of my blude, but my
blood. This believed again plainly upon our saviors plain words, the holy
doctor S. Ambrose, who says. Antequam consecretur, panis est: De sacra. li.
iiij. ^^ cap. v.
ubi aute^ uerba christi accesserint; corpus est christi: Et ante uerba
christi, calix est uini and aquae plenus: ubi uerba christi operata fuerint,
ibi sanguis efficitur qui plebem redemit.

Before it be consecrated, it is bread: but after the words of Christ are ones
come unto it, tha^ is it the very body of christ: And before ye words of
christ are prouounced, the chalisse is full of wine and water: but after the
words of Christ has ones wrought upon it, than is it made the very blude of
christ, which redeemed the world.

This believed also plainly upon out saviors plain words, the holy doctor
S. Johan. with the golden mouth, who says: Credamus ubique deo, nec
repugnemus ei, etiam si sensui and cogitationi nostrae absurdum esse uideatur
quod dicit. Quod in omnibus, and praecipue in mysterijs faciamus: Non illa quae
ante nos iace^t solu^modo aspicie^tes, sed uerba quoque eius tene^tes: Na^
uerbis eius defraudari non possumus, sensus uero noster deceptu facillimus e^:
illa falsa esse non possunt, hic saepius atque saepius fallitur. Quoniam ergo
ille dixit, hoc est corpus meum, nulla teneamur ambigui^ate, sed credamus. Let
us believe god always, and let us not repunge unto him, no though the thing, he
says, may seem an absurdity, both to our senses and also to our
understanding. Which thing let us do in all matters, but specially in the
mysteries of our faith. Let us not consider the thing that lies before us
only, but let us consider christ's words also, for our senses they may be and
are often times disceaued: but Christ's words they are not, nor can not in no
wise befalse. Because therefore christ has said, this is my body, let us believe
(says he) without all doubt, that it is, even as he has said, his own very
body in deed. This believed more over plainly upon our saviors plain words,
ye holy doctor S. Ansten, who says: expou^ding this text (as it was than
read.) Et ferebatur in manibus suis: Hoc uero fratres, quomodo posset fieri in
homine, quis intelligat? quis. N. portatur manibus suis? manibus aliorum potest
portari homo: manibus suis nemo portatur* quomodo intelligatur in ipso david
secundu^ litera^, no^ inue nimus: in christo aute^ inuenimus: ferebatur. N.
christus in manibus suis, qua^do co^me^da^s ipsu^ corpus suu^, ait: hoc est
corpus meu^. ferebat N. illud corpus in manibus ^u^^. He was carried in his own
hands. But this o brethen how it may be uerified in man, who can understand?
for what man is carried in his own hands? In other men's hands may a man be
carried, but in his own hands, is no man carried. How this may be understand in
David literally, we find not, but in Christ we find. For christ he was carried
in his own hands, when he, co^mendi^g hes own body, said: these is my body.
For tha^ he carried ye same body in his own hands. And how could christ, (I
pray you) carry hes own body in his own hands, vnlest hes body were there
really and substa^cially contained, under ye forms of bred and wie* for if it
were but a figure (as the sacramentaries says) than could David and every
other man carry his own body in his own hands toe, even as well as Christ:
which thing S. Austen here utterly denies And the same S. Auste^ again upon
the same Psalm declares special matter, whereupon a familiare similitude may
be grounded, to express, how the real presence may be (in a manner) comprised,
and may stand (after a sort) even with good reason, though the thing it self
in very deed far surmounteth and passes all reason* the similitude may be
this. Like as thinfante eats y^ very self same food in substance, that the
nource eats, but under another form, for themfa^t can not away with hard
meat, but must be feed with milk, and therefore the food is first qualified
of the nurce, chawed and swallowed down of the noursse, incarnat and
incorporat in to the body of the noursse, and part thereof by virtue of her
pappes* turned in to milk of the nursse, which milk is a food apt and meet
for thinfante to receive to suke and feed upon, Even so we christians do
receive the very same food, the very same body and blood in substance, that
was crucified for us here in earth. But because we are all as infantes in this
behalf at least, and can not a way with such hard meat, nor can abide for
lothsomnes to eat christ's body and drink his blood under the forms of
flesh and blood, our sau^oure Christ therefore, (like a good nource) he
qualifieth his body and blood, he alters it, he transformeth it, he
exhibiteth it, under another form, under y^ form of bread and wine, and so
makes it to us infantes, as milk, as a gentle familiare food, apt and mete
to be received, with out horror, of every christen man and woman. And yeat is
it for all that Christ's own very body and blood stille in substance, even
as the milk of the nource (which the infant sucketh) is the same very food
in substance, that the nource received before, only the form and the fasshion
altered.

Thus to be short believed plainly upon our saviors plain words S. Hierom:
thus S. Cyprian: thus S. Basil: thus S. Hilarie: thus all the rest of the holy
doctors: wherein they nothing vareth, but constantly syngeth all one note:
being at least well construed, and well understand: and being not torqued
and wrested, wrenched and wryed, as they have been of some in authority of
late, (God grant them grace to repent therefore). To whom our Marcus
Antonius, our Marcus Antonius, (I say,) worthy for his constancy to be
named constantius, yea constanti^^imus, has so handsomelye and so fullye
answered, that they shall ever have therehandes full of him, and never be hable
to streake and replye any thing again, at lest worthy the reading. So clarkely
has our Marcus marked out al things that makes for the purpose: So clarkely
has he accorded the scriptures and doctors sayings: So clarkely has he
brought al apparent co^tradictio^ unto unity in this behalf. Whereupon one
reason (my thiketh) may be grounded, which were sufficient, to move any hard
heart, any stony stomach, any blunte breast, that is not utterly obcecat, utterly
obstinat, utterly i^durat. The reason shall be these. Other you must grant the
real presence of our savior christ's own very body and blood, in the holy
and blessed sacrament, (as the truth is), other else must you make us believe,
that al thau^ciant authors and godly persons, all the holy Marters and
Co^fessours, all the holy fathers and catholyke writers, that ever wrote these.
xv. hundredth years and more, even from thapostles time hitherto, you must make
us believe, I say, that these, in this most high and wayghtye matter of our
fayeth, were all, most sha^fully blinded: al, most sha^fully disceaued: yea al,
most undoubtedly dampened. For had not they all, (as it appears by there works
well construed and well understand), the self same faith in the blessed
sacrament, that y^ catholics have at this present? Did not they all be leave
inwardelye in there hearts, there present the very body and blood of christ*
Protest it in there writings, the very body and blood of Christ?

Confess it with there mouths the very body and blood of christ? Receive it in
to their bodies, as the very body and blood of christ? Reverence it in their
living, as the very body and blood of christ? Die in yt belief, that it was,
the very body and blood of christ? Wherefore, if it were not the very body
and blood of christ in deed, how can it than otherwise be thought, but that
they, beginning in a wrong belief, continuyng in a wrong belief, diyng in
awrong belief, must needs be counted, to have been all, most sha^fully blinded:
al, most sha^fully disceaued: yea al, most undoubtedly* dampened? O what an
absurdity, what an inconvenience is this? was Ignatius that blessed martyr
dampened, (trow you?) Ireneus that blessed martyr, was he dampened toe? S.
Cyprian that blessed martyr, was he also dampened? was S. Hilarie dampened, S.
Basil dampened, S. Hiero^ dampened, S. Ambrose dampened S. Austen dampened, were
all the holy Martirs and Confessors, all the holy Doctors and aunciant
authors, all the catholyke writers with an infinite number of our fore
fathers, were they all dampened? O lord god, what a wonderful matter is this.
Is it lykelye, (think with your selfs good brethren), think with your selfs,
is it likely, yt christ, who promised to with hes church to y^ worlds end, and
to instruct her in all kind of truth, is it likely, that he would suffer so
many holy marters, so many holy confessors, so many holy doctors, so many
thousand thousands of our forefathers, so many hundredth years, so shamefully
to be blinded, in so high apoint of our faith and religion? Never think it
good brethren, never think it: let never such an absurdity, sink in to
your stomakes. Wherefore to avoid this unreasonable absurdity and
inconvenience, needs must it be confessed, as aplayn, sure, and vndoubtable
truth, that the presence of y^ very body and blood of Christ, (christ, I
say, god and man,) is here contained really and substancially in the most holy
and blessed sacrament of thaulter. Wherefore to conclud this part, hear you now
the earnest obtestation and request, your mother the holy catholyke church
makes unto you, calling you all, children: not al, for the present, but for
that past, and that to come: using Homilia do. octa. Pasch. ad Baptiza.
herein, with a very little alteration, the words of the holy doctor S.
Austen. Vos me audite o filioli: audite me per sanguine^ christi, quo estis
redempti: per no men quod super uos inuocatu^ est: per illud altar, ad quod
accessistis: per sacramenta, quae accepis^is: per iu dicium f^^^ru^, uiuoru^
and mortuoru^: per salute^ denique anima^u^ uestraru^, obsecro uos: ob^estor
uos: obstringo uos: adiuro ^os. Hear me (says she) o you my dear children:
hear* me (I say) hear me. I desire you by the most precious blood of
Christ, where withal you were redeemed: by the glorious name of Jesus, which
was called over you: by that holy altar, whereunto you have come: by the holy
sacraments, which you have received: by the terrible judgment to come, of the
quick and the dead, at the dreadful day of dome: briefly by the health of your
own souls, even as you trust to be saved, and avoid everlasting dampnation,
I beseke you: I pray you: I exhort you: I require you: I charge you: yea I
adjure you. What vehemency of words have we here, what an obtestation is
this, what an adiuration? But go toe, let us see, what is thy request O woman?
say on at ones in few words. Verily, even this. Consider with your selves my
dear children, consider: first the consent of all the four Evangelists, with
the holy Apostie saint Paul, of whom all, the blessed sacrament is termed
vniformelye, and that no less than a leven times, the very body and blude of
christ. Consider again the hole concent, of all the au^ciant doctors and
catholyke writers of all aiges, which, (being well constred and well
understand) do fully and holly affirm it, the very body and blood of
christ. Considre also the co^cent of diverse general cou^celles, (whose Ad Ianu.
Episto. cxviij.
authority, as S. Austen says, is most solemn and honorable) which has in
the sprite of god, determined and decreed it, the very body and blood of
christ. Considre more over the meruealous revelations, and wounderful miracles
wrought of god, and wroten of ancient authors, which has from time to time
declared it, the very body and blood of christ. Consider over and besides
this the great bitter scourges and plages, that has all ways lighted on al
christen realms, dispisinge and disworshippinge it, and contrarily the
prosperous success and tra^quilitie of al christian realms accepting and
worshippinge it, as the very body and blood of christ. Considre finally the
dredful dedly dampnable state and condition, you stand in now at this present,
as many as do not sted fastly believe it, ye very body and blood of christ.
For in these behalf, (as Epiphanius In Anco.
says*) you are fallen from grace, and from life everlasting. A gratia and
salute. You are dead, you are dead, you are dead. Hither to your mother, good
brethren. Now than, if you continue in the misbeleife of this most holy and
blessed sacram^t, and in all other most pernicious and peuilent, most
detestable and dampnable heresies, which are ^ow abroode, our mother, the holy
catholyke church, may have just occasion to repair to the heavenly phicision
her spouse, and say the words of my theme: Domine* filia mea modo* defu^cta
Mat. ix.
est etc. Lord, my daughter the church of England* (as touching the life of
faith and good belief) she is eue^ now (in apart) disceaced and dead, but come,
lay thy most gracious hand on her, and she shall revive.

HERE have you hard the death of this daughter, the church of England, as
touching the life of faith and good belief: Now shall you hear in like
manner, the death of the same daughter, as touching the life of charity and
good lyuinge.

If misliuyng also and lack of charity (derely beloved) do bring death to
these daughter, (as in deed it does*) how can she be thought than, other tha^
disceased, other than dead, in many* members of hers at least? for, when was
misliuinge, (I pray you), ever in any aige more a lofte, and more riffe, than
even now of late by our time, in this our realm? When had ever more place,
than of late years, the saying of the holy Apostle?

In nouissimis diebus instabu^t te^pora periculosa, and erunt homines seipsos
amantes, and ce. In the later days their shall come perilous times, and y^
people shall be lovers of the^ selfs, covetous, bostars, proud, cursed
speakers, disobedient to father and mother, unthankful, unholy, unkind,
co^naunt brekers, stubberne, falfe accusars, ryotous, fearce, dispisers of them
which are good, headdie, highminded, gredie upon voluptuousnes, more tha^ the
lovers of god, having a similitude of godly lyuinge, but denieng the virtue
thereof. When, the saying of the prophet Osee? No^est ueritas, no^ est
misericordia, no^ est scientia dei in terra, Maledictu^, me^daciu^, hom^
cidiu^, furtu^, and adulteriu^ inundauerunt, et sanguis sanguinem terigit.
There is no truth, there is no mercy, there is no knowledge of god in the
land, but swearyng, liyng, manslaughter, theft, and adultry has gotten thouer
hand, and one gyltinesse follows an other. When, the saying of the prophet
Esaie? Terra infecta Es. xxiiij.
e^ ab habitatoribus suis quia tra^sgressisuut leges: mutauerunt ius:
dissipruerunt foedus se^pit^num: dereliquerunt Dominum: blasphe Esai. i.
mauerunt sanctum Israel: abalienati sunt retrorsum. The yerthe is eue^infected
with her inhabita^tes, for they have transgressed the Laws: changed the
ordinances: broken the everlasting covenant: forsaken our Lord: blasphemed
the holy one of Israel and are gone bacwarde. When, the saying of S. John the
holy Evangelist? Totus mundus in maligno posi^us est. All the whole world is
set on mischief. All whose sayings, the holy Doctor S. Basile, thinking
fulfilled in his age, discribeth a disorder, not much disagreaunt from the
disordre of this our age.

Subuersasu^t pietatis dogmata* ^bati pietatis ritus: Epis. lxiij
a^bitio eoru^, qui d^m no^ metuu^t, ecclesiaru^ gubernacula inuadit: and iam
manifest, uelut impietatis proemium, primae sedis dignitas prostituitur ita,
ut, qui maledice^do est seuerior, ad Episcopatu^ populi acquirendu^ sit prior,
ac potior: Euanuit ho^estas sacerdotalis: desieru^t, qui grege^ domini pas^u^t
cu^ scie^tia: (dispensatio^s pauperu^ ad propria oblectame^ta, mu^eru^que
largitioes, absume^tibus ijs, qui a^bitionis, and dn^andi studio tene^^):
Ela^guit Ca^onu^ exacta dilige^tia: multa e^ pctilice^tia. Qui. N. humanis
adiuti oiffuijs ad pri^cipatu^ perueniu^t, hac ipsa deli^que^di perinissa
lice^tia gratifica^tur. and^. Inter ca ride^t nosinfideles: epist. lxix
nuta^t, ^modicae su^t fidei: fides ipsa in a^biguu^ uocatur: ignora^tia of^
u^ditur ine^tibus, propterea quam forma^ ac specie^ pietatis pratexunt, qui
sermone^ u^^sute adultera^t. Sile^t. N. pie doce^tium ora: reresoluta uero est
quaeuis blasphema lingua: propha nata sunt sacra: qui sam sunt in plebe, domus
oratio^is fugiu^t, ut pote i^ quibus i^pia doce^tur: Ab ignatur pastores, ut
disperga^tur greges: Vnum iam crimen est, quod ueheme^ter pumtur, si quis
pat^nas traditiones diligent^ obseruet.

Godly decrees (says he) are overthrown: Godly vsages Epis. lxiij
are put out of place: thambition of them that fears not God, inuadeth the
gouernemente of Churches: the dignity of the high Sea (as a reward of
impiety) is now openly so set out to sale, that, who is more earneste then
other in railynge, he is more forward then other, in attainyng a bishoprike:
Priestly gravity is vanyshed away: Gone are they which feeds Christ's
flock with knowledge: They which are ambitious, and desirous of ruledom,
co^sumeth the reliefes of the poor to their own pleasure, and bribyng of
other: The exact observation of the canons, and rules of the church, are
waxen faint: great liberty of sinful living is permitted. For they (which by
others help and not their own deserte) aspireth to ruledome, gratifyeth their
helpers again with theselfe same liberty of misdoing. etc. In the mean time
epist. lxix
the Infidels, they laughe us to scorn: the weakeliges in faith, they stagger:
the faith is called in doubt: Ignorance ouershadoweth men's minds, because
they pretend a form, and shappe of godliness, which coloreth their talk
with craftynesse. For the mouths of godly preachers are stopped: but eueri
blasphemous tongue rouleth at large: holy things are profaned: they, which be
good among the people, shunneth the houses of prayer, as in ye which wicked
doctrine is taught: the sheperdes are driven away, that the flocks may be
scattered abroad: one crime there is now a days, most sharply punished, if a
man do diligently observe and keep y^ traditions of the fathers. Hither to s.
Bas. But here now among all other enormities in general, to touch particularly
one in the laity, and another in the ciergie* what shall I say first of
certain of the Laity, which has what by Hook, what by crook, wrong out
of the hands of the Clergy, not only benefices and Tithes, but also the best
part of the temporalities of Bishoprikes, has they delte (think you)
charitably with them therein? No verily, unless you will call that Charity,
which Iulianus the Appostata ones used with the Christians. This Iulianus,
Chronic. Cario.
whiles he impouerished the christians, pulling from the their goods, and
possessiones, he pretended charity toward them, bearyng them in hand he
did the^ a great benefit, and a great good turn therein. For he said, he
intended their impouerishme^t for a good purpose to the end, that they being
made poor, should the more easily obtain the kingdom of heaven because it
is written. Beati pauperes, Math. ix.
quoniam ipsorum est regnu^ coelorum. Blessed be the poor for to them
beelongethe the Kyngedome of Heaven. If then certain of the laity, has
ente^ded such charity in their doings toward the Clergy, is not the
Clergy much beholding unto them (think you) in that they would so
charitablye unburden the^ of so great a part of their weighty livings, and
lay the burden on their own backs, and shoulders? Is not the Clergy, much
beeholdynge unto them, in that theie would (passing the commune Order of
Charity,) prefer the clergy before them selves, would help the clergy to
heaven first, and tarry behind themselves, coming after by leisure, when they
may intend it? But would any such of the laity be content (wyn you) to have
any point of like charity exte^ded toward them again? would the^ be
content, other should help them to Heaven by like ways* by vnburdenyng them
of any part of their weighty posessions, and liuelyhodde? It is not to be
thought in no wise. Wherefore, (the right order of charity standing as it
does, that every man ought to do, as he would be done unto) sithen the
laity would not, nor could not be content, after such sort, to be used
themselves, their own conscience must needs condemn them, of their
uncharitable, and unjust usage toward the clergy. What shall I say again of
certain of the clergy, which ought to have been as lanternes of light* in
giving good example of chastity and purety of lyfeto al other, has they done
godly, and well (trow you) in breaking their vows, and in giving therein
such an offense to the world, that all the whole order of pressed hode hireth the
worsse for their doings, and is in a manner slaundred thereby? But here perhaps
some will reply again, and say, first, that we secular priests are no
votaries, do make no vow of chastity at all, because we hold our peace.
Secondarily that we ought not to make any vow of chastity, because (they
say) it cannot be gathered of scripture. Thirdly y^ we can not keep the vow
of Chastity, because they demeth it impossible. Fourthly that the breach of
the vow of Chastity is no offense, because it seems unto them as a rash
vow. As touching the first point, that we Seculer priests, notwithstanding
our silence, do profess the vow of chastity, it may ape^e first by a
certain Canon of a general counceil, which has these words. Quicun que
Diaconitacuerunt, Co^cia^cir
and susceperunt manus impositione^, professi co^tinentia^, si postea ad
nuptias conuener^t, a ministerio cessare debebunt. What soever Deacones has
holden their peace, and has received the laiyng on of hands holy ordres,
having ones professed chastity, If afterward they fall to marriage, they ought
to cease from the ministry. It may appear again by a certain saii^g of s.
Bid, our own countryma^, declaryng therein the common usage of the Church by
his time. viii. c. year ago, and upward. Nullus sine uoto, ut uel Beda in ^. C
uirgo existens* uirgo perma^eat, uel co^tracta uxore, co^iunctionis foedera
soluat, co^secr^ri permittitur: nulli praecipitur: nullus ad hoc ministerium
subeundum cogitur inuitus: sed si quis iam co^s^sit esse sacerdos, uoto
casti^atis se sponte co^st^inxit.

No man is permytted to be consecrated without a vow, whether it be to the
end that he being a virgin may continue still a virgin, or having a wife,
may loose the promises of conjunction (as touching cohabitation): No man is
commanded to vow: No man is co^stremed perforse to priesthode: But if any one
consents to priesthod, he voluntarily has bound him self to the vow of
chastity. It may appear also, and that evidently, by the plain words of the
pontifical, accustomed to be read, commonly at the making of Subdeacons.
Where it is said to all that are to be ordered, y^ as many as intend to
receive that holy order, and therewithal the yoke of our Lord, and the
profession of chastity, should draw nere, and receive the same: as many as
would not consent thereunto, should then depart from thens. Now after this
protestation made (as it was for the most part alwais made,) they that tatied,
and receuied that holy order, though they kept Silence, and gave no word at
all of any consent, ye^ did they not in their very act, manifestly declare
their consent thereunto* and is not the consent in act, as good, and
effectual, as the co^se^t in word? I appeal here to the conscience of every
secular pressed (being ordered at least before these few years past,) whether
he, going to the receiving of the Subdea conship, did not think assuredly
the vow of chastity, so annexed to that order, that it should never be lawful
for him after that, to contract Matrimony, but was utterly out of all hope of
marriage. Let every ma^s own conscience be his own judge in this behalf. As
touching the second point, tha^ the vow, (we are required to make) may be
grounded, and gathered of scripture, it may appear, and it were no more but
only by the uniform conclusion of three ancient aucthors, gathered upon one
text of the holy Apostle. For Origene for his part has thus Vere or aliquid
dicere, quod ^n^ ex I^ nu^^ros Ho. xxiij
^ermo^ibus apos. it elligi dat^, ne forte uidear aliquos co^tristare. Cu^
dicit apostolus hijs qui in co^iugijs sunt, Nolite fraudare uos iuice^, nisi
forte ex co^ce^su ad te^pus, ut uacetis orationi, certum e^, quia impedit^
sacrificium indesine^s hijs qui co^iugalibus necessitatibus seruiunt. Vnde mihi
uidetur, quod illius est solius offerre Sacrificium indesinens, qui se
indesinenti, and perpetuae deuouerit castitati. I am a fraied to speak a
thing, yea though the thing I will sai, may be gathered of the apostles own
words. I am a ferd to speak it, lest perhaps I may seem to make some sad, and
heavy. When thapostle said to the married folk, beware you do not defraude one
another of thoffice of matrimony, unless perhaps by mutual consent for a
time, to the end you may give your selfs wholly to prayer, it is certe^ly
true, that the continual Sacrifice is let by such as give themselves unto
Marriage matiers. Whereupon me thi^keth (says he) yt none ought toffre the
continual sacrifice, but soche only, as has vowed continual, and perpetual
chastity. Hiero. con* Io^i. Ambro. in Timo.
S Jerome also, and S. Ambrose, grou^ding themselves upon the very selfsame
text of thapostle, they makes this reason. If no lay man ca^ give him self
thoroughly to prayer, but for the while must abstain from the office of
matrimony, sithen the priest, (whose office is always to offer sacrifice)
ought alwais to pray, (yea, and ought more to pray, then the lay man ought)
therefore the priest ought always, to abstein from the office of matrimony*
ought always to live chaste. And here I let pass, thuniforme conclusion of
diverse aunciente Doctors, gathered upon the same Text also of the Appostle.
Qui sine uxore ^. Co^. vij*
est, sollicitus est, quae domini i. Cor. vij.
su^t, quomodo placeat deo. Qui autem cum uxore est, sollicitus est, quae sunt
mundi, quomodo placeat uxori. Who that is single, is careful for things
pertaining to god, how he may please god. But who that is married, is careful
for worldly things, how to please his wife. As touching y^ third po^^^,
that y^ vow of thastitie is possible to be kept, hear, what our savior says
in the gospel, of the three kinds of chaste persons. Sunt Mat. xix.
eunuchi qui de matris utero sic na ti sunt: and sunt eunuchi, qui facti sunt
ab hominibus: et sunt eunuchi qui seipsos castrauerunt propter regnu^ dei. There
are some chaste, which are borne chaste from there mothers womb: some again
there are chaste, which are made chaste of men: and some also there are chaste,
which has made the selfs chaste, for the kingdom of heavens sake. Than if
some has made them selfs chaste, some may make them selfs chaste: If some
has done it, some may do it: for, from esse or fuisse, to posse, it is
always a good argument.

Yea and that every man more over may live chaste, if he list him self,
hear you what Chrysostom says, and that grou^ding it upon the apostles own
words. Non dicere oportet, non possum Ho. xvij ad hebr*
co^tinere, and accusare co^ditore^. Si N. impote^tes fecit nos, qui iubet
accusa^dus est. quomodo ergo tudicis? Multi non possunt co^tinere, imo quod non
uolunt, dic. Si. N. uoluerint, oe^s potuerint. Propterea and paulus ait: uolo
oe^s homines esse ut meipsu^, quia sciuerat, quod oe^s esse potera^t, ut ipse.
No^ N. s^ impossible esset, ho^ dixisset You ought not to say (says he) I ca^
not live chaste, and so accuse your maker, for, if he made us unable, he is to
be accused, who commanded (the vow made, to be kept). How dare thou than to
say? many can not live chaste, nay rather say, many will not live chaste, for,
if all would, all could. Therefore S. Paul he says: I would all m^ were as I
am my self: because he knew^, that al could be chaste as he was. For, if it had
been impossible, he would never have wis^hed it. Hear again what Origin says
of ye same thing. Nolite co^queri de infirmitate carnis: Ho. ix. in liuit.
nolite dicere: quia uolumus, sed non possumus: uolumus continentur uiuere, sed
carnis fragilitate deprimim^r, and impugnamur stimulis eius: tu das stimulos
carni tuae: tu eam aduersus spiritu^ tuum armas, and potentem facis, cu^ eam
carnibus satias, uino nimio inundas, omni mollicie palpas, and ad illecebras
nutris. Do you not complain of thin firmitie of your flesh: do not you say:
we would, but we can not: we would live chaste, but we are pressed down with the
frailty of the flesh: thou armest her against thye sprite: thou make her
coragious, whiles thou porrest her full, with flesh: whiles thou swillest her
with over much wine, whiles thou danlest her with all niceness, and feidest
her up, to want ones and intiscme^tes. As touching ye fourth point, that the
breche of the vow of chastity, is an offense, hear first what y^ holy
Apostle says of ye youthful wydowes, marieng after there vow Quae i. ad Timo.
v.
cum luxuriatae fuerint in christo, nubere uolunt, habentes damnationem, quia
primam fide^ irritam fecerunt. After they have ones begone to wax wanton to
the dishonor of Christ, than will they marie, having dampnation, because they
have broken there former faith, their former promise, their former vow. For so
is it expounded by the concent of all the aunciant doctors, for brech of the
vow of chastity, and not for brech of the vow of baptism, as some would have
it.

Hear again briefly what Epiphamus, what s. Cypria^, what s. Ambrose, what s.
Hiero^, what Theophilacte, what s. Basil, what s. Austen, whateuery one of
these says in this behalf.

Epiphanius: Tradideru^t sancti Contra here is. a postoli.
dei apostoli peccatu^ esse, post decreta^ uirginitate^, ad nuptias conuerti.
The holy apostles of god (says he) has left unto us by tradition,
tradideru^t, that it is an offense, (virginity ones decreed,) afterward to
faule to matrimony. S. Cyprian: Christus li. i* epi. xi.
dn^s and iudex noster, cu^ uirgine^ sua^ sibi dicata^, and sa^ctitati suae
destina^a^ iacere cu^ altero cernat, quam in dignatur et irascitur? christ
(says he) our lord and judge, when he sees y^ virgin dedicated, and
destinated to his holiness, to lie with another man, Oh, so he disdayneth and is
wood at y^ matter? S. Ambrose: Quae se sp os pondit Ad uirgi ne^ lapsa^ cap. v.
christo, and sa^ctu^ uelame^ accepit, ia^ nupsit, ia^ immortali iu^cta e^
uiro, et si ia^ uoluerit nubere, co^muni lege co^nubij, adulteriu^ perpetrat.
She (says he) yt has betrothed her self to Christ, and has taken the holy
mantel, sa^ctum uelame^, she has alredi married: she is alredi joined to
thimmortall husband: And if now she will marie, after the common usage of
marriage, she commits aduoutrie. S. Hierom: Virgins, quae Contra Iouinia.
li. i.
post consecrationem nupserint, non tam adulterae sunt, que incestae. Virgins
(says he) which after they be ons consecrated, has married, they be not only
aduouterous, but incestuous also.

Theophilact: Virgo deo dicata, In. i. co. vij.
si nupserit, delinquit haud dubie plurimum, ut pote quae christo sponso,
superinducat adulterum. The virgin (says he) which is dedicated to god, if
she marie, she offends questionles, and that haynouslye, as the which upon
Christ her spouse, brings i an aduouterer. S. Basil: De uirginitate.
Multae uirgines uirginitate^ dn^o pro fessae, deinde a carnis uoluptatibus
co^citatae, scortationis uicium, nuptiarum nomine uelare uolunt: non ignora^tes
(opinor) tam and si ignorantiam simule^t, quod, quae sponsi sui dextra^
praeterijt, nec huius est spo^sa, qua^ illegittime reliquit, nec illius, cuise
per uiciosum affectu^ copulauit. Many virgins (says he) which has professed
their virginity unto god, and afterward being stered up, by ye volup tuousnes
of ye flesh, they will color their sin of aduoutrie, with the honorable
name of matrimony: where as they are not ignorant (I think) although they
pretend ignorance, that she, which has started from her husbands side, is
another the lawful spouse of god, (who^ she has unlawfully forsaken,) another
yet the lawful wife of him, to whom she has joined her self by vicious love.
S. Austen: In coniugali uinculo, si pudicitia De bono uidu. ca*. viij.
conseruatur, damnatio non timetur: sed in uiduali and uirginali continentia,
excellentia numeris amplioris expetitur: qua expetita and electa, and uoti
debito oblata, ia^ no^ solu^ non capescere nuptias, sed etia^, (si no^
nubatur,) nubere uelle, da^nabile est. In the bo^de of matrimony (says he) if
chastity be kept, da^pnatio^ is not feared, but in vidual and virginal
co^tinecie, an excellency of an higher reward is desired, which being
desired and chosen, and offered by y^ dew of a vow, after that, not only not
to marie, but also, (though no marriage be, only to have a will and a desire to
marye, is da^pnable. which saienge he grou^deth moreover, upon the apostles
own words before recited. Wherefore sithen these four points are al true,
sithen we seculer preistes, not wtsta^di^g our silence, do vow chastity,
sithen by gods law it may be gathered, yt we ought to vow chastity, lithen by
gods grace we may keep y^ vow of chastity, and sithen we do grievously offend
god in brech of ye vow of chastity, therefore, for a redress here of, I can
see no better menes and ways, than thaduice and counsel which y^ prophet
Esdras ones iij. Esd. ix
used with thisraelites in a case not all unlike. What time thisraelites had
married heathen and out landishe wives, uxores alienigenas, contrary to y^
commandment of god, god being highly displeased with the^ for y^ saine, Esdras
(ye Israelites being gathered to gether) spoke unto the^ in effect after these
sort. brethren (says he) sithe^ you have done wikkedly, in that you have
married heathen and outla^dish wives, and theri^ have i^creaced ye syn of
Israel, and have highly displeased god, now shall I tell you, what is to be done
of your part, for pacifieng gods in dignatio^ and wrath toward you. Nunc date
confessione^* Acknowledge iij. Esd. ix
you now your offense, be sorry for the same and separate your selfs again
from your heathen and outlandishe wives. Tha^ al yt were offenders, answeringe
again with one accord, said sicut dixisti, faciemus, Even according to thy
advertisement, so will we do, o Esdras. We acknowledge our offense, we have
done wickedly, we are sorry for the same, we are content to separate our selfs
again from our heathen and outlandishe wives. So did they in conclusion, and
all was well. Even after the same sort my good brothren, you yt are votarie
preistes and have married, though not heathen and outlandishe wives (as the
Israelites did,) yeat at least unlawful wives, contrary to your former vow,
wherein you have displeased god, and offended the world, follow you now, the
wholesome council of the prophet Esdras, say on a gods name with the
Israelites, be not a shamed. We acknowledge our offense, we have done amiss,
we are sorry for it, and we are content to separate our selfs from our
unlawful wives. say this, and do this. and so doing, you shall both pacify
god, and some what satisfy the world also. Policarpus that holy martyr,
scholar to S. John the evangelist, when he hard by his time never so little
disorder concerning the misleuinge and ill manners of men, he was wont, (as
Histories makes Eccl. his. l. v. ca. xx
mention,) to shut his ears, to hide his face and to cry out, after this
sort: deus bone, in quae tempora me reser^asti? O good lord, unto what time
have thou reserved me? What would this Policarpus say (think you) if he were
now a live, and hard thenormities of our time: if he hard the marriages of
preistes monks, friars, no^nes: The multitude of diuorses, thorough out all the
realm: the swering, perjury, blasphemy, and usury of many a one: the bieng,
and selling of te^porall offices: the like marchau^dise, and chopping, of
spiritual liuinges: The bribrie and extorsion of ye rich: Their pouling and
peelinge of the poor: Their doubling and trebling of rentes, and rearing of
i^mesurable fines: Their letting down of hospitality: Thimpacientnes of the
poor, uttered by rebellion, and tumultes: the disobedience, and contempt of ye
same, toward the magistrates: If he hard again ye feruor of devotion so
sore coled that it is almost quenched: The pulling down of gods houses, and
hospitals: ye defacing of churches, i^ spoiling there goods and orname^tes: the
breking down of aulters: the throwing down of crosses: the casting out of
Images: the burninge of tried holy relics: ye co^te^pt of holy days: the
annulling of vigilles: the breki^g of Lent fast, and i^^bring days: with a
number of other enormities moo: of whom, because their is no end, I will make
and end of rehersall, If this holy martyr Policarpus, I say, were now a
live, and hard all this, he would undoubtedly stop his ears, hyde his face and
cry out, O caelum: o terra: o tempora: o mores* O heaven: o earth: o times: o
manners. Out alas alas that ever I was borne, to see this day. Wherefore, to
conclude this part this being thus, thenormities of living being such
among us now, or of late, as has been recited, and the saying of him, that
is truth, being true, (as it can not be untrue*) Quoniam abundauit iniquitas,
refriges cit charitas multoru^, because iniquity has abounded, the charity
of many waxes could, therefore our mother the holy catholic church, may
have just occasion to repair to the heavenly phicision her spouse, and say ye
words of my theme. Dn^e filia mea modo defu^cta est, sed. etc Lord, my
daughter the church of England, as touching the life of charity, and good
living, she is even now (in a part) deceassed and dead, but come* lay thy most
gracious hand on her and she shall revive.

NOw that you have heard the death of this daughter, first by defection from
her mother, then after by misbeleuyng, and last of al by misliuyng, now shall
you hear brieflye, the laiyng on of the hand of God, for her resuscitacio^ and
reuiui^g again The holy scriptur makes me^cio^ of ye layi^g on of ye hand of
God, by.ii. manner of ways: other by ve^gea^ce and correction, other by mercy,
and grace. The hand of Gods ve^gea^ce, and correction, it has been laid on
commonly, upon many of ye spoilers, tyrau^tes, and persecutors of christ's
church. As for example Heliodorus yt spoiler and rifeler, did ii. Mac. iij
not he feel ye hand of gods vengeance and corectio^ laid on hi^ when (for that
he attempted to spoil the temple of Jerusalem, and ye iuel house of ye same) he
was dedly whipped and scourged of.ii. goodly personages, sent from above for
the purpose? Nabugodonozor that spoiler, and rifler, did not he feel Danie. iiij
the hand of Gods ve^gea^ce, and correction laid on him, when (for yt he
despised to redeem his spoil and other his offenses, by ye counsel of ye
prophet Daniel, vau^tyng of his glory, and his buildyng of Babylone, in the
power, and strength of his own hand) he was deposed from his Kyngedome: cast
out of men's company: turned from a man to a beast: fed on hey, as beasts
do, for the space of.vii. years together, till his hear greewe out, like
Egles feathers, and his nails like birds claws? Balthazer son Danie. v.
to Nabugodonozor that spoiler and rifeler, did not he feel the hand of Gods
vengeance, and correction laid on hi^, when, (for yt he, with his nobles, his.
M. lords, and co^cubines, presumed arroga^tly to dri^ke in the hallowed vessels
of gold and silver, taken out of ye temple of Jerusalem by his father) he was
bereft, not only of his kingdom, but also of his life, the hand writing his
Judgment in the wall, Mane, Thechel, Phares? Antiochus that tyrant and
persecutour, did not he feel the hand of Gods vengeance and correction laid
on him, wh^ (for that he was so lofty, and proud, that he thought himself
hable to make ye sea to be walked ^: Mac. v.
on, and the earth to be sailed on, and (as though he would have been God
himself) labored by all ij. Ma* ix
means he ^uld to destroy gods honor, glory, and Religion in Jury) he was
stricken with an incurable preuie plage in his bowels, foul worms bredig in
hes body, with such a foul filthy stenche breathyng from him, that all his
whole host much lothed, shunned and abhorred his presence? Herod that tyrant,
and persecutor, and cruel murderer of innoce^tes, did not he feel the hand of
Gods vengeance, and correction laid on him, when Acto. xij.
he, (sitting in his royal throne, most roially appareiled, taking Godly honor
upon him, robbyd God of his Glory,) was stricken by thaungell of God, and
most miserably eate^n up of worms, and vermin? Nicanor that tyrant, and
persecutour, did not he feel the hand of Gods vengeance, and correction
laid on him, when, (for that he, in pride of heart, lifted ij. Ma. xv
up his hand against the holy temple of God, blasphemyng it, and thretnyng
the destruction thereof) he had that hand of his with his head, hanged up,
before the temple, and that blasphemous to^g of his, minsed in pieces, and cast
to birds?

Julian the Apostata that Chro. Cario. Mais.
tyrant and persecutoure, did not he tele the hand of gods vengeance, and
correction, laid on him, when, (for that he forbad the christians the use of
schools, of bathes, of warfare, of bering office, of possessions: slew many a
one: cast vowed virgins to be devoured of swine, there bealies burst up, and
filled with Barleie: spoiled many a church: abused the holy vessels most
unseemly: and defoiled the holy aulters with his own urine, saying in despite:
En, quibus Mariae filio sacrifica^t: Behold thalters, whero^ they sacrifice to
the son of Marie), he was wretchedly slain in y^ field, and out of his
dedly wound, gathering an handeful of bloudde, cast it abroad, and with
horrible blasphemy ended his life, saiynge: vicisti Galilee: O thou Galileo^, O
thou of Galile, thou have overcome? Consta^tius the vi. son to Leo, that
tyra^t and persecutor, and most pervert of al before him, did not he feel the
hand of Gods vengeance, laid on him, When, (for that he showed himself a
mortali enemy to God, to our lady, to all Chro. Mass.
saints, and to al Christians: burned up the holy scriptures: could in no
wise abide the name of Marie: commanded al saints to be contempned: enforced
the christians thereunto with unspeakable torments: made monasteries dwelling
places for soldiers: slew monks, nu^nes and all religious persons, with most
cruel deaths, as many as refused to marie,) he died to to miserably and
horribly to be recited? The hand of gods ve^geau^ce and correction it has been
laid on also upon many of the miscrea^tes, misbeleuers, and heretics from time
to time. For, lighted not it upon Arrius that Ecls. hist li. x ca. x^ij
archeheretike, when he suffered a most strange and horrible death, voidyng
out al his bowels* guts, and paunche dounewardes per secessum? Lighted not it
upon Olimpius, Chro. Mais.
that arrant Arriane, when he suffered a most terrible, and sodeyne death, A
fiery dart casten down sodeinely from heaven, and consumyng him up clean to
ashes? Lyghted not it upon Chro. Cario.
Cerynthus that notable heretic, when, (as he was bathyng him self in a
house, and there was besily vttrynge most blasphemous words against the holy
trinity) the house forthwith fell down upon him and al to crusshed him to
death? Lighted not it upon Ecls: hist. live ca xvi
Montanus that proud, and presu^teous heretic, when he, (with his two
Prophetisses Maximilla, and Priscilla, by thin spiration of the same spirit
which inspired them to their heresies, desperately hung them selves al iii.
together, as it were for companies sake? And this very hand of Gods
vengeance, and Correction, it has been somewhat of late years laid on, even
upon this daughter, this realm of England also. For, what penury and
ponertie, what hungre and famine, what Sedition and tumultes, what Rebellion,
and insurrections has she sustained alate? What corruption of Come, and
infection of aier, what pestilent agues, and sodeine sweattes, what servile
subjection, and il governance of certain wicked rulers, briefly, what plage
can there almost be rekened up, but of late years she has sustained some part
thereof? What man can deny these manifest plages, manifestly to come of God,
for the manifest corectio^ of this his daughter England, for the acknowleging
of herself* For what be the plagues of God, if these be not?

Wherefore, almighty God, like a good father, who, after he has corrected
his child, breaks the rod, and shows mercy to his child again, now
that he has plaged his daughter this Realm, though not sufficientlye for her
deserts, and has broken the rod, our Assure, (which was virga furoris ^^^:
the rod of our lords fury, God pardon his soul) almighty god, I say,
ente^dyng now to lai on the hand of his endelesse mercy, and Grace, upon
this deadde Daughter, and to revive her again, he has sygnifyed this his
entente, and purpose unto us, and it were no more but even by that he has sent
to reign over us, such a merciful, and faithful: such a gracious, and
verteons: such a goodly, and godly gouernesse, and ruler. Quia. n. Deus
dilexit populu^ suum iij. Re. x.
idcirco posuit ea^ principe^ super eu^ ut faciat iudicium and iusticia^. For,
because God has loved his people, therefore has he set her to reign over
them, to the end she might execute judgment, and justice. What ca^ be a more
evident token and sign of Gods mercy, and grace: Gods favor, and love:
toward this daughter England, then, after correction to send her at length
soch a Gouernesse which should enter in myraculously, passinge all Man's
Reasonne? soche a Iudithe, as should cut of the head of Holofernes such an
Esther, as should convert the wailyng of the Jews into reioycynge? Such a
Mary, as by her pure virginity, and chaste co^tinency, should confou^d
thunchast inco^tinencie, of al soche as say, they can not live chastlye, and
continentlye? Briefly such an Helena, as should be an ernest restorer of the
crucifixe of Christ, and a speedye redresser of all things amiss, touching
both faith, and manners, in every condition? For, as the most unjust and
ungodly diuorsemente of the mother, that most noble, godly, and gracious Queen
Katherine, of a blessed memory, from the croune was thoriginal cause of breche
of al good order, al good living all good believing, all godliness, and
goodness, So doubtelesse by Gods grace, shall the rightful restitution of the
daughter our most noble godly, and gracious Queen Mary, to the croune, be
thoccasion of restoring again, al good order, all good living, all good
believing, al godliness, and goodness. Venient nobis omnia bona parit cu^illa.
Together with her grace, shall come unto us, mercy, and verity, meting
together: justice, and peace embracyng one another: ple^tie, health, wealth,
briefly al things that good are* So that, after her grace has here played
her part a while (as she has already most graciously began,) God shall then
extend his most gracious hand, over this ded dough ter this realm, and shall
say to her, as he said to the daughter of Iairus, in the dependaunce of the
Gospel of this day, Puella tibi dico, surge. Thou damoysell England, to the, I
say, arise. Arise England, from the death of misleuyng. Arise England from the
death of misbeleuyng: Arise England, from ye dedly defectio^, and co^te^pt, of
thy mother the holy catholyke church. Arise England, I sai, arise* the^ shall
this daughter England forthwith revive in spirit, quicke^ in soul, and walk
forth, in ye path of virtue. And as ye daughter of Iairus, in declaration and
proof of her corporal reuiuyng, did eat corporal fode, so shall this daughter
England, in declaration, and proof of her spiritual reviving, eat spiritual
fode, the food of the soul, ye most holy sacrament of tha^ter, in yt very
self same faith, and belief, yt her mother, the whole holy Catholic church,
has therein. God grasit this to come to pass, and that with speed.

Now one word for a conclusion, and so an end.
I Read in Titus Liuius, that l. i. dec. iij
on a time, when the Romans were grievously offended with the Carthaginiens for
breach of a certain leage, that was between them, One Quintus Fabius, being
sent from Rome, as an Ambassador to Chartage, to expostulat with them for the
injuries done, as soon as he was admitted into the cou^sail house gathering his
gown together in manner of a lap, in few words he does his message after
this sort. What need any circu^staunce, tariance, or delay (says he) O you
cou^sailors of Charthage? In this lap of mine, I have brought you hear,
both battle, and peace: whether you list, chose and have: chose battle, and
have battle: chose peace, and have peace: come of at ones. When the
counsailors of Chartage, setting light of ye matter, cried together with one
voice, Sir, give whether you list, we pass not on it, No (says Fabius
thambassador) pass you no more on the matier? then battle have you: the^
battle upon you: then open battaill do I pronounce and bid unto you. And
with that, he cast abroad the lap of his gown, with such a vehemency,
terriblenes, and horror, even as though he had brought very battle in his lap
in deed. Eue^so good brethren, for as much as your father God almighty God, and
your mother y^ holy catholic church, are both no less greeuouslie offended
with you, at this present, for the breach of the leage and promise every one
of you made to them in your baptism, (which leage and promise you have sore
broken, through defection, misbeleuyng, and misleuinge, I, although most
unworthy such an hie function, being minimus apostoloru^, imo minor minimo,
and qui non sum dignus, uocari a postolus, yeat am I come this i. Cor. xv
day, as sent from them unto you, as a messenger, and as an imbassader. And, to
use few words with you, my message is this. In this lap of mine, I have
brought you here, both benediction and malediction: both life, and death: both
salvation, and dampnation: benediction life and salvation, if you return, and
repair the leage: malediction, death, and dampnation, if you do the contrary.
Now whether you list, chose and have. But if you set light of the matter, as
the Chartaginia^s did, passinge not whether you have, passing not whether you
return or no, than, malediction death and dampnacion have you, tha^,
maledictio^, death and dampnation upon you, the^, malediction, death, and
dampnation, do I pronownce unto you, than, thus says our Lord. Nisi conuersi
fueritis and cae. If Psalm. vii.
you will not return, I have alredie vnseabred, sharpened, and Eze. xxi. Psalm.
vii.
well scoured my sword: I have shaken my sword, I have bent my bow, and I have
prepared my arrows, even as instruments of death against you. than, thus
says our lord: maledicti eritis in ciuitate etc. Cursed Deur. xxviij.
shall you be i^ ye city: cursed in ye feld: cursed at your out goi^g: coursed
at your in coming: coursed shall be ye fruit of your body, the fruit of your
land, the fruit of your catel: coursed shall be your basket, and your store.
Than, thus says our lord: Vaegenti Esa. i.
peccatrici etc. Woo be to this sinful nation: woe be to this froward
generation: woe be to these unnatural children: woe, woe, woe, be to all the
inhabitants Apo. xxi
of England. Than, thus says our lord: Ite maledicti etc. Mat. xxv.
Go you cursed in to the everlasting fire, which was prepared for the deuell,
and his angels: where, in the fyrie furnes, and bourning lake, is weping,
apoc. xxi Luc. xiij. Psalm. x. Marc. ix.
waylinge, and gnasshinge of teeth: where, fire, brimstone, storm, tempest,
and the worm of conscience, shall be part of your torments: where, you shall
burn in vnsquenchable fire, Exo. xv. Hebr. vi.
for ever, and a day: inaeternu^, and ultra. Atspero deuobis uiri fratres
meliora, and quae uiciniora su^t saluti, ta^ and si ita loquimur. But I trust
(dear brethren) better things of you, and things nere to salvation, al though
I thus speak. I trust you will return, you will repent, you will repair the
leage. And I trust you will most graciouslye harken unto the cherefull
consolation, and exhortation of your good mother the holy catholic church,
besilye calling on you, and saying: Animaequior esto filia Baru. iiii.
mea, pacienter sustineto, clamato ad dn^m, and ipse eripiet te. Animaequior
(inqua^) esto, exhortatur^n te, quae te no^inauit. Ego speraui ^naet^nu^
salute^ tua^, and ueniet mihi gaudiu^ super ea, ab aeterno salutari nostro.
Emisi. n. te cu^ luctu, and ploratu, reducetautem te mihi dominus, cu^ gaudio
and iucu^ditate in se^piternu^. Sicut uiderunt uicini dolentes, defectionem
tua^ a deo, si^uidebunt gaudentes, and in coelerita ^e conuersionem tuam ad
deum, quae superueniet tibicum honor magno, and sple^doreaet^no* Sicut. n.
fuit sensus tuus, ut aberrares a deo, sic deciestantum, iterum conuertens,
requires eu^. Filicla mea quam Gal. iiii.
iteru^ parturio donec formetur in ^e christus, uenito ad me, and timore^
domini docebo te. Reuertere reuertere Canti. vi.
filia mea, reuertere reuertere, ut intueamur te and cae. Be of good chere
(says she) be of good Baru. iii^.
comfort o my daughter England, suffer patiently a while, cry on our lord,
and he shall deliver the. Take a good heart unto the, for she, who gave the thy
name, does exhort the so to do. I had always a good hoope of thy health, and
a very ioyfulnes shall come unto me thereupon, from our everlasting savior.
For with weeping and waylynge, did I let the go from me, but with joy and
gladness shall our lord bring the again unto me, and that for evermore. Like
as thy neighbors (the borderers about the) were sorry to see thy defection
from god, so shall they rejoice to see, and that with speed thy conversion
again to god, which shall come unto the, with great honor, and everlasting
worship. For, like as thy sense has led the away, and made the to swerue from
god, so shalt thou now endeavor thy self, ten times more to turn and seek
him again. O my little daughter England, Gal, iiii
of whom I traueill again in birth, until Christ be fasshioned in the, come
thou to me, and I shall teach the, the fear of our lord. Return my
daughter, Cant. vi
return: come home good daughter, come home: stray no len^ar abroad: leave
that babilonicall s^ru^pet, whose pappes thou have long sucked: acknowledge me
again for thy mother, that thou may thereby, acknowledge god for thy father,
and he the, for his daughter, and mine. hither to your mother. And if you will
this do, than, benediction, life, and salvation have you: tha^, benedictio^,
life, and salvation upon you: tha^, benediction, life, and salvation do I
pronownce unto you. Than, thus says our lord. Sipoenitentia^ egerit Hier.
viij
gens ista a malo suo, and caet: If this nation England will repent her, of
her wickedness, than will I repent me also of the plage, which I thought to
bring upon her, and will forget, Eze. 18.
and cast behind my back Esai. ^^^ Deuteronomy. 28.
all her offenses. Than, thus says our Lord: Benedicta eris o filia in
ciuitare, and cae. Blessed shalt thou be o daughter England in the city:
blessed in the field: blessed at thy out coming: blessed at thy ingoinge:
blessed shall be the fruit of thy bealy, the fruit of thy ground, the fruit
of thy cattle: blessed shall be thy basket, and thy store. Than, thus says
our Lord: Ego disposui tibi, sicut and caet. I Luc. xxij
have prepared for the o daughter, even as my father has prepared for me, that
thou may eat, and drink upon my table, in the kingdom of my father. Than,
thus says our Lord: Euge filia bona and fidelis, Mat. xxv.
quia and cae. Well, good daughter and faithful, because thou have been
faiethfull in little, I shall make the ruler over much: enter in to thy fathers
joy. Than, thus says our Lord: Venito benedicta patris mei, and cae. Come
thou blessed daughter of my father, and possess the kingdom, which was
prepared for the, before the beginning of the world. Wherein, is the glorious
quier of the holy angels and Archaungelles, melodiously singinge: The ryall
college of the glad prophets exulting: The holy fellowship of the blessed
Apostelles reioycinge: The noble army of constante Martyrs, with crounes of
victory triumphyng: The goodly society, of pure Virgyns, in continency of
body and soul, ioyously solacinge. Wherein, of all degrees, orders, and
sorts, is such passinge aboundaunte joy, such passinge excellent bliss,
such passinge eminent jubilee, as no ieye can see, nor ear can hear, nor
Esa. lxiiij i. cor. ij
tongue can tell, nor heart can think. which grant us all, he that suffered for
us all. to whom, with the father, and the holy ghost, be all honor, glory,
praise, power, and imperie, for ever and ever Amen

Imprinted at London, within the late dissolved house, of the Graie Friars* by
Roberte Caly. Anno domini ^533.


