AN AWNSWEAR UNTO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lords, of the Queen of Englandes
most honorable privy council: Concerning an Ebrew epistle of a rarely learned
Jew, most reverent toward the Ebrew skill of English, and endeavoring the good
of all Christendom.

BY HVGH BROVGHTON

Romans 11. 16. if the root be holy the branches are also.

Printed at Basil by Conradus Waldkirch the 14. of December 1597.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE EPISTLE FOLLOWING, CONTAINED in a letter of the Ligier at
Constantinopole, Written to a Certain gentleman.
HEre is a Jew, taking him self learned, and hearing of the good fame of N. has
invited him to make proof of his lerninge, by the due awnswear, expected by the
Jew from the said N. And therefore I require your W. though as I hear he be not
in london, yet to cause the same to be sent unto him, and to procure awnswear:
and if it were possible, to cause him to come hither, being as I here little
esteemed there. I assure yor W. it might turn to the benifit of Christendom.

Yours Barton

To the right honorable the LL. of the Queen of Englandes most honorable privy
council.
AN epistle of an Ebrew most plentifully Learned in all Rabbin skill, (right
honorable) came unto mine hands a feuv days ago: after that it had been in
England, and seen of your grace, my L. archb. and some others of your
Lordshippes. The right usage of the matter contained therein, as the
ambassadors letters vuill show you, what he judges, may turn to the good of
all Christendom. The matter being of so weighty importance, it touches her
majesty, to take care, how to deal in princely Learned wisdom, thoroughly for
this case: that all Christendom may see as much done for the common good, as
the care and skill off man can afforde. Your honors shall see in the letter
two poinctes of request: the one touching the countenance and Charges of the
Queen to send a scholar requested, to rule all the schools of divinity in
Constantinople. This argues some conference with the emperor for leave And he
should be first of high auctority at home, that should do this abroad, to the
Queen's honor. The other poinct of request stands, for performance, upon a
scholars Lerning: all Ebrew skill for the tongue, and massorites, for comparing
with clear declaration, the prophets and apostles: and for awnswear to all the
grounds and branches of the Jews cabala, and traditiones, how it fails: and
what in their studies can be allowed. Here a Learned awnswearer will undertake
by sure grammar and reason to such a plain heart as he bears, to make Moses,
the prophets, the Gospel and epistles to be as harpers following the Lamb on
mount Sion: and will prove all places of Scripture for this concent from the
purest and best Rabbines, taught from ancienter writers then are of their
apostasy: and will show touching all their fables, trough their Bible, how for
memory of phrases or stories they were invented: as that: Abakuk brought Daniel
a mess of Pottage. whereas the sentence written in great letters THE JUST SHALL
LIVE BY FAITH, this for two poinctes: Justice challenged of Daniel to have
stopped the Liones mouth: and faith, told by the king of him, made the saing of
the amiable prophet to be the mess of potage to him that allways makes God
the judge. The demand of the constantinopolitane Rabbin Lappeth in it a
discourse and declaration for all these poinctes: in any of which he that
fails shall be are small sway with Jews who will require to mete with better
Learned then them selves before they change religion. Hither of ordinary course,
will be long a Censure of the Greek Septuagint: what they alterd to avoid
disgrace from heathen: where they missed of unskillfulness, or vnhediness: where
the Characters deceived their eisight, that a piece of a letter made a new
Greek term: how Bibles vnwowelled caused them sometme of purpose to put one
word for an other, oftener of error: how in some of all these poinctes the hoy
ghost that cannot miss, maks the Apostles to bear with the worlds weakness:
requiring herein as much ebrew ksill against Greeks, as Ebrewes call for,
against them selves. wherein if Greeks be not overmatched, whose erroures have
marred all religion, they most hinder all the good that should come to
Christianity. These be two chief poinctes of the letter: which do require a
direct awnswear: and whereupon stands all the hope of doing good, to the east
part: that they Lerning religion from us in the ends of the earth, may bend
all their force, to recompense us, with all good. And these poinctes were
contained, in the end of the prose, in his letter: Certain verses of a sonnet
are the last end of an hearty affection, showing an infinite desire to have the
truth of Salvation opened from England, whence, as he is persuaded that may
best be afforded. To win souls good, which he so greatly desires, not to win
a sacrifice, or a cow, as Homer speaks, nor yet running, as Achilles, for the
life of Hector, but running for the souls off all the wandrnig Jews, that
they may be gathered into the shepefold of Christ. He greatly extolleth the
knowledge of diuinty in England, a congregation of understanding, and of all
variety of wisdom, where Children are above all hope multiplied, that with
astonishment it may be said from Esaias, who has begothen these to me Herein he
breaks out into rejoicing that from the ends of the earth songs are hard,
tzeby le tzaddik, the just has honor. In this, the plain dealing heart greatly
rejoiced, with a style learned, from scriptures holy terms, not of so familiar
tenor in the vulgar phrase of nationes. But in sage estimation his speches
will be perles before any but hogs. After this entrance to allure recompense for
his most humble good will, which any will be willing to recompense, that know by
their own feeling what hope of salvation is, he enters in political sort to
Show the grounds of his petition, upon what hope of promise he opened his
desire in this Zealous manner, and thirsty care, to drink of the waters of life,
and shows that M. Edward (as he writes him) Barton, gave him all his hope:
from whose mouth he was stirred up. Him he terms in most honorable terms,
Atzir, that is messinger, faithful to them that send him: the mediator of
peace, the Lord and Tiphsar. By that term Nahum names the high officers of
Nineveh. The same consonantes make Satrap, the Lieutenantes of Persias title.
Of him he says, that he assured him how for bright* clearnes in the Scriptures
he should be fully satisfied for any question touching Scripture, of the
Trinity or the other noble treasures of wisdom the arms of the world. And
upon his words he concludes, that the gate of English Scholars being Such,
the heart must be more este^ed. He has further praise of the Ambassadors
worthiness: and slideth thence un to the Queen's majesty's comme^dation. for
which her highness, as a defendour of the faith, in his expectation, will afford
him confort and help, for the good of strengthening in Christianity, both him
and all of his desire. Of her highness he speaks Eloquentely in Ebrew terms,
picked as Jewels from the bravery of ancient states: yet not base in our
language thus: Is not she the mighty among the nationes: a princess among the
countries, the only queen of this world: Elizabetah, the perfect among the
perfect, the terrible as ca^pes. It is known in the gates of the nationes,
when they see her, that she is the princess, the crown, the honor, the
diadem the overruler of the knigdome of the Romans. Esaw or Edom the Rabbines
generally in their commentaries put for Rome. And that she has in her kingdom
the skillful in all knowledge, for the silver and gold of it: as in the golden
Candelstick, for the use of it: the generalles, the particulares, the knoppes,
the bowls, and the flowers, And he prays heartily that the Eternal king would
strength her kingdom, with mighty influe^ce as was upon sir Francys Draco, a
roaring lion against the savage bear that shakes the earth, and quakech the
nationes. Other matters which greatly touch the Queen's honor, and your G. my
Lord Arch. to regard, are in the epistle: for which lam not of place to give
any intelligence to her sacred majesty, nor direction. Your grace in a matter
of this great weight, as her highness honors regard should be, will not neglect
to send a messinger to Basil, to have a copy of the Epistle. As for the letter,
I hope it is my right, and that I may keep it for a Jewel, as M. Beza does his
Moses of manifold languages in Ebrew character: which were in England, but
required home: of which he wrote to me to Basil, that he would lend me them to
further the translation of the Bible, with entreating me not to leave, or give
over, for no crossing of hinderance: But he will not let them go, out of this
country. So your g. shall have with all my most humble duty, a copy of this
epistle, for the Q. honor and speches touching her: but M. Bezaes Book of two
volumes is not a dearer (...) (so he writes) to him, then this epistle is to
me. And I would not willingly have it out of mine ownek eping. Touching the
awnsweare unto the Learned Rabbi, which should be in his own tongue, and as
eloquent as his own style, and from London whether he endorced his epistle:
the Ambassador at Byzantium his lettre to M. Stapers tellinge that this may
turn to the good of all Christendom, has I hope kindled in your zealous
wisdom, a through care: that no contempt of furtherance in this cause, make
the nationes about think the occasion offered unto you, and neglected, to have
been the extreme hinderance and blemish of Christian hope for bettering through
the world. Therefore modesty forbids me to challenge any supertority of zeal,
as once to turn my pen to exhortation, and stirring up. And this I write not
of mine own desire: but to satisfy such as would otherwise think, that I
should, awnswear the Jew: because he writes unto me. But as the Lady of Persia
kneled to Hephestio, meaning a supplication to Alexander: So the Jew
reverencing me, looks for an awnswear which the whole state will allow. Now,
nether modesty, nor policy suffers to war in this combat, without the Q.
coutenance, preferment, and allowance Whereas the Jew inviteth into trial of
lerning: if the Q. will, all Christendom shall judge, whether will be found the
readier in the prophets language: and controlment of Rabbines. Doubtless, he
must be awnsweared. When others refuse I am ready, after due recompense, to
write, and to go: Leaving, as Aristides, particular inuries, for the general
good.

Your Lord ships to command Hugh Broughton


