A Defense of the Book entitled A Co^cent of Scripture, for amendment of
former Athean most gross, and Iudaique errors, which our translations and
notes had:

Against the libel, scoffing a Scottish mist: and slaundering that the Jews
Epistle sent from Byzantian Rome, was a forged work, and not in deed sent
thence.

By HVGH BROVGHTON.

1609.

A PETITION TO THE KING TO HASTEN ALLOWance for Ebrew INSTITVTION of Ebrevves.
YOUR Majesty, gracious King, being moved the last winter by a letter, for
allowance to open the New Testament in Ebrew by Thalmudiques, to satisfy Jews
desire, and Turks expectation, said readily, as Sir Th. Overbury told, you
would give 500. pounds annuitie that way: that I leaft D. Bilson and your
Bishops all. Because my age flees, I humbly request so much sone to be
performed: and I will bestow every sicle upon Moses tabernacle: and after the
first payment, never meddle with your BB. If Banecroft can keep himself so
silent, as does D. Bilson; who is a thousand times of oftener reading in Ebrew
and Grek then he. But if Banecraft his wit, as Phaeton, cannot rule his high
seat, your highness cannot be offended, if the thunderbolt of a pen strik all
his wits out of his brain. I showed in my former Ebrew books quietness for
all christians: and so I would go forwards; but if Banecroft join with Jews,
I will sone tell your LL. of him: and yet go forward with Ebrewes, to satisfy,
as hitherto the best learned in the world, and to my power, increase the honor
of your Kingdom, to the glory of God, and blessing of your family.

Your Majesty's most humble subject Hugh Broughton

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE LORDS OF HIS MAJESTY'S most honorable privey
Counsel.
I have set forth ( Right Honorable) sundry books, institutions for (...) was
in our Christianity. Two, of Epistles, printed before A. D. 1599. and the one in
seven languages. The other Arch. VVh^ caused to be translated. The matter of
them I need not to tell. An other work is but part Ebrew: in a commentary upon
Ecclesiastes: and that is translated so much as in English might be. An other
is joined in argument* th^^ (...) family ended in the Kinge^ and th^^^^ Nathans
was afflicted: even unto the afflicting of our Lord: and of Christian^ (...).
That, I have translated into Greek: and into Latin for Europe. And I think
that no Romist, or Law of England will blame any position of it. An other is
altogether against the Jews, for disturbing the holy story wilfully, that the
redemption time should not appear. That work neded not to be translated for
England: because I opened every position of it to England before. All these
books I made for the honor of the King: that all Jews and Gentiles bettered
by them, should pray for the King and the Kings children. And them I commend
to your Lordshipes care, to be regarded according to the sage honor of his
Majesty's government.

Your Lordships most humble* Hugh Broughton.


