THE OIL OF GLADNESS: OR, Music at the House of Mourning. DELIVERED In III.
several Sermons by ROB: ALLVVYN, Master of Arts and Rector of Stedham cum
Heyshot, in the County of Sussex. 1631. And now upon Entreaty published.

O taste and see, how gracious the Lord is. LONDON, Printed by B A. and T. F.
for NATH: BVTTER, dwelling at St. Anstones Gate. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT WORpfull, RICHARD LEVVKEN OR Esquire. one of his Majesty's Justices
of the Peace and Quorum; and Deputy Lieutenant in the County of SUSSEX: Robert
Allwyn, wishes the continuance and increase, of all Spiritual graces here,
and the Eternal weight of glory hereafter.
WORTHY SIR:
THere are two sorts of Men that are reputed happy; to whom it is given: Plin.
Epist. Lib. 6. Epist. 16.
Aut Scribenda facere -- aut Legenda scribere. Either to do things worthy to
be written, or to write what is worth the reading. Were I as succesfull in the
one, as you in the other, I might presume of a fair approbation and friendly
entertainment of these few notes, which I conceive fit for the press for no
other cause, but that they have already appeared in the Pulpit, whence they
were received with zealous silence, deep attention, and fulness of
affection, such as I may not hope for or expect abroad. For readers are not
(for the most part) so beneuolous as hearers: and I have observed of the eye,
it is far more censorious than that sanctified sense of salvation. There are
many things that in Elocution, Ambr, lib, 6. Epist 40.
Aurem praetereunt, as St Amb ose speaks. That do pass and escape the Ear;
which, when they come unto public view, are more nearly noted and more
stricktly observed; not a sentence, not a word but it is weighed (sometimes with
the false weights of misprision, sinister construction, and Envy) weighed in
the balance; and therefore it is good counsel of that Reverend father, that
before we deal out our poor endeauours, we should do the same. Trutinare
and discutere omnes scrupulos maleuolentiae ponderate and discuss, Idem ibid.
Try and prove every grain (as it were) and scruple against which the envious
man may except. But for my self, I acknowledge I have been delinquent herein:
this labor I leave unto those that have leisure to be curious. Thus much the
pains that I have taken do assure me, that I have not done the work of God
negligently: and yet I confess not exactly according to the itching ears and
eyes of this age. It shall suffice that I have followed the example of a more
Elder and Ancient of the Primitive fathers. Qui non secundum artem scripserunt
sed secundum gratiam. Ambr. lib. 8. Epist. 63.
They delivered what they received, not in the intising words of man's wisdom,
Gal. 1.10.
1 Cor. 2.4.
(whom if we should seek to please, we were not the Servants of Christ) not
in the intising words of man's wisdom, but in the demonstration of the spirit;
In whose language I had rather speak five words (and these I speak are his)
than ten thousand words in the tongue of men and Angels. 1 Cor. 14.9.
And truly this is my confidence, that of those that are Religious, and by
consequence judicious, these my meditations will be approved, in that they
speak in the Dialect and phrase so familiar unto them. As for the matter and
subject, it is such as I suppose will afford acceptance also it is the desire
of our Soul, it is the aim of our hearts, Joy. Next, that which may add
audacitie and boldness to the Book, and life unto the Author, it will be your
courteous. Censure, or (of which you see I have presumed) your benign
Patronage, and favorable Tuition of it. As for applause, it is a thing I
neither affect, nor expect. Pardon, is fair; yet approbation better; and this
the sum of my desires: Cyprian ad D. Corneliu^. Papam de Cardinalibus
virtutibus, and vsque ad eius ascensu^.
Non gloria^ mendico, sed gratiam, as that blessed Martyr speaks. I seek not
for fame but favor; If you may, approve; if not, excuse me to your self; and
others, (above others) by how much your judgment is more solid than theirs; To
your self; and you honor my labors, more than enough. I know in respect of
my immature years, these preproperous Meditations will be reputed as the hasty
fruits before the Summer. Unto this you are prompted of the Prophet how to
reply; Esaias, 65.8.
Thus says the Lord: As new wine is found in the cluster, and one says,
destroy it not for there is a blessing in it. These Sermons, though not the
first of my labors are something forward I confess; yet I dare say, there is
blood in these grapes, there is wine in the cluster, Esa. 63.3.
and what will I but that it make glad the heart of man. God grant that there
may be a blessing in it, that it may cause him that is ready to perish to
forget his sorrow, that it may comfort all that mourn in Syon, that it may give
beauty for ashes, and the garment of gladness for the Spirit of heaviness.
These things have I written to none other end, but this (may I be so bold to
borrow the words of the Apostle) that their, 1 Ioh. 1.4.
that your Joy might be full. As there is diffusion in the affection; So with
the dilatation of mine heart, I wish you all the Contents of this Book. And if
it may be more; a steadfast continuance in the fear of the Lord, which is
honor, and glory, and gladness, Ecclus. 1.11 12.
and a Crown of Rejoicing; the fear of the Lord, which gives joy and
gladness, and a long life. I conclude in the benediction of St. PAVL. Now the
God of hope fill you with all Joy, Romans 15.13
and peace in believing, that you may abound in hope through the power of the
Holy Ghost; unto whom in my prayers that proceed from him I commend both you,
and you^ ^^^^est.

Your Worships, observant and respective Friend, Robert Allwyn.

THE OIL OF GLADNESS: OR, Music at the House of Mourning.
PHIL. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord Always; And again, I say Rejoice.


AFter the shutting of the Book the first place that my Text lights on is that
of Ezechiel in the 34. Chapter. Ezech. 34.4.
The Diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which is
Sick, neither have ye bound up that which is broken, neither have ye brought
again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought out that which was
lost; but with force and cruelty have ye ruled them. Some such Shepherds, or
indeed, Cyprian.
Non Pastores sed Lanij, in the words of St. CYPRIAN, they came for to kill and
to steal, Pseudo-Apostles, and false-teachers. Zanch. in locum.
(As ZANCHY and others conceive) even at the Plantation of the Gospel, were
crept into the Church, so far from healing the breach of the spirit, from
administering a word of comfort in his season; that they spoke Law louder than
Sina: they made them meditate terror: they wounded such as were vexed at the
heart: they gave them the cup of trembling, even the dregs of the fury of
the Lord.

Now the opportunity, now the time for him that binds up the brokenhearted,
for the God of consolation and comfort, to lay to his hand. Hence he that was
the pen of that ready Writer, least these young Plants should perish for want
of watering, lest they for whom CHRIST dyed should be swallowed up with over
much heaviness, with all earnestness of exhortation, he labors to exile
anxiety, to give beauty for ashes, and the garment of gladness for the spirit
of heaviness. That the bones that were broken might flourish, he inculcates
consolation once and again, he makes them hear of joy and gladness: Esaias.
40.1.
Comfort ye? That is not enough, he repeates it again; Comfort ye my
people; says your GOD. See here how he replies as it were, how he echoes in
effect to the word of life, as the Lord commanded, even so did he. Rejoice
always in the LORD; Eccles. 11.6
And again (he knows not whether may prosper, this or that, or whether both
may be alike good) he adds line unto line, and precept unto precept, as the
Prophet speaks. Again I say Rejoice. Esaias.


The parts are these.

Rejoice.

will have it) the Longitude of it; Always.

In the LORD.

And again I say, Rejoice. Of these, or some of these at this time, and first
of the foremost: Rejoice.

(...). Arist. Eth. 2. Cap. 5.
says the Philosopher. The affections of the mind, as Anger, fear, sorrow,
love, delight, and joy, they are neither absolutely good, nor simply evil of
themselves; but according to the cause, the object, and measure, they are both
the one and the one and the other. The fathers, they are Parapathetickes in the
point, they are of the same opinion. Affectiones ordinata virtutes sunt, Bern.
parvi and varij Sermones.
Inordinatae passiones. Says Saint Bernard. Our affections if not irregular,
if ordered aright, they are virtues; if not, that which is opposite unto them,
an evil sickness. Spiritual diseases and maladies of the mind, they are
compared by LACTANTIVS, Lactant. de vero cultu, Lib. 6.
Equis pernicibus, unto fiery, unto fleet horses; If good, if brought to the
hand, if guided aright, they are as they (says Saint Ambrose) that carried,
that caught up Elias, into Heaven. If evil, if unbridled and wild, like the
Horses in the Chariots of Pharaoh and the Egyptians, they hurrie us to
destruction, they run away with us to the ruin and subversion of our Souls.
So that Ars artium, it is the science of man and his greatest felicity, to
order them aright, not to let loose the Reins; to hold them as it were with
Bit and Bridle lest they fall upon thee. Lactant. de vero cultu. lib. 6.
Quibus prave uti vitium est, dirigamus in rectum, says he, whose tongue
flowed with Milk and honey. Those things, which to use otherwise than well it
is evil. Let us guide and direct in the way of truth.

Omitting the rest, I am at this time to speak of that, which though one and
the selfsame thing, it varies both according, to the Object, and Subject. It
is amongst Fools as the cracking of thorns, as the frenzy of the Soul; but
unto the righteous, it is health to their Navill, and marrow to their bones.
Joy; it is one of the principal passions of the sensitive part; yet as annexed
unto the Rational proper only to a reasonable Soul, arising from an Object
either good, or seeming to be so: unto which the heart opens as a friend, his
arms and his bosom to embrace a friend: so this opens the hidden rooms and
secret closets of it self, to entertain the pleasure that is presented unto
it.

Thus in effect is the definition of nature, let us hear the addition of
grace. It is all both essential and integrall, it is all in the whole, and all
every part. My Spirit, Luke 1.47.
(says our blessed Virgin) My Soul (says he Psalm. 35.9.
that made Songs with all his might, and loved him that made him. Psalm. 82.2.
) My Soul shall rejoice in the God of my salvation. Come we to the body: My
heart and my flesh rejoice in the living God. For the superficies and face.
Cant. 5.10.
My beloved is white and ruddie, and such are all they that put their trust in
him. Eccles. 26.4.
Whether he be poor or rich, if he have a good heart toward the Lord, he
shall at all times rejoice with a cheerful countenance. For his Lute and
harp, Psalm. 118.15
for the Daughters of Music, the voice of joy and health is in the dwelling
of the righteous. And last of all for his habit; Eccles 9.10.
Let thy garments be always white, and let thine head want no ointment: as
the Preacher speaks.

This (Beloved.) Such is the Subject in my Text, not straightened in himself,
but open, and enlarged as the Sea. For grace, it is not so scantie, it is
nothing so narrow as nature. Come we to the Object, it is transcendent too: It
is good, not apparent, but absolute: It is the most supreme and Sovereign
good, the hony-combe with the honey: Eccles. 11.3
It is the chief of sweet things, as the Son of Syrach speaks. Psalm.
73.24. Job. 35.10.
I have none in Heaven but thee, and there is none in Earth that I desire in
comparison of thee. It is God that gives us Songs in the night season, it is
the God of Consolation and Comfort. And how then (beloved) how shall I express
the affection, how shall I open the joy that issues from hence? Shall I say it
is like that in Harvest, or the joy of them that divide the spoil, or of such
as keep holy day? Nay, there is nothing upon Earth, that can so much as shadow
it unto us. It is as the fulness of Joy, Job. 38.7.
it is as theirs in Heaven, as the morning stars that do sing together, and
as the Sons of God, that do showt for joy. Aug. In. Ps. 99. H.
Gustatur hic unde ibi satiemur (says St. Augustine) It is a Cluster of
Canaan, it is a taste of that new Wine, which we shall drink with him in his
Kingdom. Bern. de Verbis Apost.
Stilla and guttula est de flumine illo descendens, (says Saint Bernard) It is
as the dew of Heaven, it is a draught of that River that makes glad the City
of GOD. What shall I say? It is a pure influence flowing from the glory of the
Almighty. It is the brightness of the everlasting light, and that unspotted
mirror of Heaven. All these things which in some measure may express the
affection, they pluck off the covering, from the face of the Saints, Esaias.
64.5.
and the veil from such as mourn in Syon. Thou meetest him that rejoices and
works righteousness; as the Lord does us, so we the Lord, both by nature and
Grace do we go out as it were, do we meet him in this Injunction of Joy. Ita
se beatos esse omnes, velle consonant, quemadmodum, consonarent. Aug. Conf.
lib. 10.
Si hoc interrogetur se velle gaudere, says Saint Augustine in his
Confessions. As all men do affect felicity, so that which is the Diamond in
the Ring, that which is enclosed within it, Joy and gladness of heart. O how
happy then are we, how good and gracious is the Lord, that enjoynes that, which
is the desire of our souls; that which we so earnestly seek of our selves.
Opto vt ea potissimum iubear, Plin Epist.
quae me deceat vel sponte fecisse, says Pliny: and it is the wish of the
world too. Who but would willingly be enjoined that, which is the Joy and
rejoicing of his heart? Let the Lord command us what he will, so that we will
but what he commands. Ioh. 5.3. Mat. 11.30 Psalm. 19.8.
Praecepta cius non sunt gravia, his yoke is easy, and his burden light. His
Statutes are right and rejoice the heart. All that he requires of man, it is
his felicity, it is his happiness, it is his Heaven upon Earth. To rejoice,
Eccles. 3.12.
and to do good in our life. Both these as they are united by the Spirit, so
they may not be severed by a man: for as there is no good under the Sun but to
rejoice, so there is no Joy but in doing good. Let the righteous (says the
Prophet David,) once and again, nay a third time he names in effect who they
are, unto whom our Apostle speaks. Psalm. 68.3.
Let the righteous be glad and rejoice before God, let them also be merry and
joyful. See how affluent, how exundant is the joy of the Saints; how full and
copious is the Prophet in the point. Though not a cipher in the Psalms, he
has many words to express one and the selfsame thing. This is the Dialect
of the Holy Ghost, these things are written: That his Joy (which no man can
express, Ioh. 15.11.
but he that has it, nay he that has it cannot express it) might be
fulfilled in us. Be glad, Psalm. 32.12.
o ye righteous, and rejoice in the Lord, and be joyful all ye that are true
of heart. There are many more places that I might produce to show you the
superabundance, the streams of consolation, the joyful gladness of such as
are in the state of Grace; but as St. Paul to his Corinthians, Ye are our
Epistle; 2. Cor. 3.2.
So I unto you, ye are the proofs, you your selves are the places unto which
I refer you. Have ye received the first fruits of the Spirit? Have you
tasted of the heavenly gift? Have you been made pertakers of the powers to
come, the Songs of Syon, the Anthemes of Heaven, they are more than written
within you. A stranger may not intermeddle with, neither can he possibly
conceive this joy. It is far beyond that of the Sons of men. Prae
consortibus, Psalm 45.8.
true not only of Christ, but of all those that are his. They that love
righteousness and hate iniquity, they are anointed with the Oil of Gladness
above their fellows: for the work of righteousness it is peace. Esaias. 32.17
Is not that enough? It is more quietness and assurance for ever. Oh how
erroneous then, is the opinion of such as embrace this present world? Such as
suppose all our ways to be grievous? That imagine Religion to be nothing but
melancholy, full of anxietie, vexation, and fears? Oh that they would but
turn into her, that they would but repose their Souls with her; without doubt
they should find more pleasure, than in that which they so eagerly pursue. Her
consolation has no bitterness, and to live with her has no sorrow, Prove.
3.17.
but mirth and joy. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are
peace. Bern. de vit. solitar. page 1027.
Delectationes enim non perdimus, sed mutamus de corpore ad animum, de sensibus
ad conscientiam, says St. Bernard. We do not lose our delights, but we
change, not for the worse, but for the better; from the body to the soul, from
the senses to the Conscience. In stead of the pleasures of Pharaohs Court, we
have those of the Land of Canaan: for the delights of the Sons of men, we
have the consolations of God, Quietness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, joy
unspeakable, and full of Glory.

Go to then, you that rejoice in that which is naught; You that spend the time
in mirth, Job. 21.13.
and in a moment go down to the Grave; you that say as they in the second of
Wisdom: Wisd. 2.6.9
Come on, let us enjoy the good things that are present, let none of us pass
without part of our voluptuousnes, let us leave the tokens of our joy in every
place. Do but join your selves to the Saints, do but adhere to Heaven. Let
your souls but cleave unto God, and he shall give you the desire of your
hearts: you shall be satisfied with the plenteousnesse, with the pleasures of
the life that now is; and of that which is to come: even in this Valley of
tears, Psalm. 36.8,
He shall give you drink out of his pleasures, as out of a River. Wherefore,
you that have wearied your selves in the ways of wickedness, and destruction,
return unto your rest; and for famine, Lu. 15.15.25
husks, and Swine; or, if you will, strange women, Harlots, and the like: you
shall hear of joy and gladness, you shall be received with music and
dancing, not only of others, but of your own Souls. Do this then: Haec ante
omnia fac, says Seneca as divinely as if he had been St. PAVLS Disciple
indeed. Above all things do this, Disce gaudere, Sen. Epist. 23
Learn to Rejoice. It is a lesson, unto which though we are incited of our
selves, though we are scholars by nature, yet no man attaines unto it, but he
that breaks off his transgression, he that forsakes his sin, he that purges
his conscience from dead works, to serve the living God, who has reserved the
blood of the grape, the purest pleasure for piety, and appropriated his joy
unto those that are his; But as for the ungodly he writes bitter things against
them, and in the midst of their mirth, he makes them to possess the sins
of their youth; so that as their mercies are cruel, so their very joys are
but Wine mingled with Mirrhe. Plut. Moral de Audiendis poetis, and alibi
saepius.
They are like the City in Sophocles, of which Plutarch often makes mention,
that it was full of exultation and triumph, full of shouting and joy; and
withal as every town that is taken with the enemy, full of Lamentation,
weeping, and mourning. It is so with the wicked: Prove. 14, 13
Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end, nay the midst of
their mirth is heaviness. Non est gaudere impijs; So Saint Augustine, Es.
48.22. Au. Ps. 96.7 Bern. de verb. Apost. and alibi sapius.
so Saint Barnard, so most of the Fathers read that place of the Prophet:
There is no joy to the wicked. And least beholding their prosperity, you should
stagger at the truth; Non dicit homo, sed Dominus (says the same Father:) It
is the voice of God and not of man. Once, yea twice, nay a third time has he
deeply expressed himself in the point. Do but mark the Metaphors, do but
observe the similitudes concerning the ungodly, and you cannot but deplore the
joys of the most glorious sinner upon earth. Psalm. 7.15.
He travaileth with mischief, he has conceived sorrow, See; that which is the
fruit of his womb, that for which he takes so much pains, his very
pleasures, they are the pangs of a woman in her travel. Eccl. 14.20.
Again: The iniquity of the wicked it dries up the Soul, though his mouth
be filled with laughter: Though lasciviousness like oil make him look with
a cheerful countenance, yet is he full of heaviness within; Like some wild
Beast laid over with vermillion and paint, and covered with red, as the wise
man speaks. Whatsoever he seems for to be, do but enter into him, and you
shall see, that his heart is ashes, and his hope is viler than the earth; all
his days are sorrows, his delights are griefs, and his soul takes no rest
in the night season. Prove. 22.5.


To conclude; Prove. 15: Hos. 2.9. Prove. 29.6.
his ways are hedged with thorns, and there is a snare in all his paths. In
the transgression of an evil man there is a snare, but the Righteous does sing
and Rejoice. The Corollarie, the use that we are to make of the point, it is
this: Eccl 21.2.
To fly from sin, as from a Serpent, for the poison thereof of it drinks
up the Spirit, and its venom, it is the curse of the heart. But joy, and
honor, and glory, and a crown of rejoicing, shall be to every one that
departs from iniquity, who is only capable of this exhortation of S. Paul,
Rejoice.

Ansel. in locum Plut. Mor.
Non per intervalla, ut modo gaudeatis, modo non gaudeatis, says Anselmus on
the place; not by startes, not as they say of Songs, that they consist of
sounds, times, and rests between: but continually, without intermission, not
only in habit, but in Act. For though in Philosophy their blessed man per
dimidium vitae, Arist. Eth. lib. 1.
do not differ from the wretched, it is not so with us, that are in the state
of grace. Our bed is green, says the Spouse in the Canticles. Cant. 1.16.
Even in the season of sorrow, even in the most disconsolate time, there
springs up light for the righteous, and joyful gladness for them that are
true of heart. Psalm. 97.11.
While the ungodly pine away in their iniquity: They have Songs (says JOB)
Songs in the night season: Job. 35.10.
Such as are not far from the Hallelujahs of Angels. Though not vocal,
though they may not be heard, they are celestial, heavenly, and divine. As
when an holy solemnity is kept, and gladness of heart: Esaias. 30.29
As when one goes with a pipe to come into the Mountain of the Lord, the
mighty one of Israel: the God of consolation, (well may they lay them down and
take their rest) the Comforter himself, he illuminates, he inlightens, with
that which is a thousand times more clearer than the Sun; with the spirit of
Wisdom, with the Revelation of himself, and him whom he has sent, JESUS
CHRIST. So he gives his beloved sleep. And therefore, Let the Saints be
joyful with glory, Psalm. 149.5.
let them rejoice in their beds, as the Prophet David speaks.

Now for the day: Not a Moment but administers matters of joy. Lament. 3.22.23.
Behold (says the Prophet) his compassions fail not. They are new every
morning. There is a continual flowing; There is an incessant supply of that
which makes glad the heart of man. Job. 29.20.
Our glory (to speak with that upright and Just man) our glory, it is fresh,
within us. And our bow it is renewed in our hand: Our strength is restored,
and in our body there is spirit and life.

Go we forth to our labors; Eccles. 2.24. Ibid. 3.22.
Behold a blessing in the Field, and he that is with us, injoynes us to joy
therein. Deuteronomy. 12.18
Thou shall Rejoice before the Lord, in all that thou put thine hand unto.
Do we behold the dew of Heaven; and the fat of the earth; The things that
concern the body they are to put gladness into our hearts. Psalm. 4.8.
Thou shall rejoice in every good thing that the Lord thy God has given thee.
Thou and thine house, not only without but within, Deuteronomy. 26 11
where the Lord has crowned thee with blessings, and plentifully expressed
himself in his bounty unto thee. Thou have anointed mine head with Oil, and
my Cup shall be full. Psalm. 23.5.
But all these things, they are nothing unto that which immediately follows:
Thy loving kindness and mercy, Ibid.
shall follow me all the days of my life. For the things that concern our
corporal Estate, for the glorious beauty that is in the fat of the Valley,
Esaias. 2^.4.
(in thy Barn, Wine press, or something nearer unto thee) it is as the fading
flower, or as the hasty fruit before the Summer, which when he that looks
upon it and sees it, even while it is in his hand he eats it up. But though
these things perish, though they be taken away, though there were a famine in
the Land; yet have we the food of Angels, meat and drink that you know not
of. Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the
Vine: Though the labor of the Olive shall fail, neither the Field shall yield
any meat, the flock shall be cut off from the Fold, and there shall be no
heard in the stalles: Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of
my Salvation. Hab. 3.19. Hab. 3.17.18.
Hear a fountain indeficient, hear an object that makes our joys as the
days of Heaven. Though it be the 3. part of my Text, I cannot but incroach
upon it, forasmuch as our affection would fail, if not fastened aright: for
how could we rejoice always, but in him that is with out variableness and
shadow of changing?

How could we always Rejoice but in him that abides for ever? Bern. Sermon. de
Nimia falla pras. vita.
Gaudium in Re convertibili mutari necesse est Re mutata says St. Bernard. Now
you know, all the glory of the world, it is as a Morning Cloud, and as the
early dew it fades away. Hence I suppose the followers of Pharaoh Court, being
conscious of this inconstancy, are so solicitous for the season, Wisd. 2.7.8
so careful that they loose no time. Let no Flower of the Spring pass by us,
say they in the second of Wisdom. Let us crown our selves with rose-buds,
before they be withered. See how short, how inconstant are the Joys of a
Summer; who says the most when he compares them unto the lasting of a flower,
unto the life of a Rose; Wisd. 5.4.
They are indeed but as the dust that is blown away of the Wind. Like the
thin froth, that is driven with a storm. Like as a smoke, which is dispersed
here and there with a tempest. In a word; the tryumphing of the wicked is
short, and the joy of the hypocrite is but for a moment.

To ascend something higher, to speak of that which concerns the visible
Church. Our Feasts, they are but solemnities for seasons: They are but days of
joy for set and appointed times. Eccles. 43.7
From the Moon (says the Son of Syrach) is the sign of Feasts; A light
that decreaseth in her perfection: A right Emblem of some such as will seem
to be of us. Howbeit they halt between God and the World, their joy it is not
univocall nor even, it is neither true nor constant. But he that has a good
conscience (says Solomon: Prove. 15.15 In the Old translation it is a good
conscience, in the new a merry heart.
) And (as if they were convertible terms) he that has a merry heart has a
continual Feast. For the Moon, whatsoever is obnoxious unto change, for all
that is mutable, is under his feet. Animus sapientis velut mundi status super
Lunam, Sen. Epist. 59
semper illuc screnum est. It was a speech too high for an Heathen, it is only
fulfilled in the soul of a Christian, which is as that place above the Moon,
where there is neither thunder nor lightning, neither storm nor tempest, nor
any such thing; Nothing there but a glorious splendour, a delightsome light, a
continual calm, a settled Quietness and tranquillity for ever. Thus much for
the time.

We are to take pleasure (as St. PAUL says) in infirmities, 2. Cor. 12.10
in reproaches, in necessities, in Persecutions, and anguish. For these things
they come not forth of the dust, Job. 5.6.
neither does trouble spring forth of the ground; no, it is inflicted of a
Father, it is praeordayned of him that works all things for the best unto
those that are his. Romans 8.28.
And howbeit, no correction for the time seems joyous but grievous; Heb.
12.11.
yet when the hand of the Lord is heavy upon us, he remembers our souls in
trouble, Psalm. 31.8. Act. 16.25,
he compasses us about with songs in the prison, he administreth matter of
joy. Psalm. 23.4.
Baculus and virga, Thy Rod and thy staff comfort me, Not only in respect of
the fruit and effect, but the plentiful expression of the Spirit, who is most
copious of his consolation in the fiery trial. In the heat of pressure and
affliction, Psalm. 94.19.
Secundum multitudinem dolorum, so the Latins read it, According to the
multitude of sorrows that I had in mine heart, thy comforts have refreshed my
soul. Where sufferings abound, there consolations also abound much more. I am
filled with comfort (says St. Paul) I am exceeding joyful in all our
tribulation. 2. Cor. 7.4


O the blessed, O the happy Estate of all the Elect; whose very sorrows are
sweeter than the joys of the wicked: whose afflictions are to be preferred
before the pleasures of the ungodly. Vinum aqua factum, Bern. de verbis
Apostoli, Non est regnum Dei Esca.
(to use the allusion of St. Bernard) they drink more than the blood of the
grape, their water is turned into wine. The best, far more pleasant, than
that which is naturally so. For the affliction you object, it is not worth the
naming. It is less than nothing, in respect of that secret comfort of the
hidden treasure of the heart. Velut nubes levis transit (to sanctify the words
of the Stoicke) It is but as the morning mist before the Sun, Sen. Epist. ^0
or indeed not so much; It is but Quasi, some thing as it were. Quasi tristes
(says Saint Paul) as sorrowful, 2, Cor. 6.10
yet we always rejoice. See, tristitia nostra habet Quasi, gaudium nostrum non
habet Quasi, Aug. in Psa. 48. tr. 2. g.h.
says St. Augustine. Our sorrow it is as the shadow of a dream, at the most
it is but something as it were; but our joy, it is so indeed, it is both
complete and constant, it is full and perfect, it may not be removed, no not so
much as interrupted. As timber guirt and bound together in building may not be
loosed with shaking; Eccl. 22.
so is the soul that is knit unto the Lord; in whom all the fabric is fitly
framed, it is established, it stands fast and will not shrink; it is
strengthened with all might according to that glorious power, unto all
patience, and Long-suffering with joyfulnesse. Coloss. 1.11


I have satisfied what happily might be objected from affliction, the point is
as yet beset with opposition by Repentance and Temptation. First, for
Repentance: It should seem that it is wholly averse, that it is clean
contrary unto this exhortation of St. PAVL. For the picture of a Penitent in
the phrase of the Holy Ghost it is this. First for his habit, Ion. 3.5.
it is sackcloth, it is the garment of anguish and mourning. For his Site,
Lament. 3.
he lies down in his sorrows, he wallowes in ashes. For his Person, his head
is full of water, his eyes are a Fountain of tears, Ierem 9.1.
his face is soul with weeping, and on his eyelid is the shadow of death. Job.
16.16.
For his fare, he is fed with Wormwood, and his wine is water of Gall, he eats
ashes as it were bread, and mingleth his drink with weeping. Psalm. 102.9.
To come something nearer unto him: for his speech, it answers the original,
it is contrite and broken, it is often interrupted with sighs, Even to the
breaking of the loins, Ezech 24,
as the Prophet speaks. Gemitibus inenarrabilibus, with sighs that cannot be
uttered, as the Apostle speaks. Romans 8.26


The half of the objection is not yet at an end. Psalm. 22.14.
Within, you shall have an heart in the midst of his body, like melting wax.
Prove 18.14
His spirit is wounded, and a wounded spirit who can bear? Psalm. 51.8. Psalm.
141.8. Psalm. 38, 3.
For his bones they are broken, and from the Crown of the head, unto the sole
of the foot, there is no health in his flesh, by reason of his sin. In a word
he is like unto the Roll of Ezechiel, Ezech. 2.10
in the which there was written within and without, Lamentation, weeping, and
mourning. So that the words of St. Paul, Ruth. 1.20.
the voice of joy unto him, (call me not Naomi, but call me Marah) it is as
laughter at the Grave, it is as Music at the house of Mourning.

Unto this we reply, that the heart of a penitent knows his own bitterness,
Prove. 14:10
and a stranger may not intermeddle with his joy. The one it is as occult, as
invisible as the other; Howbeit where sin abounds, there Grace abounds
much more. Romans 5.20,
So in the repentance not to be repented of, our consolations are more than
correspondent to our sorrows. Prove. 20.30
The blewnesse of a wound, it cleanses away evil, so Repentance sin, whose
cuts are as it were of a two edged Sword. Besides the effect, the cause, it is
a comforter, the holy Ghost, that is spread abroad in our heart, by whose
society our penitency is made pleasant: Et ut ita dicam, amaritudo nostra
dulcissima, says Saint Bernard. Bernard.
Our bitterness it is sweet, not only to the Angels, that rejoice at the
conversion of a sinner, but so to our own souls. Our very sighs and groans
they are like Pillars of smoke, Cant. 3.6.
perfumed with Mirrhe and Frankincense, (in the phrase of the Spirit) and with
all the powders of the Merchant. Our tears (besides their operation, which is
to make our sins melt away, as the ye in the fair warm weather) even in
the instant that they run down the cheeks, they are as strong drink unto him
that is ready to perish; they rejoice, they make glad the heart of man. Fit
plerumque ut in ipsis pijs fletibus illa interim gaudij claritas crumpat, says
Saint Gregory. Greg. Mor.
In, or indeed out of the midst of our tears, there arises light as it were
out of darkness, serenitie of the Soul, and brightness of Spirit. In profuso
gaudio Lachrimae erumpunt, Tertullian.
says Tertullian, and our observation the same, there are often tears in our
joy, and so not seldom if spiritual, there is joy in our tears. Lact. de ira
Dei, page 483
Orbem vitreum plenum aqua si tenueris in Sole, de lumine quod ab aqua refulget
ignis accenditur etiam in durissimo frigore, says Lactantius: If you hold an
hollow round glass in the Sun, from the light that it casts an heap of
coals is kindled, it yields an heat that will make a fire even in the
midst of Winter. How true this is in Nature, I know not, sure I am in Grace
it is so. Our tears they are put into a bottle, Psalm. 56.8.
they are the luster of Grace; The Sun of Righteousness shines upon them,
and from the heat there is derived another, an influence as it were, an effect
of him that Baptizes with the Spirit and with fire. It is a vehement desire and
zeal too, of those things that proceed from that godly sorrow. 2. Cor. 7.12
In the second to the Corinthians, it is a passion composed of grief, or at
least some thing like it, grief and gladdesse of heart. Poenitens de peccatis
dolor gaudet, He that sorroweth for his sins, he rejoices for his sorrow.

Now for Temptation, 3. Temptation.
it is the King of terrors, it is the Artillary of Hell, it is the strong man's
battle Axe, and his weapons of War; and yet behold from hence there arises
joy to the Righteous; even in the extremity, even in the heat and violence
thereof. The Angels themselves, nay he whose strength is scene in infirmities,
he that lifts up those that are cast down, he administers Might, Alacrity,
and consolation unto us.

So that our temptation, it is as the Whirlewind in the first of Ezechiel,
Ezech. 1.4.
that came out of the North, a great Cloud and a fire unfolding it self, but
withal a brightness was about it, and out of the midst thereof, as it were
the color of Amber. It is so with that which strikes terror into us, the
temptation of Satan; there is often serenity, joy, and brightness of spirit,
even in the midst thereof. Cogitur nos adversarius ad sua damna tentare,
says St. Ambrose. Ambrose.
The Serpent is wounded with his own sting, his temptations they are against
himself, and for the honor of Israel; Luke 10.19.
for by this means he and his, the Devils themselves, are subject unto us; by
this means we overcome the evil, we tread upon Serpents and Scorpions, and
over all the power of the enemy. Wherefore my Brethren count it all joy, Iam,
1.2.
when ye fall into diverse temptations.

You see now how every way you may fulfill and answer the exhortation of the
Apostle. There is joy in the light, and joy when gross darkness covers the
Earth; Joy in our beds, and joy in the morning, in the Field, in all that we
set our hand unto. There is joy in that which is our portion under the Sun, the
good things that God has given us; and though they be slight and momentany,
though they be taken away, joy in him that is more than they all.

It was the opinion of Plato, Plato.
that the Celestial Orbs with their concourse and meeting, they hit our
harmony and make Music not unworthy of Heaven. It is assuredly so with the
precious stones of Syon, even here upon Earth; all that wheeleth about them, or
indeed is as wisely ordered, as sweetly disposed by that supreme Providence,
as the things that are above. It works jubilation and joy, the voice of
melody and gladness of heart. Wisd. 19.18
So that as in Psaltery notes, change the Tunes, and yet are they always
sounds; so is it here, though our Estate do alter, though we continue at a
stay, though sometimes we abound, and sometimes are abased, though one while in
affluence and health, another in sickness and distress; all these things they
are but as so many several tunes to the Righteous, there is the voice of joy
and gladness in them all. Joy in affliction, and the Lesson of Lachrymae it is
delightsome. Our Harp, our Lute, it is in the right tune, it makes most
melodious music (heavenly harmony) when it is mournful most. There is joy in
Repentance, and in Temptation Joy: When thou passest through the Rivers I will
be with thee, Esa 43.2.
and through the floods, they shall not overflow thee. When thou walk
through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon
thee. Neither affliction, nor tribulation, nor distress, nor temptation, no
not all the gates of Hell shall be able to prevail against thee.

I can go no further, you have all that I can comment on the point. Our mouth
is open unto you, 2. Cor. 6.11
and our heart it is made large (says St. PAUL to his Corinthians.) Dilatamini
and vos, Unclasp your affections, extend your Souls as a Tent for to dwell
in. Be ye also enlarged. Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say, Rejoice.

The third part it is the Object, of which because through this whole discourse
I have implicitly spoken already, a word or two shall suffice. Rejoice always
in the Lord. Sen. Ep.
Ad summu^ pervenit qui scit quo gaudeat. I am almost persuaded he was a
Christian that spoke so divinely. He is come to the height, in the phrase of
the Holy Ghost, he is not far from the Kingdom of God, that knows how and
wherein to Rejoice. Howbeit as in a Race many run, but one receives the prize;
so is it here: though we are all in aemulation, though we strive for the more
excellent gift, though both our actions and affections follow hard after joy,
yet few are they that do attain unto it: for according to the delights of the
Sons of men, are their aberrations from it. Job. 31.25
There is one that rejoices because his wealth is great, and because his hand
has gotten much; so most of the children of this generation. There are others
that account our life a pastime, the Harp and Violl, and the Tabret and also
the Pipe, and Wine are in their Feasts, but they regard not the work of the
Lord, neither consider the operations of his hands, Esaias 5.12.
as the Prophet speaks. Next unto these are they, which are emptyed from
Vessel to Vessel, that they might prove what is that good of the Sons of
men. Wisd. 2.
They seek for to solace themselves with variety, and let no flow of the
Spring pass by them. In the last place, there are some that sleep not unless
they have done mischief. Prove. 4.16
Qui laetantur cum malefecerint. Who rejoice in doing Evil, Prove. 2.14.
and delight in the frowardness of the wicked.

For the joys of all these they are but slight and superficial; Sen. Ep.
Frontem remittunt, non pectus implent. Besides that, they are shallow and
inconstant, even at the best they are fastidious and unpleasant; but sorrows
indeed, but waters of gall in respect of that which is ordered aright, unto the
object in my Text. Cant. 4.10.
How much better is thy love than wine, and the smell of thine ointment than
all spices! Should the windows of Heaven be opened, should the Mountains drop
new Wine, and the Hills flow with milk. Might every Man be Heir of that
inventory in the second of Ecclesiastes, Eccles. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 8, 9,
10, 11, 12.
of those several delights of the Sons of men: all these things they were
not worth the naming; they were vanity and less than nothing; in respect of
the person in whom we are enjoined to Rejoice.

What shall I liken to God, or with what comparison shall I compare him? Cui
aliunde comparata omnis iucunditas maeror est, omnis suavitas dolor, omne dulce
amarum, Bern. parv. Serve..
says St. Bernard. Extract what you can from his Creatures in Relation unto
him, it is but as the drop of a Bucket, and as the smallest dust of the
balance. Whatsoever the world affects, as Riches, Honor, Pleasure, or the
like, they are all in him, and more also. Bern. ubi supra.
In a word; Ipse fecit omnia, ipse habet omnia, ipse est omnia; says that
sweet Father: He is the Maker of all things, and the Owner, they are all his,
but he himself is more than they all. This is my beloved and this is my
friend, Cant. 5.16.
O ye Daughters of Jerusalem. This in himself; Let us see now what he is unto
us.

First for affliction, In the time of trouble he is an hiding place from the
Wind, Esa. 25.
as a Covert from the Tempest, as Rivers of waters in a dry place, as the
shadow of a Rock in a weary Land. And not only so, but he devises blessings
toward us, he rejoices over us to do us good with his whole heart, and with
his whole soul, as the Prophet speaks after the manner of men, Ier. 32.41.
because of our infirmities. As the Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride (that
is an other (...)) As the Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, Esa. 62.5.
so shall the Lord re-rejoyce over thee. So near is the Relation between him
and us: My beloved is mine, and I am his. Cant. 2.16.
And how then can we but sympathize, how can we but answer his affection,
and parallel (if it were possible) the joy of our dearest? I will rejoice in
the Lord, my Soul shall be joyful in God, for he has clothed me with a Robe
of Righteousness, Esa. 61.10.
as a Bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a Bride adorneth
herself with Jewels. Many more are the attributes of God, in that which might
amplify the joy of his chosen. As that he is our Shepherd, and our strength
in temptation, in the day of our spiritual battle. So David: Psalm. 28.8.
The Lord is my strength and my shield, my heart has trusted in him, and I am
helped: therefore my heart danceth for joy, and in my Song I will praise him.

But hear the end of all the felicity of the Chosen: that which includes the
Heaven of Heavens, the transcendent cause of the dilatation of the heart.
Behold, God is my salvation, I will trust and will not be afraid, for the Lord
JEHOVAH is my strength and my Song, he is also become my salvation. Therefore
with Joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of Salvation. Hear our
confidence; Esa. 12.2, 3.
well may we rejoice in hope, it is more than so, it is (...) it is the full
assurance of the Saints. So that we pass (being sealed unto the purchased
possession) we pass from Glory to Glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord. The
expectation (our present estate) the expectation of the Righteous it is
gladness, Prove. 10.28
and what then shall the fruition be, when we shall enter into our Masters joy;
when we shall be satisfied with the pleasures of his house; when we shall
always behold the face of the Lord, in whose presence is the fullness of joy,
and at his right hand his Son our Savior, Psalm. 16.12.
pleasures for evermore? To him with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be
ascribed all Power, Praise, Majesty, Might, and Dominion, both this day and for
ever. Amen, Amen.

THE SECOND Sermon.
Our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ; and these
things write we unto you, that your Joy may be full, 1. Ioh. 1.4. 1. Ioh. 1^
I sat down under his shadow, with great delight, and his fruit was sweet
unto my taste: He brought me into his banqueting house, and his banner over me
was love. Cant. 2.3.4. Cant. 2, 3, 4
Hic est ignis, quem voluit Christus vehementer accendi. Bern. of Spiritual
Joy. Declamat. Bernard.
August.
Qui in via sic pascit, in Patria quomodo saginabit? August. in Psalm. Bernard.
Quid erit in Patria, si tanta est copia delectationis in via? Bern. Declam.
PHIL. 4. The latter part of the 4. Verse.

Again, I say, Rejoice.


THere is a deplored, there is a desperate opinion of the wicked; That Piety is
pensive: That the Saints are men of sorrows: That they wast their lives with
heaviness, and their years with mourning. True it is, I confess, that many
are the afflictions, diverse and sundry are the pressures, the troubles of the
Righteous; But that which makes a man either miserable or happy, it is not his
passion but action, not that which he suffers, but does. If it be good,
sorrow may lie at the door, but there is no ingresse, it cannot enter into it:
for that which is nearer than the joints and the marrow, all his inward parts
they are possessed, they are taken up with an hidden, with a secret Joy. So
that what is without, say that it may raze the skin; sure I am it cannot
pierce the soul. Our Rejoicing it is not shallow, nor superficial; it is in
the hidden man of the heart, it is the testimony of a good conscience: 2. Cor.
1.12
let it be sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb, let it be purged from the
evil of actions and affections, and behold the bones that were broken shall
flourish. You shall hear of joy and gladness, and sorrow, and sighing, shall
fly a way.

What is said of Wisdom, is true of Religion also, at first she will walk
with him, Eccles. 4.17
that is her Disciple, by crooked ways, and bring fear and dread upon him,
and torment him with her Discipline, until she may trust his soul, and try
him by her Laws, and comfort him; then will she return the straight way unto
him, and show him her secrets. So in the School of Repentance; first anxiety
and sorrow, first terror and contrition, and after this great a calm, after
this Iubilation and Joy. Lodo vic. Viv.
Nec aliud conatur pietas Christiana quam ut serenitas humanos actus exhilaret,
and tranquilitate animorum, compositisque affectionibus simus Deo and Angelis
quam simillimi. So Lodovicus Vives answers the misprision of them, that put
bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter; that are mistaken in the supposed
austeritie and strictness of Religion, Prove. 3.17.
whose ways are ways of pleasantness, and her paths are Peace. All that
she enjoynes it is, what? Not to cut our selves with knives and lances; 1.
King. 18.28.
not to sacrifice our sons and Daughters unto Devils; Wisd. 12.5 Wisd. 5.7
not to go through Deserts where there lies no way; but that even here upon
earth, having suppressed our passions, and composed our affections, we may
anticipate our Heaven, and in tranquillity and peace resemble the Lord and his
Angels of Light. Again I say, Rejoice.

The parts you remember.

Rejoice.

In the Lord.

Always.

Again, I say, Rejoice.

For the present we are to observe.

Rejoice.

Again.

I say.

Or thus.

Again.

I say.

Rejoice. Of these in their order, and first of the Repetition.

Again.

It is the Dialect of joy, it is the phrase of a comforter; the voice of the
Holy Ghost himself, Genesis 3.8. Luke 15.20
who as he walks in his Justice, so he runs in his mercy; As he
expresses our sorrows with an Aposiopesis, so our joys with an Epizeuxis. He
sighs out the one, but he speaks once, yea twice, he ingeminates the other,
and sometimes more. Though no Tautology, not a word in his Book but is weighed
in the Balance, yet has many Synonymies, dilation of phrase to express this
celestial affection. Sing, Zeph. 3.14.
O Daughter Syon; Shout O Israel; be glad and rejoice O Daughter Jerusalem. The
Lord has taken away thy Judgments, he has cast out thine Enemy. Zephan.
3.14. See (beloved) how affluent, how full of water is the River of the Lord.
Psalm. 65, 10.
Like that which he spyed out for his people, Josh. 3.15.
It overfloweth his banks in the time of Harvest. Once and again, nay a third
time and more he inculcates one and the selfsame thing. So in the Psalms:
Psalm. 68.3.
Let the Righteous be glad and rejoice in the Lord, let them also be merry and
joyful. In a word, throughout this whole volume, you shall seldom hear of
this Heavenly affection without an Ingemination at least. Rejoice in his holy
name (says the sweet singer of Israel, Psalm. 105.3.
) Let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord. And again, Psalm. 149.2.
Let Israel rejoice in him that made him, and let the children of Syon be
joyful in their King. Thus he waters the Hills from above, he sends rain
into the little Vallyes; Psalm. 65.11.
He makes them soft with the drops of the first, of the former and the latter
rain. Haec locutus, these things (and thus) have I spoken unto you, Ioh. 15.11.
that my joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full. Hear his
Disciple, and you cannot but confess, that he leaned on his bosom: Surely
thou art one of them, for thy very speech bewrayes thee: These things I write
unto you, that your Joy might be full. 1. Ioh. 1.4. 1. Ioh. 1.4
So our Apostle. (O the heavenly harmony of the Songs of the Sons of Syon)
here is a whole Quire, a choice Consort of him that spoke as never man spoke,
and of him that took pleasures in afflictions: Christ and his Disciples;
Rejoice always in the Lord. And again; A word (as the Wiseman speaks) of a
Consort of Music with Wine; like a Carbuncle set in gold. Eccles. 32.5
Again I say, Rejoice. Ambr. apud Lyram in locum.
Hoc adeo necessarium est vobis quod iterum dico gaudete, non ut quaedam alia
semel; says St. Ambrose, as he is alleged by Lyra. He that speaks but once
for the most part in the incitation of other things, he doubles his exhortation
of joy: and without doubt, there is something in it, it is expedient, nay it is
necessary unto us, that are in this Valley of tears, that now go on our way
weeping.

The Joy of the Lord is your strength Neh. 8.10. Neh. 8.10.
So in our spiritual war-fare, against those that have evil will at Syon. Our
shield and our Buckler, nay the might of our inward man, it is joy. In the 10.
of St. Luke we read of the 70. Luke 10.17.
that went out to preach the Kingkome of God; that they returned again with
joy, saying; Lord, even the devils themselves are subject unto us through thy
name. Cause of triumph, cause of exultation indeed to tread upon the Lion and
Adder, to overcome the evil, to cast down strong holds, and every high thing
that exalts it self against the knowledge of God. It cannot but put gladness
into the heart of man. Yet this I dare say, the joy of the Saints it wounds
him more than this supreme and transcendent power. Vae nobis; As Hugo the
Cardinal sweetly applies the words of the Phililistines, 1. Sam. 4.7.
when they heard the exultation, the shouting of the Host of Israel. Woe unto
us, for there has not been such a thing heretofore, woe unto us. Bis dicunt
vae nobis, sicut hic dicitur bis, Hug. Card. in locum.
Gaudete. According to the joy of the Saints, so is the sorrow above and
besides their Hell. The sorrow of that uncircumcised Host. Their woe it
answers, and the repitition in the Text. Rejoice always in the Lord, and
again I say, Rejoice.

The next thing we are to observe, it is the Quantity and the constancy of our
spiritual joy, expressed or at least employed in the Reiteration Again. The
word it puts a difference betwixt the joys of the Saints, and the delights of
the Sons of men: In which though you empty your self from Vessel to
Vessel; though you make proof of those things in the book of the Preacher;
Eccles. 2.1, 2, 3, 4.
In all the pleasures of Pharaohs Court you cannot find this Again. Quod
delectat momentaneum: though the guilt of sin be eternal, yet the joy is not
so, but of a moment, but of a minute, but of the twinkling of an eye. In the
fifth of Wisdom there are sundry similitudes to express it unto you. What has
Pride profited us, Wisd 5.8, 9, 10, 11.
and what good has riches with their vaunting brought us? All these things
they are passed away like a shadow, and as a Post that hastes by, and as a
Ship that passes over the Waves of the Waters, which when it is gone, by the
trace thereof cannot be found, neither the Path way of the Keele thereof in the
Waves. Or as when a Bird has flowne through the air, there is no token of her
way to be found. See how swift, how transient, how voluble is all that is in
the world. The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life.
Besides their brevity, for the most part they end in bitterness, and in the
enjoying they are fastidious and unpleasant. Not to speak of them in gross,
but to single out some of your beloved sins, as Concupiscence, Drunkenness,
and that which you call pastime. Were they such as you suppose, yet evil in
this, that they vanish with a breath, and even in the enjoying they perish.

For the former. Come on, says the woman, whose lips drop as the hony-combe,
and her mouth is smoother than Oil: Prove. 7.18
Come on, let us take our fill of loves; how long? Brevis and non vera
voluptas. Ovid.
Let us take our fill of loves until the morning: but see what follows.
Before that time (every Sinner is a liar) before that time he is in bitterness
of spirit, Prove, 7.23,
and a dart strikes through his liver.

In the next place is the darling of our days, Drunkenness; a sociable and
insinuating sin, that flatters with the profession of joy: But mark but the
end thereof, Sen. Ep. 29
Vnius horae hilarem insaniam longi temporis tedio pensat, as the Stoicke; At
the last it biteth like a Serpent, Prove. 23.32
and stingeth like an Adder: as the Preacher speaks.

Now for those things that are indifferent: Am. 8.10.
Our Feasts they are turned into mourning, and our Songs into Lamentation. Am.
8.10. In a word; The Vine languisheth; the merry hearted do sigh, the mirth of
the Tabrets cease, the noise of them that rejoice ends: Esaias. 24.7. Esa.
24.7.
So not only in the time of Famine, so not only in the time of dearth, but
when the wine and oil puts gladness into our heart both in peace and plenty:
The world and the glory thereof it passes away; and when once gone, thou may
as soon make the flowers green that are withered; as soon may thou recall
the Sun from his course, as redintegrate the joys and pleasures that are
past. Which though they were always present, though of constancy and
continuance, yet for this very cause would they be loathed of us. Scult. de
Gaudio.
Satietas mortales capit etiam mellis and florum venenis, says Pyndarus as he
is alleged by Scultetus. If thou eat too much honey, the end thereof will be
gall: Sen. de tranq. in. cap. 2.
Sweetness it self, in time turns to choler. Quosdam ad mortem adegit illud
rabidarum deliciarum, Quo usque eadem? Says Seneca. Satiety for the most part
it breeds dislike, and no such surfeit as of pleasure and joy: it ends in
fury or deep coffeehouse at the least.

O the doleful estate, the deplored delights of the Sons of men; that are
neither solid nor certain: or if so, if of continuance, they cause satiety and
loathing. The reason, it is our Aberration from the right Object. So Aquinas.
Aqu. 12. d. Quaest. 31. art. 7.
Delectatio in affectibus animae proportionatur Quieti in corporibus. Joy in
the affections of the mind, it resembles Rest in the Physical body. Sed
appetitus corporis naturalis non quiescit nisi in loco connaturali. Strange,
that our affections should not be on the things that are above. The natural
body cannot rest but in its proper place: whence I may infer, that it is as
easy for a stone to lodge in the air, it is as easy for the earth to ascend
up on high, as the Soul to be at peace, to enjoy it self in whatsoever (but
with relation to God) in whatsoever is under the Sun.

So far the similitude holds. Hear the difference, the inclination of that
which is inanimate, it is at rest, it cease in the place that is appointed
for it. But the soul not so: When her joy is full, her affections are fresh;
and behold there is neither surfeit nor sorrow, there is neither loathing nor
satiety in them: They that fear the Lord shall always Rejoice. A peculiar, a
privilege proper to the precious Sons of Syon; whose joy not the enjoying,
neither Estate nor time can take away from them. It is established in the Lord,
and it stands fast: It is once and for ever, it is always and again. Thus
much for the difference between the joys of the Saints, and the delights of
the Sons of men, expressed or at least employed in the Reiteration, Again.

Solet Apostolus Paulus in verbis esse brevis, in sente^tijs copiosus, Bernard.
says St. Bernard. And my Text the same. In which there are two sentences in
one word. Aug. de verb. Ap. Sermon. 2.
Gaudendu^ de ijs quae expectamus, and gaudendum de ijs, quae sustinemus, says
St. Augustine. All this in the word Again. We are to rejoice in the future for
the good that we hope for, and in the present for the evil that we suffer. For
the first, our heart shall rejoice in him, why? Because we have hoped in his
holy name: Psalm. 33.20. Psalm. 33.20
So St. Paul. Spe gaudentes, Romans 12.12
Rejoicing in hope. The Prerogative of Piety it has the promises, the
pleasures of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. Anguste
fructus rerum determinat, Sen. 171. Ep. 99.
qui tantum prasentibus laetus est, says the Stoicke, and it is spoken like a
Christian: sure I am it is so in Divinity. He imprisons the heart, he
straightens dilatation, he deminisheth the felicity, the good estate of the
chosen; that sees not so far as the future, that only rejoices in that
which now is. And yet all delectation and delight it is de bono praesenti,
Damasc. Aqu. 12. Qu. 32. art. 3.1.
says Damascene: and how then may we rejoice in hope, which is of things not
seen? By knowledge and application; it is in effect the answer of the
Angelical Doctor. The nature of hope, it is to call the things that are not as
if they were, it has affiance in the future, it has the security of heaven,
it has the obsignation, the seal of the Spirit; from whence arises
Iubilation and Joy, joy unspeakable and full of glory. By way of comparison we
have it plentifully expressed by our Savior. The 70. returned again with Joy,
says St. LUKE. Luke 10.17.
Saying, Lord, even the Devils are subject unto us through thy name. Hear the
reply: And he said unto them, Behold I give you power to tread upon Serpents,
and Scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy. See, what a word is this?
What sovereign, what supernatural might have we here? If Moses and Miriam,
if Deborah and David did so shout and sing at their corporal Conquests; how
inconceiveable is the joy of such as tread down Satan under their feet? Of
those that spoil Principalities and powers? And yet, behold I show you a far
more excellent joy. In this rejoice, Luke 10.20
not that the spirits are subject unto you, but rather rejoice that your names
are written in Heaven. Luke 10.20. Hear the enlargement of the heart, hear
the dilatation of joy that deifies as it were the estate, and sublimates the
nature of man. Cum accepta fuerit ineffabilis illa laetitia, perit quodammodo
men's humana, and fit divina, August in Psalm. 55.
says St. Augustine. So soon as we receive this inconceiveable joy, though
in our earthly mansions, though in our houses of Clay, our mortality it is as
it were swallowed up of life, our humane Soul it is made celestial and
divine: In so much, that for the Glory that is set before us, we fear not
that which is (...), Arist. Eth. lib. 3.
says the Philosopher: In the phrase of the Holy Ghost, the King of terrors
Death. We sing our Dimittis with joy. My heart was glad, my glory rejoiced,
Psalm. 16.9.
my flesh also shall rest in hope.

To go one step further. Hear the full expression of joy, that arises from
the hope of the faithful, at the meditation of the dreadful day, when the Sun
shall be black as a sackcloath of hair, and the Moon shall be turned into
blood; when the heavens shall vanish like a scroll, and the powers above shall
be shaken, when the last trumpe shall sound and the books shall be opened. At
the meditation of all this it is so far from fear, (O the blessed trust and
confidence of a christian Soul,) it is so far from fear, that it breaks
out into a Prosopopeia, into the deepest strain of melody and joy. Let the
floods, Psalm. 98.9.
says the soul of the Saints, let the floods clappe their hands, and let the
hills be joyful together before the Lord; for he is come to judge the Earth.
Psalm the 98.9.

Again. Gaudendu^ de ijs quae sustinemus. We are to take pleasure in pressure,
to rejoice in tribulation. Blessed (says he, who for the glory that was set
before him endured the Cross, despised the shame, and is set down at the
right hand of God) Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute
you, Math. 10.11 12
and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and
be exceeding glad. See in the midst of calumny, which is sharper than a two
edged sword. In persecution, which is almost as much. In the multitude of
sorrows, which they have in their heart, how affluent, how full is the joy of
the Saints. Be glad; that is not enough, once and again be glad and exceeding
joyful. In the journey of Israel through the waters of blood, The dry Land
(says the Wiseman) appeared, Wisd. 19.7.
and out of the red Sea a way without impediment, and out of the violent
stream a green field. It is assuredly so with us that are in via, in our way
out of Egypt unto the Land of Promise, In the great water floods when the waves
lift up their heads. In our manifold afflictions there is an evasion, a fair
passage and escape from them all; For he that comfort those that are cast
down, Psalm. 31.8. and 32.8.
he considers our trouble, he knows our Soul in adversity, he compasses
us about on every side with songs of deliverance. And not only so; but in the
violence of our passions, inundation of affliction, he does more than make a
way to escape. He turns our Sorrow into Joy, the violent stream into a
green field. Unto the godly (O their happy estate, Psalm. 112.4.
whose night is cleerer than the noone of the wicked) unto the godly there
arises light in the darkness. Even in the season of Sorrow, in the most
disconsolate time of tribulation and anguish, there is a day star that
arises in their hearts. More, there is a Son of righteousness that shines
upon them. Sen. Epist. 27
Si quid obstat nubium, modo intervenit; quae infra feruntur nec vnquam diem
vnicum; Whatsoever may befall for the afflictions of this life, like the
clouds that are below they are sublunary, they are under their feet; so that
they cannot obscure, they may not darken their day. The consolation of GOD it
is always with them as the Rainbow, giving light in the bright clouds,
Ecclus. 50.7
as the Son of Syrach speaks. It is the Covenant that he has established
with all those that are his. In whose afflictions (so he speaks by the mouth
of his Prophet) he himself is afflicted, Esa. 63.9.
and they on the other side are partakers of his Joy.

Hear the difference between the best estate of the ungodly and the worst of
the righteous. Thus says the Lord: Behold my Servants shall eat, but ye
shall be hungry. Esa. 65.13, 14, 15
Behold my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty. Behold my servants
shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed. Behold my servants shall sing for joy
of heart, and ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for vexation
of spirit. Esa 65.13, 14, 15. And thus much of the particulars of the parts of
the Repitition. Rejoice in hope, and Rejoice in tribulation.

Again I say Rejoice. Affectus contrarios discutimus contrarijs affectibus;
Rod. Agric. Dial. lib. 3.
says Rodulphus Agricola. As in the diseases of the body, so in the affections
of the mind, the cure for the most it is wrought by the contraries. So that
the Repetition, the earnestness of the Exhortation, it may be as a medicine to
heal the broken in heart, to salve the breach of the spirit, and on the other
side to cure the frenzy of the Soul. The mirth (or which is more proper) the
madness of fools; both these we may remove, we are to take them away with
the strong persuasion of the true and real, of the sollide and substantial
Joy. Bernd. Sermon. 59. parva and varij Sermones.
Revertere primo ab inepta laetitia, secundo abinutili tristitia, says St.
BERNARD. Rejoice always in the Lord; and again, it is a double exhortation,
and in effect it dehorts on every side, it dehorts from a two fold evil.
Return first from your vain, from your foolish, fond, and frivolous joy; and
again, from that in which their is no profit, that which drinks up the
Spirit, that which dries up the bones, sorrow and heaviness of heart.

For the first. Aquin. 12. d Quest. 31. articum. 8.
Aquinas in his Sums concludes; That there are some delights, as those of the
body, that are adverse and contrary to those of the Soul. So that the
opposites of joy and gladness, they are not only Sorrow but Joy. Such as that
in the 16. of St. John; Ioh. 16.20.
The Joy of the world. We have the same, or the like at least in the 15. Prove.
15.21
of the Proverbes. Folly is Joy unto him that is destitute of wisdom. And
again, Prove. 10.23
It is a sport (as the Wiseman speaks) to a Fool for to do mischief. That
which clothes with shame and covers with confusion of face, that which
swallows up with sorrow, even Sin it self, it is the glory and the
boasting; it is the recreation and the pleasure of the wicked. When he does
evil than he rejoices; As a mad man that casts firebrands arrows, and
death; and says, am I not in sport. So is every one that sins at his
pleasure, that delights in the works of iniquity, he is be sides himself,
he is not in his right mind. So that we may not but mourn at his mirth, we
cannot but weep for to see him laugh. This evil it is greater tha^ the other;
he is sick, and he knows it not; his soul it draws nigh unto hell, and yet
he is insensible of it: more than an Enemy, he laughs at his own calamity.
Pliny Latinus Paeatus inter Opera Plin.
Ad eorum vicem, qui, degustato Sardorum graminum succo, feruntur in morte
ridere. They write of a certain herb in Sardania, of which whosoever tastes,
he dies not long after laughing. It is so with the Iovialists, so with the
Drunkards in these our days; their grapes are grapes of gall, and their
clusters bitter. Deuteronomy. 32.32
Their wine it is the poison of Dragons, and the cruel venom of Aspes. They
bear about them the death not only of the body but of the Soul; and yet who
can but wonder, they spend their days in mirth, though in a moment they go
down into hell. Esa. 23.16.
Their mouths are filled with laughter, and as the Harlot in the 23. of Esaias.
They sing many Songs that they may be remembered. Sen. Epist.
But all this it is but hilaris insania, as the Stoicke speaks. And as a
wiser than he: I said of laughter it is mad, and of mirth, Eccles. 2.2.
what is this that thou do? With a kind of indignation and sorrow may our
eyes gush out with tears, at these wretched and deplored joys of the world,
with which we are to have no community, no society but in grief and
compassion. Thou man of God flee these things, and follow after Righteousness,
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost; but at the pleasures of this life, Psa. 137.1.
by the waters of Babylon sit down and weep, or at least take heed, that thou
do not taste thereof. What have thou to do in the way of Egypt, to drink
the waters of Sihor? Ier. 2.18.
Or what have thou to do in the way of Assyria, to drink the waters of the
River? Behold that which is of the Land of Promise, that which overfloweth his
banks in the time of Harvest; we have fountains of life, we have floods of
joy, Esaias. 8.6.
we have the waters of Siloh, that run softly; as a deep river though they
make not so much noise: they are far beneath, they are far above the
obstreperous joys of the wicked. And therefore drink of these waters above
the heavens; they are never deficient, they are neither fastidious nor
unpleasant. Drink (as it is in the Song of Songs,) yea drink abundantly,
Cant. 5.1.
O my beloved. Rejoice always in the Lord, and again, I say, Rejoice.

both the estate of grace and glory. Of that which concerns us, Grace; It is
the effect of a Comforter, it is spread abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost
which is given unto us; and therefore it requires alacrity and cheerfulness,
joy, and gladness; spirit and life in all our sacrifices, in the whole service
of GOD. If you offer the Lame and the Sick is it not evil? Malac. 1.8.
says the Prophet Malachy. Our oblations are odious, if in our prayers and
praise, if in our supplication and giving of thanks, we be overwhelmed with
heaviness, and swallowed up with sorrow. The living (says the Son of
Syrach) the living and sound in heart shall praise the Lord. Ecclesiasticus,
17.28. Cum, sit Lilium inter lilia commoratur, and cum sit candor delectatur
candidis. Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 71.
My beloved is white and ruddy, and as he is so he loves to be among the
Lillies. He rejoices to be with them that rejoice. The troubled spirit (...)
confess the broken and the contrite, it is a sacrifice to God; and so (without
doubt) so is the merry and joyful.

In the 8. of Nehemiah you may see; Neh. 8.9.
That the sanctity of Joy, it is not inferior (to say no more) it is not
inferior unto that of sorrow. This day (say the Levites that taught the
people) This day is holy unto the Lord your GOD, mourn not, nor weep. Do but
observe the words and you shall perceive not only an imparity between the
affections, but a kind of difference between sanctification and sorrow;
between Holiness and grief of mind; which for the most part interrupts and
hinders all divine and heavenly exercise. So that, though it be the curse of
the heart, though it breaks the strength, though it dries up the bones, it
is nothing so prejudicial to the body, as it is unto the health of the Soul,
in that which is her spirit and life, Preaching and Prayer.

For the first. Gregogius propter tristitiam Intermi sit Ezechielis
Expositionem; says Aquinas. Aquinas.
That blessed Bishop, a Master, a nursing father in Israel, by reason of
overmuch sorrow, he desisted from opening the book that is sealed from the
Interpretation of EZECHIEL the Prophet.

Now for the disciple and hearer. If affliction and sorrow be extreme, it so
oppresses the heart, it straightens it so, that a Barnabas, that he that
knows how to administer a word of comfort in his season, the Son of
consolation himself is not able to open it. Though MOSES and AARON be fitted
and prepared of the Lord, though they bring unto Israel glad tidings of great
joy, yet they will not hearken unto them, and the reason it is given for anguish
of spirit and cruel bondage. Exodus 6.9.


Now for Prayer. Muscae morientes corrumpunt vnguentum; Eccles. 10.
says the wise King. Dead Flies cause the ointment of the Apothecary to send
forth a stinking savor; So does bitterness and vexation of spirit, so does
anxiety and sorrow, it pollutes, it corrupts that which is as ointment powered
out. That which for the most part is a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor,
supplication and prayer. Ye have not yet half the Evil or the Sin of
sorrow. Semper malitiatur and contristat Spiritum sanctum; Athan apud Bern. de
mo^d^ been vovendi. Sermon. 11.
says Ancient ATHANASIVS. It is the poison of Dragons and the cruel venom
of Aspes; it is full of envy and malice; it grieves the Holy Ghost by which we
are sealed to the purchased possession. And not only so; but it takes off, or
at least it defaces the Seal of the spirit. Aug. apud Aquin. in Genesis 12.
JACOB (says Saint AUGUSTINE upon Genesis) Hoc timuisse videtur, ne tristitia
sic perturbaretur, vt non ad regnum beatorum iret, sed ad inferos peccatorum.
He that was an heir of the promise, the royal seed of the father of the
faithful, by reason of our much heaviness drew nigh unto hell: he was
afraid he should not go unto the place of bliss, not unto ABRAHAM'S bosom
but unto the Region of death, unto the Land of darkness. The ground of this
opinion I cannot conceive, how be it it is certain there is a diffidence and
distrust, there is fear and trembling, horror, and even almost despair in
the sorrow, not only for crosses and afflictions, but for transgression and
Sin. In the sorrows of the Saints, what advantage Satan has taken by the
grief which causes Repentance not to be repented of, by the hearty
contrition for sins committed against GOD, the near approaching of so many
afflicted souls unto death, whom the conscience of Sin (says that venerable
Hooker) has brought unto the very brinke of extreme despair, Hooker, Serus
does but too abundantly express: deep, disconsolate, and something diffident
is the sorrow of such as mourn in Syon, they sail lower than the Grave by the
gates of hell. They sail unto Heaven; hear I pray you their inundation, their
Sea of anxiety and sorrow. He has given us waters of gall to drink, Ierem.
8.14.
because we have sinned against him. Ier. 8.14. So the Prophet DAVID, though
he were of a sanguine complexion, and by consequence naturally cheerful,
though he were acquainted with the instrument of music, yet see how his Harp
is turned into mourning, and his Organ into the voice of them that weep. There
is no health in my flesh, because of thy displeasure, Psalm. 38.3.
neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sin: Psalm. 38.3. And
again: The sorrows of death compassed me, and the overflowing of
ungodliness made me afraid. Psa. 18.3.4
The pains of death came about me, and the snares of Hell overtooke me. These
and the like are the voice of the mourning Turtles, the Lamentations and
Threnes even of the Saints themselves, unto whom (not as if I did dissuade from
repentance, let them weep still, and still desire to weep) but let their
tears be as the rain in the Sunshine, comfortable and hopeful. We are to
inculcate consolation, Dr. Hall.
to preach the good and acceptable year of the Lord; to make them hear of joy
and gladness, that the bones that were broken might flourish; give strong
drink, the double exhortation in my Text, give strong drink unto him that is
ready to perish, Prove. 31.6.
and wine to those that are of heavy hearts. If the Apostle wrote to the
Corinthians, 2. Cor. 2.7.
concerning him that was guilty of a sin that was not so much as named
amongst the Gentiles themselves, to comfort him; least peradventure such an one
be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow: how should we power out our souls? How
should we heap our consolation on those; that come short of his sin, and yet
in sorrow do exceed? Comfort ye, Esaias. 4.1.2.
comfort ye my people, says your God; speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem,
and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, and that her sin is
pardoned.

See, there is remission, there is forgiveness for Man; and there is mercy
with God, it is over all his works, so and much more over ours. We cannot
offend so much as he is able to forgive. Neither may we imagine that our
sorrow is sufficient for sin, were our head a fountain of water; were our
breach as the Sea, did our eyes gush out with tears; should we weep as much
as the clouds from the beginning of the world until this very day; it were
too little to make our agreement with God; too little to wash away the least of
our sins. We have been with child (says the Prophet Esaias) such is the
grief, Esaias, 26.18.
the anguish of the soul, as the travel, as the labor of a woman. Will you
see the Son of our sorrows? But in respect of imputation it is nothing.
Parturivimus ventum; We have as it were brought forth wind; we have not
wrought any deliverance upon earth. Yet hear our consolation, hear that which
will make our wilderness like Eden, Esa. 51.3.
and our desert like the garden of the Lord. There is one that has wrought it
for us, Vir dolorum, that is his description in the Prophet. Esa. 53.3.
He is a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief far beyond that of
affliction or Repentance; Behold and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my
sorrow, Lam. 1.12.
which is done unto me. All that we suffer, all that we deplore, it is but a
drop to the Sea in respect of the Passion of our Savior. The reason: Aug. de
temp Sermon. 117.
Suscepit tristitiam nostram, vt largiretur laetitiam sua^: says St.
Augustine. Surely he has borne our grief, he has taken our sorrows upon
him, that he might communicate and impart his joy unto us. Now if one should
coequall the other, if our gladness should be correspo^dent to his grief; how
pregna^t, how unspeakable should be the joy of the Saints? With him you know
there is mercy and plentiful redemption. Oh let our rejoicing be as full, let
our exultation be answerable unto it. The ransommed of the Lord shall return
and come to Syon with Songs and everlasting joy upon their heads They shall
obtain joy and gladness, Esa. 35.10,
and sorrow, and sighing, shall flee away. It is the case of the contrite ones,
the estate of those that are reconciled unto him, whose works are
righteousness and peace; quietness and assurance for ever. Esa. 51, 22, 23.
Behold, I have taken out of thine hand the cup of trembling, even the dregs of
the Cup of my fury, thou shall no more drink it again, but I will put it into
the hand of them that afflict thee. They are the words of him that has sealed
us to salvation. That speaks peace unto the souls of his Saints. Wherefore
lift up the hands that hang down, and strengthen ye the feeble knees. Faint
not in the spirit of your minds. Love your own souls, and comfort your
hearts. Rejoice in hope, your names they are written in Heaven. And Rejoice in
tribulation, in the fiery trial, in temptation and assaults of Satan; as
being assured, that you are thoroughly fenced against them. We have a strong
city, Salvation has GOD appointed for walls and bulwarks, Esaias, 26.1. We
will therefore Rejoice in our salvation, Psalm. 20.5.
and triumph in the name of our GOD. To whom with the Father, and the
Holy Ghost, three persons and one GOD, be ascribed all Power, Praise, Majesty,
Might, and Dominion, both this day, and for evermore. AMEN, AMEN.

THE THIRD SERMON.
THe River of the Lord is full of water. Psalm. 65.11. Finally my brethren,
Rejoice in the LORD. To write the same things, to me indeed is not grievous,
but to you it is safe. Phil. 3.1. The Lord shall comfort Syon, he shall
comfort all her wast places, and make her wilderness like Eden, and her desert
like the garden of the Lord. Joy and gladness shall be found therein,
Thankesgiving and the voice of melody. Esa. 51.3. Levium metallorum fructus in
summo Est, illa Opulentissima Sunt, quorum in Alto lateT vena, assidue before
responsura fodienti. Seneca Epist. PHIL. 4.4. Again, I say; Rejoice.


IN that day the Lord called unto weeping and to mourning, Esa. 22.12, 13.
to baldness and girding with Sackcloath, and behold Joy and gladness; says
the Prophet Esaias. There is a generation as yet, that when iminent judgment
calls upon Repentance for sorrow and contrition, they mock at fear, and are
not afraid; they sing a Requiem to their souls; they solace themselves with
the pleasures (...) evil day far from them, that say Peace, peace, until
their destruction comes; that spend their days in mirth, and in a moment
they go down into hell. To sing this Song of Syon, to ingeminate joy unto
these, what were it else but to add unto drunkenness thirst? What were it
else, but to sow pillowes under the arms of security. Strange is the method of
joy; Psalm. 51.8.
the bones must be broken before they can flourish. They must first mourn, and
if so, blessed are they. Blessed are they that mourn, Math. 5.4.
for they shall be comforted. Who is he that makes me glad, 2 Cor. 2.2.
says St. PAVL, but he that was made sorry by me? His exhortation without
doubt, it was only unto those, whom he had made for to meditate terror;
only to those whom he had smitten with remorse of Conscience. Esa. 66.2.
Unto this man will I look (says the Lord) even unto him that is poor, and
of a contrite heart, and that trembles at my Word. Esa. 66.2. See the most
gracious aspect, the light of the countenance that is a thousand times more
clear than the Sun, it shines full upon those that sit in darkness, that
have the sentence of death in themselves. I dwell (says the Lord) in the high
and holy place; Esaias, 57.15
(and yet he humbles himself unto those that lie among the pots, that are
smitten into the place of Dragons) with him also that is of a contrite and
humble spirit, to receive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of
the contrite ones. Unto this purpose he speaks once, yea twice, but man
perceives it not. When the Sun is at height (in the midst of consolation)
lo darkness and sorrow; Esaias, 5.30.
Esa. 19.5.
And the light (as the Prophet speaks) is darkened in the heavens thereof. So
that once more, a third time (O if yet the soul of him that refuses comfort
would hear.) But the waters they fail from the Sea, and the Rivers are wasted
and dried up; all that has been spoken it is too little to the afflicted
Soul. So a third time am I to press you with the Exhortation of Joy. Rejoice
always in the Lord, and Again I say, Rejoice.

The Parts the last day were these.
Again. I say. Rejoice.
Of the former of these have I spoken plentifully already out of this place, it
was the subject of my whole discourse; and yet so true is that of St. Hierom,
Hierom.
Singula verba plena sunt sensibus. Much more might be spoken of it, howbeit I
intend not to build a new, but to work on the line that I laid the last day in
the later part of the Sermon.

Rod. Agric. lib. 3. Dial. cap. 3.
Again. Contrarioru^ affectus discutimus contrarijs affectibus; you remember
they are the words of Rodulphus Agricola. As in the diseases of the body, so
in the affections of the mind, the cure for the most part it is wrought by the
contrary. So that with this double Exhortation, we are to take away a twofold
evil. First, the joy that is enmity with this in my text, The joy of the
world; The sport unto him that is destitute of wisdom, The cracking of
thorns; The mirth or indeed the madness of fools. And on the other side, The
sore evil under the Sun; The supreme sickness of the soul, Sorrow; which,
as it is the rottenness of the bones, as it breaks the strength, as it
dries the marrow, as it drinks up the spirit; so it takes possession of all
in the whole, and all in every part. So that, as the Physician of the body, so
we of the soul are most troubled about the cure thereof; for besides the
inherency, besides the deepnesse of the disease, there is an inaptitude, more
there is an Antipathy, an opposition of health in the patient. Consol ad Mar.
cap. 5.
Partem mali putant audire solatia, says the Stoicke of such as are
overwhelmed with anguish. Do but administer comfort unto them, and you make
the breach the greater; do but speak of joy, and though you seek to asswadge,
yet in their opinion you do but increase their grief. As he that takes away
a garment in cold weather, and as vinegar upon niter; Prove. 25.20
so is he that sings songs unto an heavy heart. Proverbs, 25.20. See how
uncomfortable (That word not enough) how refractory, how contumacious is the
grief of an afflicted Soul. They say of sorrow that it is an oppression, a
straightning, a constriction of the heart; so indeed and it should seem so of
the senses also. Hence I suppose that in respect of the sullenness, or indeed
the stupidity of sorrow is that figure Prosopopeia, of speaking to things
inanimate, such as have neither eyes nor see not, neither ears nor hear not,
neither passes their breath through their nostrils, so obvious and common in
the word of the Lord. Sing O ye heavens, Esaias, 44.23
for the Lord has done it; showt ye lower parts of the earth; break forth
into singing O ye mountains; Esa. 49.13.
O Forest and every tree therein; for the Lord has redeemed, and glorified
himself in Israel. Esa. 44.23. So in the 49. Chapter, and 13. verse. In
exprobation of their diffidence and fear; because of their sorrow and distrust
he turns aside to his creatures, he speaks unto things without sense, as if
they would sooner hear than the distressed Soul. Sing, O heaven, and be
joyful O earth, and break forth into singing O ye mountains; for God has
comforted his people, and will have mercy upon the afflicted. But Syon said;
The Lord has forsaken me, and the Lord has forgotten me. It is the true
dialect of the Malcontent, of the disconsolate Christian, that he is not in
the state of Grace, that the deliverer is far from him, that the Lord has
cast him out of his sight, that he is destitute, forlorn, and forsaken: and
so long; though you have the tongue of the Eloquent, though your lips drop
like an hony-combe, though your mouth flow with the precious balm of Gilead,
all your consolations they are but as delicates powered upon a mouth that is
shut up. They are but as messes of meat upon a Grave, Ecclus. 30.18.
as the Son of Syrach speaks.

You have now the nature of Sorrow, a full expression of the anguish of the
Spirit, it is deaf and stupid, it is both obstinate and stubborn, and yet we
may not despair of the cure thereof, nor sin against God in ceasing to
administer medicine for to heal their sickness. What if the Earth be of
iron, shall the Heavens be brass? God forbid. Let them rather melt with
compassion, let them rather dissolve into showers, let them water the hills
from above, let them make soft the clouds thereof with the drops of the former
and the later rain. Gutta cavat lapidem. So without doubt the assiduity of
consolation, the continual dropping of comfort, it cannot but pierce through
sorrow, it cannot but enter into the most obstructedst heart. And therefore as
the rain comes down, and the snow from heaven, and turns not thither, but
waters the earth, and makes it to bring forth and bud, Esa. 55.10.
(...) Neque enim bonis mediocribus gaudent, Latinus Pacatus inter Plinij opera.
qui exultandi modum non habent. They are no mean things (the object in Grace
it always exceeds the affection) they are no mean things that can cause an
indificient, a bound less and unlimitted Joy. All gold (as the supposed
Solomon of wisdom) it is as a little sand, and silver well may be accounted
even as clay before them. They are the first fruits of the Spirit; they are
peace, tranquillity of mind; they are the testimony of a good Conscience, they
are quietness and assurance for ever. August. in Psalm. 57.
Et qui in via sic pascit; quomodo in patria saginabit? Says St. Augustine.
He that feeds us in Egypt; he that in the wilderness, in a dry and barren
land where no water is, gives us drink out of a Rock. O what will he do when
we come unto Canaan, when we shall taste of his cup and drink of the wine that
he has mingled. Then shall our joy be full pressed, and running over; it is so
already, it shall then be more, more than the repetition, more than the
amplification can express. Our hearts shall be enlarged as the Sea; our
souls shall be satisfied with the plenteousnesse of his house; and he shall
give us drink out of his pleasures as out of a river. Chris. Aur. Cat.
Maiora erunt premia quam desideria Sanctorum. The satiety of Saints shall be
more than their hunger, their happiness shall out-reach their desires. Thus
much of the Repetition. Again.

I proceed to the person exhorting expressed, or at least employed in the Verb,
I say; Dilectus meus locutus est. It is the voice of my beloved, Cant. 2.8.
the voice of GOD and not of man, of him that speaks by the mouth of the
Prophets, and Apostles, who are all but the pen of that ready writer. What they
have received from him, they deliver unto us; and they that are anointed with
the Spirit, they know who it is that speaks, his sheep they hear his voice;
If any man think himself to be a Prophet or Spiritual, 1 Cor. 14.37
let him acknowledge that the things that I write unto you, they are the
commandments of the Lord. 1. Corinthians. 14.37. See, the words of the Apostle
they are the Oracles of GOD; and if so, as so without doubt, hear another
ingemination, The repetition and more, the double exhortation, it speaks not
with so much power as the person. I. For the Sons of men we know what they
are, Job. 13.4.
Physicians of no value, says that upright and Just man. Job. 16.2.
Miserable comforters are they all. I looked on my right hand, (says the
Prophet DAVID) and there was no man that would know me. Psa. 142.4, 5
I had no place for to fly unto, no man cared for my Soul. So in the 69.
Psalm, 21. verse. I looked for some to have pity upon me, but there was no
man, neither found I any to comfort me.

Now for our selves: though we are all right dear in our own eyes; though
benevolous and well affected to felicity and joy. Yet there is no man that
quickens his own soul; all consolation it is from without. If I said I will
forget my complaint (says JOB, Job, 9.27, 28.
) I will leave off my heaviness and comfort my self, I am afraid of all my
sorrows. So the Prophet JEREMY: When I would comfort my self against sorrow,
my heart is faint within me. Ierem. 8.18. Ier. 8 18.
The true nature of grief, it is so with all those that are in anguish, of
spirit; as they that are fallen they need another man's hand for to lift them
up. O how happy then are we that are raised from the gates of death, that are
comforted on every side, not of others, not of our selves, but by the God of
all consolation and peace. I say: there is power and spirit, there is
authority, there is life and emphasis in the word; and he that speaks it with
a double expression, will have it deeply to be observed of us. I, even I am
he that comfort thee, who art thou that thou should be afraid? Esaias,
51.12. Esa. 51.12.
Afraid of man, says the Prophet. I may add principalities and powers, such
as neither slumber nor sleep. The girdle of their loins is not loosed, nor
the latchet of their shoes broken. Their wheels are like a whirlewinde, and
their charriots as swift as the wings of an Eagle. Who art thou, that thou
should be afraid of all the armies of hell? Are the consolations of God
small with thee, said Eliphaz unto Job. Chap. 15. v. 11. Job, 15.11.
Were our estate as his, were our grief thoroughly weighed, and laid in the
balances together; yet behold a far more excellent, a far more immense and
ponderous weight of Joy. He that comfort those that are cast down, he
thinks toward us thoughts of peace, and with all earnestness he expresses
the same. Hear the word of the Lord ye that tremble at his word, Fear thou
not, for I am with thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy God, I will strengthen,
I will help thee, yea I will uphold thee with the right hand of my
righteousness. Esaias, 41.10. Esa. 41.10.


See, how full, how copious is the consolation of the Lord? But not a world of
words, not the tongue of men and Angels can express it so much as the person,
as this one thing, that it is his. Prove. 27.9.
Ointment and perfume they rejoice the heart, says Solomon: so does the
sweetness of a man's friend; how much more the consolation of Heaven? The
sweetness of the Lord himself: Anima lique sacta est, Cant. 5.6.
My soul melted when my beloved spoke. Cant. 2.14.
His voice it is sweet and his countenance lovely. The friend of the
Bridegroom which stands and hears him rejoices greatly because of the
bridegroomes voice. Ioh. 3.29.
So at all times, but especially when his voice of joy, Psalm. 137.4.
which with us upon earth is as a Song of Syon in a strange Land, in the world
you shall have affliction, while by the waters of Babylon, until the Lord
turn again the captivity of his people. It is the Antheme of the Enemy, for
the most part we hear of nothing but trouble and distress. But be it, as
the Son of Syrach speaks, Ecclus. 40.20.
that Wine and music rejoice the heart; Esa. 9.3.
or as the Prophet Esaias. That there be a Joy in harvest, or of those that
divide the spoil. All these, if the comforter that should relieve our Soul
be far from us, all these they are nothing at all. Domino privante suo
gaudio, Cyril. Alexandrinus.
quodnam potest esse gaudium? (says St. Cyril,) If the Lord deprive us of the
joy that is his, alas what is our joy? What but sorrow? But anguish and
bitterness of spirit? And on the other side: If he that comfort the wast
places of Jerusalem; If he that satiates the weary Soul make us for to hear
of Joy and gladness: when he gives quietness, who then can make trouble:
Job, 34.29. Job. 34.29.
Though the earth be moved, and though the hills be carried into the midst
of the Sea, Psalm. 46.2, 3, 4.
though the waters thereof rage and swell, though the mountains shake at the
tempest of the same. The rivers of the flood, the consolations of heaven shall
make glad the city of God. I am he that comfort thee, who art thou that
thou should be afraid? I say Rejoice. So sometimes within by the same spirit
that makes intercession for us with sighs that cannot be uttered, he
comfort us in all our griefs, he makes us glad with the joy of his
countenance; he prophesies good things and speaks peace to our Souls. So
that we may not say now as the Children of Israel unto MOSES. Speak thou
with us and we will hear, but let not the Lord speak unto us, Exodus 20.19
least we dye. Nay rather let the Lord (his voice it is not of Law but of
Gospel, it is of Joy not of fear.) Let the Lord, as a man with his friend,
speak unto us, face to face. Or, which is the same, let his spirit talk and
communicate with our spirit, that our joy might be full. Behold he does this,
and more also: he speaks not only within, but his voice it sounds in our
ears from without; from his word; from the ministers of the manifold graces of
God; from the disposers of the unsearchable riches of the Gospel.

1. King. 19.12.
There was a soft and still voice, and the Lord (as the Text does imply) was in
it.) So in the word of God, especially of Peace, GOD in effect is that Word:
and therefore it speaks with Spirit and power, it is mighty and lively in
operation, it puts more gladness into our hearts, than their wine and oil,
than all that the Earth can yield. Thy words were found and I did eat them.
And, thy word was unto me the Joy and rejoicing of mine heart, Ierem. 15.16.
Ier. 15 16.
You have seen how in the water, face answers face, so does the effect
resemble the word of the Lord. Double the Exhortation of Joy, and so the Echo
unto it double. In Gods word, Psalm. 56.10.
will I rejoice; In the Lords word will I comfort me, says the sweet Singer of
Israel. Who for all his Instruments of music, had not his delight, had not
his joy been in the Law of the Lord, had not his Statutes been his Songs in
the house of his pilgrimage, he had utterly fainted; in his own phrase, he
had perished in his trouble. Heaviness in the heart of man makes it stoop,
Prove. 12.25
but a good word makes it glad, says that wise King. So that from the lips of
a friend, so and much more; if from the father of rain, if from him that has
begotten the drops of dew; Job, 38.24.
and therefore in the multitude of the sorrows that he had in his heart, in
his anxiety and distress he flies not to his Lute and Harp (the Pipe and the
Psaltery make sweet music; Eccles. 40.21.
but a pleasant tongue is beyond them both) he flies not (I say) unto these,
but unto that, which is beyond the choice in the book of the Preacher of
men-singers and women-singers, beyond musical Instruments, and that of all
sorts, the word of the Lord. Psalm. 119. part 4. v. 4.
My soul melts away for very heaviness. O comfort thou me according to thy
word. And again in a branch of the same Psalm, O think upon thy servant as
concerning thy word, Par. 7.1, 2. v
where in thou have caused me to put my trust. The same is my comfort in my
trouble, for thy word has quickeneed me.

So there is a vivification, there is a resurrection, there is as it were a
raising from the dead in the faith of the truth, in the affiance of all those
promises that are Yea and Amen. The words that he spoke they were spirit and
life. And therefore as Peter said sometimes; Whither or to whom shall we go,
Ioh. 6.68.
thou have the words of Eternal life. In the day of distress, in the evil
hour, when we are destitute, afflicted, and tormented; where should we
solace our selves, where may we find any ease, but in the word of mercy and
truth, but in the word of the Lord? Sen. Epist. 99, 172
Infantium fletum infuso lacte compescimus, says Seneca. And our observation
the same: we still the cry, we take away the tears of our little ones, with
the bosom, with the breast of the Mother. So (grace in this it imitates Nature)
in the anguish of the Soul, in the bitterness of Spirit, to silence our
sorrows, to quiet discontent, we have no other means, but the sincere milk
of the Word. Matter Ecclesia, Aug. Tract. 3 in Epist. Iohannis. Sub Initio.
and vbera eius duo testamenta divinarum Scripturarum, says St. Augustine. The
Church is our Mother, her breasts are the two Testaments of the Scriptures,
whence she gives her children suck. In effect, we have the same similitude
in the Prophet Esaias. Esa. 66.13.
As one whom his Mother comfort, so will I comfort you. Hear this, ye that
mourn in Syon. Come hither all ye that are weary and heavy laden. In the
evil day, in the heat of affliction, in what estate soever you are; Lo, a
hiding place from the wind, Esaias, 32.2.
a covert from a tempest, a shadow of a rock in a weary Land. We have Moses
and the Prophets, more we have Evangelists and the Apostles, we have a Mother
that we may suck and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolation, Esaias,
66.11.
as the Prophet speaks.

Zach. 4.12.
They are as the olive branches in the Prophet Zachary, which our of the
golden pipes empty the golden oil out of themselves. They are as the Clouds.
Eccles. 11.3
Ecclesiastes, 11. full of rain, that water the earth. They are as the
Mountains in Joel, that drop new wine, Joel, 3.18.
and as the hills, that flow with milk. In a word; Esa. 61.1.
the Comforter him self, the Spirit of the Lord is upon them, Esa. 50.4.
he has anointed them that may know how to speak a word in his season unto
him that is weary; Esaias, 61.2.
to preach good tidings to the meek, Eccl. 17.24.
to comfort those that fail in patience, to repair the breach, to strengthen
with the mouth; and as that upright and just man speaks, Job, 16.5.
with the moving of the lips to assuage grief. To cause the widows heart, or
that which is far more afflicted, Job, 29 13.
to cause the contrite and broken to sing, to raise up the soul, to give life,
Eccles. 34.17.
health, and blessing. All these things works one and the self same spirit;
by that which he has shed forth among us, by the words that he has put into
the mouth of his Sons of consolation, of the helpers of your joy, so are they
styled by Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 1.24
although in your opinion not so; but supercilious and austere, the very death
of your feasts, and the interrupters of your mirth. For this cause, as if they
were made to reprove your thoughts, Wisd. 2.14, 15.
as if they were grievous unto you to behold, as if their lives were of another
fashion; when you would forget your sorrows, when you would be excused of the
upbraidings of your Conscience, when you would shake off the terrors of the
Soul, you seek the society of vain men; you join your selves (as if Satan
could cast out Satan) unto those that can preach of Wine and strong drink,
they shall be even the Prophets of this people; unto those that laugh their
sins out of countenance, and deride the sorrows and Repentance of the
righteous. But alas (beloved) what mirth, but shall be turned into sorrow,
what mirth, but that which is the bread of mourners, all that eat thereof
shall be poluted, Hos. 9.4.
can this laughter of Fools administer unto you? Would you exile discontent?
Do ye seek after joy? Ecclus. 9.16
Let the Just man (as the Son of Syrach speaks) let the just man eat and
drink with you. 2 Cor. 12.14
Or at least ( for I will not (says St. Paul) be burdensome unto you,) do
you so with him. Eat of his bread and drink of the wine that he has mingled.
Prove. 11.5.
His lips (O how sweet is his breath) they abound with consolation and joy;
and therefore how can you but affect his communication and society? 2 Samuel
18.27.
He is a good man (as DAVID said of AHAMAAZ) he is a good man and comes
with good tidings. He is a medicine of life (as the Son of Syrach speaks of
a faithful friend) and they that fear the Lord shall find him. Eccles. 6.16
Slight him as much as you may, Job, ^9.25.
he is as a King in an Army, says JOB; As one that comfort the mourners,
he strengthens the weak hands, he confirms the feeble knees; Esa. 35.3, 4.
he says to them that be of a fearful heart, Esa. 21.14.
be strong, fear not; he brings wine to the thirsty, and prevents those that
faint for bread.

These (beloved) such are they whose ways are grievous unto you; the Preachers
of peace, the ministers of the Spirit. And how is it then, will some man say?
Nay, it is the demand of the Lord himself: How is it that the health of the
Daughter of my people is not recovered? Ier. 8.22.
Job, 24.12.
Behold the tears of the oppressed, and they have no Comforter; men groan out
of the City, and the soul of the wounded cries out; There is Lamentation and
mourning, there are sighs even to the breaking of the loins; There are threnes
of the poor in spirit; and yet, as if they may not be comforted, as if their
wounds were incurable, there is none to bind them up. Ier. 30.13. Esa. 1.6.
They have no healing medicines, as the Prophet speaks, for such as should
be Physicians in Israel, they are as St. Cyprian says of Novatian; they are
like the Levite or the Priest in the Gospel, that are so far from pouring
Oil into the wounds of the poor Samaritane, Cyprian ad Novationum Haereticum
Epist.
Vt Ingeniosa and nova potius crudelitate occiderent. They speak the piercings
of swords; their teeth are spears and arrows, and their lips of knives,
nothing but Law and that louder than Synai, nothing but thundering, but a storm
and tempest is sounded in the ears of the bruised Spirit, in the hearing of
the wounded Soul. Plinij Epist. lib. 20.
(...), as Pliny has it of Pericles. Such sons of Thunder as these. Solatium
aeternae spei adimunt, arborem a radice subvertunt, Cyprian.
navem ad scopulos ne perveniat illidunt. They take away all hope of salvation;
They overturne the tree by the roots; They dash the ship least it should come
to the haven where it should be, they dash it against the rocks: If the Lord
be angry, yea but a little, they help forward the affliction, they bind one
evil to another, they persecute him whom sin has smitten, and they talk
how they may vex those whom their own Conscience have wounded. So that in the
labor of Repentance, in the travel of contrition, to multiply sorrows there
are they that are ready to strangle the fruit of the Soul. I have heard a
voice, Ier. 4 31.
as of a woman in travel, (says the Lord) as of her that brings forth her
first Child, saying; The voice of the Daughter of Syon, Ier. 4 31.
that bewayleth herself, that spreads her hands, saying; Woe is me because
of murderers. Ier. 4 3^. There are such as these even until this very day;
there are man-slayers of the Soul; there are bloody Preachers, that if it were
possible would murder Saints themselves with the edge of their words, their
tongues that are set on fire of hell; That speak nothing but despair, nothing
but death and destruction. And what then, beloved? What shall we judge of
these? Do they bring tidings from a far Country? Are they come out from
God? No, they bring a vision of their own, and not of the mouth of the Lord,
whose song it is of Mercy and Judgment: Psalm. 101.1.
Though of Judgment, a Song; and for the most part his mercy rejoices against
it. Iam. 2.13.


Hear, I pray you, how he bemones his people? Ierem. 8.22.
Is there no balm in Gilead? Is there no Physician in Israel? And again:
these things are come upon thee; Esa. 51.19.
desolation, and destruction and the famine, and the sword, by whom shall I
comfort thee? How much more is he solicitous about the consolation of those
that are pressed above measure, that are crushed with the weight of their sins,
that are affrighted with the horror of hell? With a fearful expectation not of
these light and momentany, not of temporal but eternal judgments? To him that
is afflicted pity should be showed from his friend, so says Nature it self;
Job, 6.14.
So Grace; So the Lord by the mouth of his servant Job. How much more is it his
pleasure in a case of conscience, that the plaster should cover the wound.
That consolation should spread, and effectually answer the anguish of the
Soul, the sorrow of his Saints. Hence the large, the exundant command to his
Prophet, Esa. 33.21.
hence that place of broad waters and streams, Comfort ye, Comfort ye my
people, says your God: Esa. 40.1, 2.
Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem. And again, O Jerusalem that bring
glad tidings lift up thy voice, Esaias, 40 9.
lift it up with strength. Now (beloved) you have the person exhorting. I say.
First, he speaks by himself. Secondly, he speaks by his word. And thirdly,
by those that tread out the new wine, by those that breathe (as it were) the
Holy ghost upon us. So you how on every side he confirms his love toward
you. 2. Cor. 2.8.
And how then (to make some use of the point) how shall we grieve that God,
that comfort us in all our griefs? how shall we do despite unto the
Spirit that at all times, that in every place administers joy and consolation
unto us. Do ye remember how inhumane was the Act of Haman in the 2. Sam. when
David sent to comfort him by the hand of his servants. He returned hatred for
his goodwill. 2 Samuel 10.4
He evil entreated the messengers. He shaued the half of their beards, and
cut off their garments in the middle.

Beloved; as much as in us lies we do the same: The same, and more also. When
with sins of malice we affront his goodness. When we oppose with
presumptuous wickedness the comforts that he administers unto us, we do
despite (that is the word) we do despite unto the spirit of Grace, and so to
our selves we sin against our own Souls. So that instead of a comforter,
for joy and gladness what can we expect, but a trembling heart, but failing
of eyes and sorrow of mind? What can we expect but the same which happened unto
Hanun, and more also. Sen. Epist.
That the Lord (vt a nobis tractatur, ita nos tractat.) That the Lord set
himself in array against us, that he muster up his charriots and come forth
with all his armies that are created for vengeance. They rebelled (says the
Prophet of the house of Israel) they rebelled and vexed his Spirit. Hear what
immediately follows: Therefore was he turned to be their enemy, and fought
against them. Esa. 63.10. Esaias, 63.10


When I am in heaviness I will think upon God; Psalm. 77.4.
(says he that had as much as a Kingdom can yield for to comfort his soul)
but all these things (it should seem) they were not enough to make him to
forget his sorrow. Are there among the vanities of the Gentiles that can cause
rain; Ier. 14.22.
(says the Prophet Jeremy) or can the heathens give showers. So may I say of
the pleasures of Pharaohs Court, of the delights of the Sons of men; Are
there any but are clouds without water, any that can power out comfort, and
drop the least consolation and joy? Behold and condole the deplored estate of
the daughter of Syon. She wepeeth sore (says the Prophet) in the night, Lam.
1.2.
and the tears are on her checkes. Among all her lovers she has none to
comfort her, all her friends have dealt treacherously with her. They are become
her enemies. It is the case of all such as have emptyed themselves from vessel
to vessel; that have lived in pleasure; That have walked according to the
desires of the flesh in the time of visitation, in the day of affliction. So
far are their familiar friends, so far are the sins, the unfruitful
works of unrighteousness from wiping away tears, from speaking of peace,
from preaching joy and gladness unto them that they power out their gall upon
the ground, they break them with breach upon breach, they wound to the soul,
and torment them with their own abominations. Hear the consolation of
pleasure, hear the comfort of Sin. Walk in the light of the fire, and in
the sparks that ye have kindled. This shall you have at my hands; Esa. 50.11.
you shall lie down in your Sorrows. Now for the Creatures. Say that the soul
turn unto them, as JOB of his friends, Job 16.2.
miserable comforters are they all, not able to afford the least consolation
unto it. Quocunque se convertit in rebus terrenis amaritudinem Invenit, August.
in Psalm. 45.
vnde dulcescat non habet, nisi levet se ad Deum: says St. AUGUSTINE on the
Psalms. Which way soever it turns it finds nothing but vexation and
bitterness, it has no joy in any thing under the Sun, unless it lift it
self up to the Lord. Wherefore when thine heart is vexed within thee. When
thou look for some to have pity upon thee, and there is no man, no sin,
no pleasure, no Creature to comfort thee; Acquaint thy self with GOD; Job,
22.27.
as ELIPHAZ said unto JOB, and so shall GOD come unto thee. For the World it
cries, Ego deficiam; I will leave you. The Flesh, Ego inficiam, (says Saint
BERNARD, Bernard.
) I will corrupt you. The Devil, Ego interficiam, I will destroy you; Let us
hear now what the Lord will say to our Soul. Ego Reficiam. Come unto me all
ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will refresh you. Dico, Gaudete.
Again, I say, Rejoice.

the end of the verse. Arth Eth. 7
Finis Architectus, says the Philosopher. It is that which sets all our action
on foot. Aquinas.
The first in intention; and in effect, in operation. The first, in every
work; and therefore it should seem it is the same with felicity, it is the
soul of that which we affect with our souls. O how happy then are we? How
good and gracious is the Lord, that spurs nature with grace? That adds wings
to the Dove? That so earnestly incites us unto that, which we affect of our
selves? The most supreme and sovereign good, or at least the affection which
makes it so unto us, Neh. 8.10.
It is our strength (says Nehemiah.) The gladness of the heart, Ecclus. 30.22.
it is the life of man, (says the Son of Syrach.) It does good like a
medicine, Prove. 15.15
it is a continual feast, says the wise King. Yet all these they speak not
so much as our Savior. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my Name. Ask, Ioh.
16.24.
and ye shall receive, that your Joy may be full. Gaudium plenum petant,
August. in Johan.
says St. Augustine upon St. John. Quoniam si aliquid aliud petant, idem
aliquid nihil est. Let them ask, that their joy might be full; for whatsoever
they shall crave besides this, it is not worth the asking, in comparison it is
less than nothing unto it. O what shall we render, what shall we say unto
thee! O thou Preserver of men? We know that thou art more ready to give, than
we for to ask: Yet with the same earnestness that thou speak unto us;
(Seek ye my face; Thy face Lord will I seek:) with the same earnestness we
pray unto thee. Grant us (O thou Father of every good and perfect gift, Iam
1.17.
) grant us joyfulnesse of heart, and that peace may be in our days, Ecclus.
50.23.
and in thy Israel for Ever. This is not enough: Though we are less than the
least of thy blessings, give us yet more; what will thou give us? More than
peace and plenty, more than their Wine and Oil, more than the beasts on a
thousand hills. O Remember us with thy favor, Psa. 106.4, 5
visit us with thy Salvation; that we may see the felicity of thy chosen, and
rejoice with their Joy, the joy of thy salvation, and establish us with thy
free Spirit. To whom, with thee (O Father) and the Son. Three persons, and
one God, be all Land, Power, Praise, Majesty, might, and Dominion, both this
day, and for Evermore. AMEN, AMEN.

Errata from page 1. unto 113.
PAge 5. line 7. read Coacervation. Page 6 l. 2. read Perepatetickes. Ibid. p.
l. 6. r. Perturbationes. p. 30. l. 21. r. Sinner. p. 42. l. last, read 2. p.
44. l. 5. r. Enfolding. p. 46. l. 2. r. Ont. Ibid. p. l. 5. r. Soones. ibid. p.
l. 15. wants Never. p. 61. l. 20. r. a great. p. 64. l. 3. r. Employed. p. 74 l.
15. r. Veneris. p. 85. l. 19. r. Vincunt. p. 99. l. 6. r. Over. p. 111. l. 7.
read Immanent.

CAuse thy belly to eat, and fill thy bowels with this Roll. Ezech. 3.3.
Gather ye Wine, and Summer fruits, and Oil, and put them in your vessels.
Ierem. 40.10. I have eaten my Hony-combe with my honey, and drunken my Wine
with my milk. Eat O friends, drink; yea drink abundantly, O my beloved.
Cantic. 5.1. Quando veniet tempus vt pere^nibus gaudijs in ipso Divinitatis
font profundius immergamur, vbi vnda vndam sine Interrapidine and
interpositione contineat? Bernard. de verb. Ap. Non est verbum Dei esca, etc.
RAPSODIA.
THou that would master thine affection so,
To mourn in mirth, and to triumph in woe.
To sing a song of Syon in a Land
Of strangeness, rudeness, barbarism: and
In wealth to exercise true lowliness,
Jn Poverty abundant patience.
Jn sicknesses a faithful constant mind,
In health an heart to thankfulness inclined.
Thou that desir'st to sigh out hourly breath,
Expressing death in life, and life in death.
Whose drossie part on Earth does Worme-like glide,
Whilst that celestial spark in Heaven does bide.
Like to that pair of Saints in azure shrowdes
Paul and Elias wrapped above the clouds.
Thou that of all annoy would be bereaven;
Read here an heavenly Earth, and earthly Heaven.
R. B.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by B. Alsop and T. Fawcet, for NATH: BVTTER, 1631.


