A DISCOVERY OF CERTAIN ERROVRS PVBLISHED IN PRINT IN the much commended
Britannia. 1594. Very prejudicial to the discentes and successions of the
ancient Nobility of this Realm.

By York Herault.

Quam quisque norit artem, in hac se exerceat. TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, ROBERT
EARL OF ESSEX, Earl Marshal of England, Viscount Hereford, and Bourchier, Lo.
Ferrers of Chartley, Bourchier and Louayne, Knight of the most Noble order of
the Garter. etc. Lord general of her Majesty's Forces in her Realm of
Irelande. And to all other the Nobility of England.
RIght Honorable, having upon deligent search, apprehended within the compass
of my profession, and science of Heraldry, certain errors in descentes and
successions, such as may be scandolous to the gray hears of Antiquity, and
prejudicial to the branches of our Nobility; I thought it my duty to
present them as Captives at your Honors feet, being the undoubted Champion of
truth, and the worthy Marshall of all Heroike magnanimity and honor: unto
whom I humble my self for a favorable censure, and protection of this my
poor service. As no child is so deformed, but the father commonly has a
natural affection toward it: so these errors will no doubt, be both
fathered and favored of the Author; whose reputation for Learning is so great,
and beard of Antiquity lately grown so long, that the goodly Britannia,
Mother of us all, is become his daughter, trained up, and taught to speak
Latin in his School; only she lisps, and makes no good congruitie in these
principles of Herauldy: For which I challendge him; not that my exception, and
challendge, is about the words and terms of our Art, (that is the least)
but touching the falsifiyng of Noble discentes, depriving some Nobles of issue
to succeed them, who had issue, of whom are descended many worthy families.
Naming others to have but one sole Daughter and heir, when they had diverse
Sons and Daughters. Denying Barons, and Earls, that were: and making Barons
and Earls of others, that were not: mistaking the Father for the Son, and
the Son for the Father: affirming legittimate children to be illigittimate,
and illigittimate to be legittimate: those to be basely borne, who were in
deed descended of very honorable Parentage: assigning Arms, and ensigns of
Honor to others not their own. Lastly, the framing incestious and unnatural
marriages, making the Father to marry his Sons wife, and the Son his own
Mother. These, and such like matters of importance, are the errors that I
have examined, and attached, to abide your Honors censure and reformation: For
whom, with bowed heart and knee, I pray to God, for all increase of honor, hearts
contentment, and happy victory.

Your Honors in all duty, Ra. Brook, York Herault at Arms.

TO MASTER CAMDEN.
WHere as You expect thanks at the hands of her Majesty's Heraults, for
entermedling so sparingly and gently with that, which appertains to their
profession. Contrary to your expectation, and answerable to your deserts, my
self (being the most unable) have undertaken to answer your unkind speeches:
as also your untrue, and erroneous writing touching matters of our profession
and science, published in your Britannia. In deed you dealt but sparingly, and
after a sort gently (as you say) in the handling of our mysteries at the first:
but in your fourth and last Edition (though your Preface spoke as it did,
sparingly still) yet your Book has swelled with large additions of
Herauldrie: in which you have (by your patience) been too busy, and venterous;
except your proceedinges, in those points, had been more firmly grounded upon
experience. And I doubt not, but the grouth and increase of your Book has
sprung from some of those Heraults labors, which you so much hold in scorn.
Nay, it can not be denied, but since the death of Glouer, late Somerset
Herault. 1588. you have gleaned not only handfuls, but whole sheaues, out of
his industrious collections, being reserved in the Library of that Honorable
Lord Treasurer deceased, and by that means incommoned to your use, and free
recourse. I would his Gloves might have fitted your hands in such sort, as you
might have smoothly carried them away: his Notes (I mean) I wish you had
neither misunderstood, nor misreported; as contrariwise you have, in such
palpable manner, that (me thinks) ever hereafter you should distrust your self
in the search of such mystical points, without the advice of an Herault
better experimented then your self. I prognosticate already, what
entertainment in these mine aduertisementes, I shall have: It will be objected
from your self, that I understand not your Book. I confess mine
intelligence not so great, but my fear is the greater, and my care the more,
to understand you by helps; so that the trust in my self is the less: And
this suspicion (I hope) will force me to make sure work in that I undertake.
Valor (they say) may be too bold, and Learning too full of quillities: the
one standing more upon the bravery of his fight, then the goodness of the
quarrel: the other, more upon the generality of his knowledge, then the
truth of his cause. The mother tongue of every Nation (as you affirm) is the
best conseruer of Original names: And your self endeavor to get a more ample
credit in History, by auouching that you have read over many home-bredd
Historinas. By your example therefore, I am induced to believe that English
Authors, and English Heraults (though they have concealed their trauayles from
the world, and not published a Rapiamus general upon every light occasion)
are to be credited for the truth of English successions, discentes, and
reports, of all honorable designementes. Again, who is more unfit to describe
the truth of actions in their proper nature, then such affectate Nouices, as
have their mouths and pens running over with the foaming Must of vn-refined
Eloquence? who chouse rather to let the truth of the matter slip, then to
abate one title of their selfe-pleasing phrase. Therefore, I have heard meny
great statsmen affirm, that the Court has affourded more absolute Wisemen for
any active employment in the Commonwealth, then the Schools: which falls out
especially, because to these proceedinges of the one in Art, there has not
been added some lecture of discretion to qualify the same withal; which is to
be had daily by examples, and practice in the other. And doubtless for a mere
Scholar to be an Historian, that must take up all by hearesay, and uncertain
rumors, not being acquainted with the secrets, and occurrences of state
matters, I take it (as many others affirm with me) very unfit, and dangerous.
I hope you will (in some sort) acknowledge this to be true, if indifferently
you take a view of these errors by your self committed; a man of so rare
knowledge, and singular industry. Yet no one man so generally well seen in
all things, but an inferior person in some one special matter, may go
beyond him. In regard whereof, contemn not these few Collections of mine
(wherein I have not vaunted my Learning, but cleared the truth, according to
the oath and profession of an Herault) unless learnedly with truth you confute
the same: Until then, I bid you farewell.

A DISCOVERY OF DIVERSE ERRORS, PVBLISHED IN PRINT ANNO 1594, prejudicial to
the discents and successions of most of the ancient Nobility of this Realm.
TVtburie castle was built by Henry Lo. Ferrars a Norman, Tutburie.
unto whom William the first gave large possessions* which Robert Earl
Ferrars and Derbie, his grandchild (by his son Robert) lost, by reuolting
the second time from king Henry the third. Page 447. THe Catholic credit of
your great learning, (which might have been a clubbe to daunt the courage of
unlettered Heralds, and cause them to retire the field, from encountering with
you) has been the drum that has summoned me out, not as a champion, but as
a defendant (by my oath and profession) for the trial of the truth, and defense
of the unspotted honor of Arms, and ancient Nobility. The sacred body of
my sweet and native Country Britannia, I embrace. The phrases of your
scholler-like language, I esteem as gorgeous ornaments upon a Matrone that is
naturally beautiful: the relics of industrious Leyland, together with his
farre-fetched and dear bought Antiquities, I admire: almost I had said adore,
but for religion sake. Only the disgrace of ancient Herauldie: (wherewith
England has much flourished in former age,) the empeachment of many
illustrious families, the misreport of many honorable discents, and the
dangerous errors avouched by your lowd-sounding pen, I must repeal and
reuerse with a writ of Quo warranto, least in time, the countenance of your
world-wondred and selfe-conceited knowledge, cause naked truth to be held in
scorn of others, as it is in captivity by your self. My humble requestis,
that the honorable beholders of our combat blush not, nor the scholasticall
Readers bite the lip, to see an English Herald encounter with an antique
Hercules. Let not the fore-running breath of deep renowned science blow up the
weight of long experience: you may enjoy the reputation of Arts, but in Arms
and Herauldie we except against your skill. And because I intend only a
freedom of truth in matter of mine own profession, you shall understand, that I
will not intermeddle with any other the commendable discoueries of Antiquity,
(being without the lists and compass of mine exception) but only where the
ancient pedegrees of honorable families are either clipped, or strange
feathers imped into their trains: there am I bold to note the defects, and to
declare the excess that may make a worthy progeny seem some monstrous
offspring, if the truth be not unfolded. What cause I have to undertake this
charge, may appear by these few erroneous slippes (gathered out of many) in
your Britannia. In the detection whereof, I have not followed your Method, a
long by the Rivers side, from shire to shire, and town to town (for that were
a journey too tedious, and out of my way) but I have fastened first upon that
noble Ferrarian line, whose present issue, so glorious at this time, seems to
command a redress of that injurious obscurity, wherewith your superficial
skill, or rather ignorance, has somewhat eclipsed the former excellency
thereof.

First therefore, I am pressed to encounter you at the castle of Tutburie, in the
honor of whose founders, I am to spend my first breath and valor: to the end
I may revive the race of them which you have overthrown, by falsifying and
extinguishing four discents in seven. If you demand how? I answer, in making
Robert Earl Ferrars, grandchild of Henry Lord Ferrars the Norman, to be
that Robert which did forfait all his lands to king Henry the third: when in
truth, it was the said Roberts great great grandchild. And therefore, to build
up again this honorable descent and succession of the Earls Ferrars, (which
you have ruinated) I will first begin with Henry Lord Ferrars the Norman, unto
whom (by the book of Domesday) William the Conqueror gave many large
possessions in the counties of Stafford, Leicester, Bedford, Gloucester, Oxford,
Bucking and Barkshire. He had issue Robert Earl Ferrars, who founded the Abbay
of Muriuall, in king Henry the first his time, and died the 19. of king
Stephen: whose eldest son William Earl Ferrars, and Lord of Tutburie being
slain in his lodging in Lumbards street in London, without issue, Robert his
second son succeeded, and was Earl Ferrars Lord of Tutburie and Oucam. He kept
the town of Leicester for king Henry the second against the young king, and
had issue William Earl Ferrars, and first earl of Derbie, who married
Margaret, daughter and heir of William Peuerell Lord of Nottingham, and died
the 12. of Henry the third, leaving issue William the second Earl Ferrars
and Derbie his son: who took to wife Agnes, the third sister, and coheire of
Ranulph Earl of Chester and Lincoln: and died 1242. unto whom succeeded the
third William Earl Ferrars, and Derbie, who married Margaret daughter and
coheire of Roger Quincy earl of Winchester. On whom he be got Robert Earl
Ferrars, and Derbie, who in the fifty year of king Henry the third, was
taken prisoner at the battle of Chesterfield, and imprisoned in the castle of
Chipenham: where he for the obtaining of his liberty made assurance before John
Chishall then Lord Chancellor of England, of all his lands (except Chartley and
Bolbroke) to Lord Henry son of the king of Romans, William Valence Earl
of Penbroke, John earl Warren and Surry, William Beauchamp earl of Warwick,
Roger Somery, Thomas Clare, R. Walleron, Roger Clifford, Hamon le Strange,
Bartholomew de Sudley, and Robert Bruise, Barons, his suerties, for the payment
of 50000. pounds on a day, at one entire payment, to Lord Edmond the Kings
son. Which day and payment being broken, and not performed, the said Lord
Edmond, by the surrender of the sureties aforesaid, took possession of those
his lands, and enjoyed the same during his life: and after left them to his
heirs, the same being then valued at two thousand pounds by the year. And
this is that Robert, whom you very untruly have set down to be grandchild to
Henry Lord Ferrars that lived in the time of the Norman conquest, he being
the seventh in line all descent from him: (as by your own words in the title
of Derby. page 430. it may appear) where you confess William to be the
father, and William the grandfather of this Robert, that forfeited his lands in
king Henry the third his time. Now, to let you know the inconvenience arising
hereby: It is the concealment and loss of three most notable inheritrices,
that were married unto three of these Ferrarian Earls. The first was the
daughter and sole heir of William Peuerell, Lord of Nottingham (whose son
was honored with the title of earl of Notingham.) The second was the sister,
and coheire of Ranulph Earl of Chester and Lincoln, who enriched this family
with the Castle and honor of Chartley. The third being the daughter and
coheire of Roger Quincy Earl of Winchester, who brought with her the honor and
barony of Grooby. Of which fruitful marriages, if you make a fained nullitie,
or deuorce, you intercept those noble plants, from whence sprung sundry the
most famous branches of our nobility, flourishing in this our declining age.

CHartley Castle builded by Ranulph earl of Chester, came to Chartley.
the Ferrars by Agnes his daughter, whom Robert earl Ferrars and Derby married:
of whose progeny issued seven barons Ferrars of Chartley: Anne daughter of the
last of the^, brought this title and honor by marriage, to Walter Deuereux her
husband, who was the great-great-great grandfather of the right honorable
Robert Earl of Essex that now is. Page 449. WHere you affirm in this place,
Ranulph Earl of Chester to have builded the Castle of Chartley, which after
came to be the possession of Robert earl Ferrars and Derby, by marying Agnes
the daughter of the foresaid Ranulph: and that there did descend of the said
Robert and Agnes seven barons in direct line successively: hereto I answer,
that Ranulph Earl of Chester builded indeed the castle of Chartley, in the
fourth year of king Henry the third, and died An. 1236. But that he was father
to the said Agnes, I utterly deny: affirming him to die without any issue at
all. And for proof hereof, I appeal to your self, in perfect remembrance,
testifying the same against your self, in the title of Earls of Chester, Page
471. And for the foresaid Robert Earl Ferrars, he never married any such woman.
So that by this your not understanding, you have obscured and made imperfect
that noble line of the Earl Ferrars. Nay you have done them a far greater
wrong, for hereby have you (contrary to all law and reason) made the said
Agnes to be daughter to her own brother, and the said Robert to be husband
unto her that was his grandfathers wife. By which untrue wresting, you have
thrust out of their places, not only two of the greatest Earls of their time,
but also the coheire of Quincy, who (as before I said) brought into that
family the barony of Grooby. Therefore that you may reform this your error, I
will here set you down the truth of this descent, proved by good authority,
beginning first with William Earl Ferrars and Derby, grandfather of the said
Earl Robert, who married the forenamed Agnes, the third sister, and coheire of
the forenamed Ranulph Earl of Chester and Lincoln, (and not his daughter, as
you have written.) This said William died in the 27. year of king Henry the
third, and left issue William Earl Ferrars, and Derbie, his son, Lord of
Chartley, who married with Margaret Lady of Grooby, daughter and coheire of
Roger Quincy Earl of Winchester, on whom he begot Robert Earl Ferrars and
Derby, and after died in the 38. year of king Henry the third. Which Robert
was he that you would have to mary Agnes the daughter of Ranulph Earl of
Chester, who was in truth his grandmother. But for your further satisfaction,
understand, that the said Robert married to his wife the daughter of the Lord
Basset, and was taken prisoner soon after by King Henry the third, in the
Barrons wars, and forced to pay at one entyre payment for his ransom, and
delivery, to Lord Edmond the Kings son, the sum of fifty thousand pounds:
for the assurance of which payment he bound over all his lands: as before in
the title of Tutbury I have set down. He died in the seventh year of king
Edward the first, 1278. leaving issue by his said wife, John Lord Ferrars of
Chartley, auncester to the Earl of Essex now living.

REignald, base son to king Henry the first, was made Earl Reignald earl of
Cornwall.
of Cornwall, and after dyed without issue. Page 130. IN making Reignald Earl
of Cornwall to dye without issue, you offer great injury to diverse
worshipful families, depriving them of their Auncestor from whom they are
descended. For the said Reignald had issue three daughters, his heirs: one
married to Baldwin Riduerse Earl of Deuon, of whom descended the honorable
families of Courtneys: and an other to Valitort, of whose issue many remain at
this present.

KIng Richard the second honored William le Scroope, first, Earls of Wiltshire.
with the Earldom of Wiltshire. But the felicity of this man did both stand,
and fall with his Prince, etc. Not many years after, this dignity came unto
James Butler Earl of Ormond. From thence (the family of Lancaster decaying)
it went unto John Stafford, second son to Humfrey Duke of Buckingham, by the
gift of king Edward the fourth: of which stock, one or two succeeded. At last,
a grandchild of the forenamed James Butler, by his son, carried this title
into the family of Bullens: for Thomas Bullen, in right of his mother, was
created Earl of Wiltshire: whose eldest daughter Anne was married unto king
Henry the eight, and by him had issue, our sovereign Lady Elizabeth: Page 187.
ALthough your rash, and over hasty pen, have seemed unto you so priuileged,
as that thereby you durst adventure the prejudice of many honorable persons in
their discents and ensigns of honor (as you have done) yet me thinks that her
Majesty's sacred name might justly have lymited your writings within such
bounds of loyal duty, as that your hand should have trembled to endite, or
your heart once to admit the publishing any untruth, whereby her honor might
in any part be eclipsed. Here you say, that James Butler Earl of Wiltshire
had a grandchild (by his namelesse son) which was mother unto Thomas Bullen
Earl of Wiltshire, graund-father to the Queens most excellent Majesty that
now is: in which you greatly wrong her, she being not descended of the said
James, but of Thomas Butler Earl of Ormond his brother. And the better to
manifest the same, the said James was atteinted by Act of Parliament, for high
treason, and suffered for the same at New Castle, in the first year of king
Edward the fourth, without any issue of his body at all to beget such a
grandchild, as you say, was the mother to Sir Thomas Bullen. Which being true
(as it cannot be denied) I admire that a man of your learning, and professing
such skill in Heraldy, would so unadvisedly publish in print, to the view of
the whole world, so great an untruth, you having neither proof, nor warrant
for the same. And not contented herewith, after, for maintenance and color of
these your errors, you further affirm, that the said Sir Thomas Bullen was
created Earl of Wiltshire in right of Margaret his mother, graund-childe (as
you say) of the said James. In which so saying, you show your self very
ignorant in the discents of dignities. And for answer hereunto: First I say,
that Margaret the mother of Sir Thomas Bullen was second daughter and coheire
of Thomas Butler Earl of Ormond, brother of James Earl of Wiltshire, and not
the said James his grandchild: and so in that point, have you falsified this
descent. Secondly, where you would have this dignity of Wiltshire to descend
to Thomas Bullen in right of his mother, that do I also deny: and for proof
thereof say, that the said James, being both the first and last Earl of
Wiltshire of that surname, did by his attainture forfaite the same to king
Edward the fourth: by reason whereof, the said honor reuerted to the crown,
and there remained until king Henry the eight, of his mere grace and great
favor, did bestow the same upon Sir Thomas Bullen, grandfather to our most
gracious sovereign lady Queen Elizabeth. And thus was Sir Thomas Bullen
advanced to this dignity, and not as in any right descended to him from James
Butler Earl of Wiltshire, from whom he did not descend.

TOtnes, the ancient possessions of Iudeall, surnamed de Totnes: Totnes.
afterward it came to William Briwer a Noble man: by one of whose daughters
it came to the Bruses, and from them by a daughter to George Cantelup Lord of
Abergeuenny: whose daughter did carry the same by marriage to the Barons Zouches:
in which name it remained, until John Baron Zouch was banished for taking
part with Richard the Tyrant. Page 135. TO that part where you affirm, George
Lord Cantelup of Abergaueny to have issue a daughter and heir married unto the
Baron Zouch: I answer, that the said George had no daughter at all, but dyed
without issue: as by his office taken after his death, in the first year of
king Edward the first, it does plainly appear: and therefore have you greatly
erred, in making him to have issue a daughter.

IN the time of king Richard the second, Torbay was the seat of Torbay.
the Briwers, who were in those days men of great account. Page 136. IT
seems unto me very strange, that you will affirm Torbay to be the Seat and
habitation of the honorable family of Briwers, in the time of king Richard the
second, when as you are not able to prove any of that surname to live in almost
an hundredth and fifty years before: for William Briwer, the last of that
progeny, dyed without issue, in the beginning of the reign of king John,
leaving his five sisters his heirs, of whom are descended many of our
Nobility now living.

HAccombe was in times past the Mansion of Iurdan Fitz-Stephens Haccombe.
a famous knight. His daughter and heir Cecilie did marrye into the family of
the Archdeacons: from whom, in process of time, that possession came by Hugh
Courtney unto the Carewes: For Jane the sole daughter and heir of Peter
Courtney, was married to Nicholas Baron Carew, and had issue diverse sons. Page
136. HAccombe was never the Mansion or possession of Fitz-Stephens: but always
the seat and inheritance of the family of Haccombs, and did continewe in that
surname until their heir general was married to Archdeacon. And for proof
that these were two several families: Haccombes bare for their Arms, argent
three Bends sables: Fitz-Stephens was an other family, always seated at
Norton in the county of Deuon, and never at Haccombe, and did bear for their
Arms, gules an Eagle displayed gold. But because I see you are at a stand, I
will here help you with an excuse, giving you to understand, that about the
reign of king Edward the second, there was one Stephen de Haccombe, who
dwelling at Haccombe, had a son named Waren (which happily might be called
Waren filius Stephani de Haccombe) And so I think, that worshipful family of
Carewes will confess: to whose judgment I refer my self in this point, and
you to be corrected: as also to say whither Nicholas Baron Carewe did ever
marye with Jane, the daughter and sole heir of Peter Courtney. Which Peter (by
my books) as yet had never other father then your self.

EXceter had three Dukes, vidz. John Holland Earl of Huntingdon, Exceter.
made Duke of Exceter by king Richard the second (his half brother by the
mother:) he was dispossessed of that honor by king Henry the fourth, and
Thomas Beauford of the house of Lancaster set in his place. Yet afterward,
John Holland, son of the said John, recovered his fathers honor, which he
left to his son Henry, who had issue one only daughter married to the family
of Neuils, Page 139. IN this place have you committed a dangerous error, to the
hazard of disinheriting many honorable families, by publishing in print, that
Henry Holland duke of Exceter, had issue one sole daughter and heir, married to
the family of Neuills: when as it is manifest, that after his deprivation by
Act of Parliament, the first of Edw. the fourth, he was found drowned in the
sea, the 12. year of the said kings reign, without any issue: and therefore,
no such daughter of his could be married to Neuil (as you affirm.) And that you
may the better know the said Henry Holland, as also his coat of arms, I wish
you to see his tumbe, where he lies buried in the South Side of Saint Peter's
Church at Westminster, which you have heretofore avouched to be the tumbe of
John of Eltham Earl of Cornwall. But if you will take good view thereof, you
shall find him that lies thereon, to wear on his head a Dukes crown (no fit
ornament for John of Eltham, being but an Earl) and to bear in his shield
the arms of England within a border of France. The which shield and arms to
be the said Henry Hollands, it does appear by diverse his deeds yet extant,
with their seals affixed to the same.

VVIscombe appertained to William Baron Bonuill, who Wiscombe.
in right of his wife did augment his inheritance with the barony of Harington,
and left behind him one sole daughter named Cecilie, who by her marriage
transported both those titles, with their possessions, unto the Greys Marquis
Dorcet. Page 140. HEre you make William Lord Bonuile, that married the daughter
and heir of the Lord Harington, to dye without issue male, leaving one sole
daughter married to Graye Marquis Dorcet, when as in truth the said William had
issue a son, that succeeded him in his dignity, and no daughter at all. And
if you would know his name, I answer William, who carried both the title of
Lord Bonuile and Harington, and had to wife Katherine, daughter to Richard
Neuill Earl of Salisburie, by whom he had issue Cecilie his daughter and sole
heir, married to Thomas Gray Marquis Dorcet. Which Cecilie you would have to be
sister to her father, and daughter to her grandfather: by which mistaking the
father for the son, and the son for the father, you have obscured, and made
imperfect this descent of the Lord Bonuills, of whom many honorable families
at this day are descended.

BAldwin Rivers was by king Henry the first, made Lord of Earls of Deuon.
Twifferton and Plymton, and after Earl of Devonshire. He had issue Richard
that succeeded him, who had issue Baldwin and Richard, both Earls
successively: which dying without issue, that honor came to their fathers
brother called William of Uernon. This William had issue Baldwin, who dyed
before his father, leaving issue by Margaret daughter of Warin Fitzgerald, a
son called Baldwin, the third Earl of Deuon: who changed his anncesters
Escuchion, from a griffon gold in a field gules, unto a shield gold charged
with a Lion azure. He had issue two children, Baldwin the last Earl of this
family, and Isabell, that was married to William de Fortibus, Earl of
Albemarle, and of Devonshire in her right. Page 144. HEre do you wrong this
descent of the Earls of Devonshire, making Baldwin Ryuers to be the first
Earl of Devonshire, and Lord of Twyfferton and Plympton, in king Henry the
first his time: when as it is very manifest, that Richard Ryuers, father of
this Baldwin was the same person unto whom king Henry the first gave
Twifferton, Plimpton, and the isle of Wight, with the Earldom of Devonshire,
and not to Baldwin his son (whom you name:) as is very well proved by the
book of Brightley and Forde, where those of that family do lie buried, as
also by your own Testimony against your self, in the tittle of Isles, in your
book, Page 710. Secondly, to your affirmation, that Baldwin the third Earl of
Deuon did change his Ancestors Escucheon gules a griffon gold, unto a shield
gold a Lion azure: I answer, it is a fault in a mean person to be found
untrue in his reports, much more in you to publish in print such an untruth
as this: for you can not ever prove the said shield gules with the griffon
gold to have been borne or used by any of the said family: or any other Arms
at all of theirs can you show, until that Baldwin the third did use for his
Arms the foresaid Lion azure upon gold. Thirdly, because in the beginnning of
this succession of Earls of Deuon you abridged us of the first, now to make
amends for the same, and to fill up the number again, you do here name for
an Earl of Deuon, William de Fortibus, who never as yet attained unto that
dignity. And therefore, no reason why you should thus add or substracte, to,
or from noble persons dignities at your pleasure. But here peradventure ye
will say, Isabel the wife of the aforenamed William de Fortibus, did in her
widowhood write her self Countess of Albermale, and Deuon, and Lady of the
I Will: which if I grant unto, that she did, it was in respect that she was the
only heir then left alive of that honorable family: and yet will not that
make a necessity, that her husband must be Earl of Deuon.

THe Barony of Stoke-Curcy was so named of the Lords Stoke-Curcy.
thereof. It was the seat of William Curcy that was Sewer unto king Henry the
first. He had issue William, whose daughter Auice was wife to Warin
Fitzgerald, and their daughter and heir was married to Baldwin Rivers Earl of
Deuon. Of this family of Curcies did descend John Curcie, which by warlike
force overcame Vlster in Ireland, Page 157. YOur errors here committted are
these: first, you make William de Curcy, that was Sewer to K. Henry the first,
to have issue a son named William: which is untrue, for that he dyed without
issue, and left Robert de Curcy his brother his heir. Secondly, you say, the
said William de Curcy had a grandchild by his son William, called Auice,
married to Warrin Fitzgerald, who had issue a daughter and heir married to
Baldwin Earl of Deuon. In which you are also deceived: For, the first William
(as I said before) had not any issue at all, and therefore no such
grandchild. And where you affirm the said Warin Fitzgerald to have issue by
Auice his wife but one only daughter: it is manifest that he had issue a son
named Warin Fitzgerald, who had issue the third Warin Fitzgerald. But for
your better instruction herein, and to correct this your error, I will set you
down the truth of this disce^t, as follows: Robert de Curcy, a great Baron
and Counselor unto William Rufus, had issue two sons, William and Robert.
William the eldest son dying without issue, Robert his brother succeeded him
in his dignity, and was a witness to the Charter of king Stephen, of lands
that he gave to the Abbay of Westminster, by the name of Robert de Curcy the
kings Sewer. After whose death, Robert de Curcy his eldest son, Sewer to king
Henry the second, being slain in Ireland without any issue, William the
second son succeeded, and was a witness to the Charter of king Henry the
second, of lands and liberties that he gave to Saint Peter's at Westminster. He
had issue John de Curcy governor of Vlster in Ireland, in the time of king
John, who having no issue, left his rich patrimony to Alice (or Auice) his
sister, then the wife of Warin Fitzgerald: which Warin was a witness to the
Charter of king John, of his submission to the Pope, 1212. He had issue by his
said wife, the second Warin Fitzgerald, Lord of Harewood, father to the third
Warin.

THe greatest glory of Bridgewater was, that king Henry the Bridgewater.
seventh honored it with the title of an Earldome, by making Giles Dawbeney
Gentleman of his Chamber Earl thereof: whose only daughter and heir was
married to I. Bourchier, the first earl of Bath of that family. Page 161. IF
the making of Gentlemen heretofore has been greatly misliked by her Majesty
in the kings of Arms, much more displeasing (I think) it will be to her,
that you being no Officer of Arms, should erect, make, and put down Earls
and Barons at your pleasure, publishing in print falsely their admittance or
deprivation: as in this place you have done, making Giles Dawbeney to be
created Earl of Bridgewater by King Henry the seventh, when as the said King
never advanced him nor any other to that dignity, neither was the said Giles
ever any Earl during his life. And therefore here have you no great cause to
boast of your skill in Heraldie. But, to pleasure you, I will bring you to the
mark whereat your unadvised pen has roued, which is to Henry Dawbeney,
whom king Henry the eight on the 21. day of Iulie, in the 30. year of his
reign, did at his Manor of Ocking create Earl of Bridgewater: which Henry
was both the first and last that ever carried that title of dignity, and died
without issue. All which I hope you will confess to be true, and acknowledge
your fault.

HVngerford was a family of great account ever since the time Hungerford.
of King Edward the third: for Thomas Hungerford was grandfather to Walter Lord
Hungerford Treasurer of England: Which Walter enriched his family by marying
Katherin Peuerell, she being descended from the Moyles, and Courtneys. His son
Robert also enlarged the same more, by marying with Eleonore the daughter and
heir of William Lord Mollins, who was beheaded at New Castle, in the civil
wars betwixt the families of Lancaster and York. He had issue Thomas, that
was slain at Salisbury in the life of his father: yet left he issue one sole
daughter called Marie, that was married to Edward Lord Hastings.. Page 168. YOur
fault committed here, is far greater then that before in the title of
Bridgewater: for in that you added a supposed earl that never was: and from
this descent of Hungerford you have subtracted a Baron that was, in making
Robert Lord Hungerford, who married the daughter and heir of the Lord Mollins,
to be son of Walter lord Hungerford (that was Treasorer to King Henry the
sixth) and father to Thomas which was slain at Salisburie. In which you are
greatly deceived: for that Robert, who (you say) married the daughter of Lord
Mollins, was grandchild to Walter, and son to Robert Lord Hungerford and
Margaret the daughter and heir of William Lord Botreaux. By which your error
you have not only thrust quite out of this descent, Robert the true son of
the foresaid Walter, but his wife also the heir of the Lord Botreaux: to the
great prejudice of the now Earl of Huntingdon, who is heir general both to
the said Lord Robert, and Margaret his wife. And for your better satisfaction,
that there were two Roberts, the father and son, betwixt Walter that was
Treasorer to king Henry the sixth, and Thomas that was slain at Salisburie,
look into the Parliament holden at Westminster, in the 29. year of king
Henry the sixth, and there shall you find both the said Roberts, the father by
the name of Robert Lord Hungerford the elder, and the son by the name of Robert
Lord Mollins.

PHilibert de Chandew a Bretaigne, borne in France, was by Earls of Bathe.
king Henry the seventh made Earl of Bathe: after whom, king Henry the eight,
in the 28. year of his reign, created John Bourchier Earl of Bathe. He had
issue John his son, that succeeded him: who had issue John Lord Fitz-Warren,
that died in the life of his father, leaving issue William now Earl of Bathe.
1594. Page 171. What your meaning is, by so often falsifying the petigrees and
discents of the Nobility, I know not: but wish there were some good order
taken in time for reformation of the same, least these and other like untruths
be received generally for infallible verities, to the disparagement of noble
families, as well in their fame, as right of inheritance. And especially would
I desire, your self being famous for learning (which you acknowledge) through
all the provinces of Christendom, to recant such erroneous fallacies: that the
world may perceive in your great learning, a spirit of singleness, not
obstinately resting in the love of your selfco^ceited opinion, but willingly
subscribing to the clear shining truth: which truth has vncharged the noble
succession of honorable houses, from the mist of your ignorant conjectures, by
the means of us contemned Heralds. And now to manifest your error committed
in this succession of Earls of Bath, I affirm you have thereunto added an
Earl, who never had other father then your self. If you demand his name, I
answer John, whom you make to be son to John the first Earl of Bathe, and
grandfather to William that now lives. But that you may the better amend this
your rash and unadvised writing, I will set you down the truth of this
descent, beginning with John Bourchier Lord Fitz-Warrin, whom king H. 8. on the
9. day of Iulie, 1536. created Earl of Bathe. He had issue John Lord
Fitz-Warin, that died before his father at Hengraue in Suffolk. 1560. leaving
issue William now Earl of Bath: to whose honorable judgment I submit my
self, to say whether he had any such grandfather.

KIng Henry the second, and Robert the son of Harding, Lo. Berkley.
who was the son of the king of Denmark, were founders of the Monastery of
Saint Austens by Bristow. This Robert was Alderman of Bristow, and so dearly
beloved of king Henry the second that by his means he married the only
daughter and heir of the Lord Berkeley, whereby the said Roberts posterity
living in great honor, are yet called Barons of Berkeley: some of which are
buried in this Church at Bristow. Page 174. IN this title of Berkley, you make
Morice the son of Robert Fitz-Harding to be son to his own wife, and the
said Robert to marry his sons wife: which unnatural marriages, though well
liked of by your self, yet never known nor allowed of by any others. And
where you affirm Robert Fitz-Harding to marry the only daughter and heir of
the Lord Berkeley: therein will you fail of your proof: for Roger Lord
Berkeley of Dursley (whom you mean) had issue a son, of whom are descended
many living at this present. But, that you may both know and confess yout
fault, I will set you down again the true descent hereof, with my authority
for the same: beginning first with Harding the Dane, who (by the Book of
Domesday) in the 20. year of William the Conqueror, held of Brictric, in
morgage, the Manor of Witenhort, in the County of Gloucester. He had issue
Robert Fitz-Harding, who founded the Abbay of Saint Augustines, and the
hospital of Saint John's in Bristow, 1135. and married one Eua: by whom he had
issue Morice Fitz-Robert, who took to wife Alice the daughter of Roger Berkley
Lord of Dursley: as does appear by the said Rogers deed, made in the sixth
year of the reign of King Stephen, where he gives unto the said Morice
Fitz-Robert, in frank marriage, with Alice his daughter, the Manor of
Slimbridge, in the County of Gloucester. And this I hope will be sufficient to
make a deuorce of this your forenamed unlawful and unnatural marriage.

Walter d'Eureux, Earl of Rosmar in Normandy, had Earls of Salisburie.
great possessions given him by William Conqueror, aboxt Salisburie: which
possessions he left unto his younger son Edward, surnamed of Salisburie,
giving to Walter his eldest son his other lands in Normandy, with the
Earldom of Rosmar: whose posterity failed within a while. Edward aforesaid
lived in the twentieth year of William the Conqueror. Walter his son builded
a Monastery at Bradenstocke, wherein he became a Monk: yet he first left
issue a son called Patrike, (By Sybill de Chaworth his wife) which Patrike
was the first Earl of Salisburie, and was slain coming out of the holy
land (by Guy de Lusignan:) to whom succeeded William his son, which died at
Paris in the time of King Richard the first. Whose only daughter honored
William Longa-Spatha her husband, with the title of that Earldom, and with
her Escucheon Azure charged with six Lions gold. His son William succeeded,
and was in battle in the holy land, Anno. 1250. Whose son William lost the
Earldom, through displeasure of King Henry the third: but he had issue one
sole daughter named Margaret, which being married to Henry Lacie Earl of
Lincoln, and Salisburie, in her right, had issue by him a daughter called
Alice, that was married to Thomas Earl of Lancaster. Page 183. THe more
plainly to decipher your errors in this title of Salisburie, I will first
begin with Edward d'Eureux, whom I find to live in the 21. year of King
William the Conqueror, and to be a witness to the said kings Charter
touching the foundation of the Abbay of Selbie, by the name of Edward Earl of
Salisburie. Which proves, that Patrike his grandchild was not then the first
Earl of Salisburie, of that family (as you affirm.) Secondly, where you hold
for a certainty, that Walter the son of Edward aforesaid (before his
monastical profession) left issue to succeed him, Patrike his son. To that
I answer, that Sybill his wife, after the death of the said Walter her
husband, took upon her the habit of a Nun, and having continued in that
estate but one month, and perceiving her self to be with child, forsook that
order again, and afterward was delivered of a son, which was named Patrike,
who was after steward to Maude the Empress: by whose means king Henry the
second, in the 28. year of his reign, confirmed unto the said Patrike the
earledom of Salisburie. Thirdly, concerning your affirmation, that William
son of the said Patrike had but one only daughter named Ella, married to
William Longa-Spatha, who in her right was Earl of Salisbury, and did bear
her Arms. To this I say, you do hereby greatly prejudice the honorable family
of Howards: for, the said William had not only two sons, but also two
daughters (as appears by the book of Bermondsey in Southwarke) viz. Patrike,
William, Mabell, and Ella. Mabell was married to Nigell Lord Mowbray, of whom
all the Howards, with many others are descended: Ella was married unto William
Longa-Spatha, base son to Henry the second, who afterward by the special
favor of King Richard the first, in the 9. year of his reign, was made Earl
of Salisburie: and not in right of his wife (as you would have it.) And where
you say, the said William Longa-Spatha and Ella had issue William, who
succeeded his father in that dignity, and left issue the third William, which
lost that Earldom through displeasure of King Henry the third. I answer,
that I marvel how you can invent two so great untruths, as, first to affirm
these two last Williams to be Earls of Salisburie, when neither of them both
were ever Earls, either of that or any other place. And that the said
William did use or bear the Arms of his wife, I take it, you have no other
proof for the same then your own bare imagination: which with you is very
great. Lastly, where you affirm Henry Lacie to be Earl of Salisburie, in
right of his wife, the daughter and heir of the last William Longa-Spatha: I
say that neither he the said Henry, nor any other of his Surname were ever
at any time honored with that title or Earldom. And now, to manifest the
marriage of the Lord Nigell de Mowbray with Mabell daughter of William
Fitz-Patrike, I will set you down for proof, the said Nigels deed, which is
as follows.

SCiant presents and futuri, quod ego Nigellus dominus de Mowbray, dedi and
concessi, etc. Know ye, that I Nigell Lord Mowbraw, have given and confirmed,
from my Manor of Bensted in Surrey (which I had in marriage with Mabell my
wife, heir of William Fitz-Patrike) the Church of Bensted, to the canons of
Southwarke, in whose possession I found the said Church, confirmed by Richard
Bishop of Winton, etc.

TOuching the Earls of Winchester (as our Herauldes report) Earls of
Winchester.
after that Clito the Saxon was by the Normans deprived of his ancient
dignity, King John made Saer de Quincie Earl of Winchester: who used for his
Arms, a Fesse with a Labell of five points (as we have seen in his Seal:)
but Roger his son bare seven Losenges gold voyded in a field Gules. He
having no issue male by Helene his wife, the eldest daughter and Coheire of
Alane Prince of Galloway in Scotland, that honor lay dead. A great while
after, Hugh de Spencer was honored with that title by King Edward the second:
whose son for treason lost both that dignity and his life. After that, by
the bounty of king Edward the fourth, Lewis of Bruges, a Belgian, Baron of
Gruthuse, and Prince of Stenhuse, enjoyed this title, with the Arms of
Quincies: Which title, after the death of King Edward aforesaid, he
surrendered again to King Henry the seventh. Page 197. Whom you understand
by the term of our Heralds, I know not: my self being one of her Majesty's
Heralds, do approve for truth that Seer de Quincy was Earl of Winchester, and
did use in his shield for his Arms, a Fesse, and a Labell of 13. points, and
not of 5. (as you misreport to have seen in his seals. And, to prove my
assertion true, I have diverse deeds with the Seals of the said Quincies in
my custody, made as well in the reign of king Richard the first, as in the
times of king John, and Henry the third. As for Hugh Spencer, he was made Earl
of Winchester, and high Treasurer of England in the 15. year of King Edward
the second, and in the 19. year of the said kings reign he was executed at
Bristow by Queen Isabell: so that the dignity ceased in himself, and not in
his son (as you affirm) who never had, or was possessed of that dignity.
Lastly, where you say, that King Edward the fourth did give to Jews of Bruges
the Earldom of Winchester, with the Arms of Quincies: I answer, you have
not only misreported the same: but also showed your self to be very ignorant
in matters of Arms, for those Arms given by Edward the fourth to Jews of
Bruges, were neither the arms of Quincies, nor any thing at all resembling the
same. And for proof hereof, I pray you let us a little compare them both
together: first the arms given by K. Ed. 4. to the said Jews were, Azur ten
mascles gold: the arms of Quincies were, Gules 7. masclesgold: Bruges did
bear in his arms a canton Gules charged with a Lion passant gardant of the
second: Quincy had neither Canton nor Lion in his Arms. So that here is
neither color nor charge, to induce a man of any judgment or knowledge, to
think or say, that this gift of Edward the fourth was the Arms of Quincy. And
for better proof hereof, I will here insert the words of king Edwardes
grant, concerning the gift of the said Arms.

REx omnibus, etc. Sciatis quod etc. Lodouicum Brugensem, principem de la
Gruthuse, dominum de Spieres, de Aemsted and de Oestamp, in Comitat. Winton.
praefecimus, Creauimus, and insigniuimus, ac per praesentes praeficimus,
Creamus, and insignimus, vna cum armis and insignib. armorum, modo and forma
hic depict. in gallico sic discernundis: Il port d' azure a dix mascles d'or en
orme de un canton de nostre propre arms de Angleterre: c' est ascauoir, de
gules un Leopard passant d'or arm d'azure, pat. 12. Edw. 4.

LAnheron was the seat of the family of Arundels, (or de Hirundine,) Lanheron.
that is, of the Swallow: for Arondell is in French a Swallow. Those of that
family bare for their Arms, five Swallows silver: Page 127. Would any man
of learning or judgment thus have enterprised to publish in print, to the
view of the whole world, those things he is utterly ignorant of, but your
self? And that you are merely ignorant in matter of Armorie, I think there
needs no further proof then your own writing, touching the Arms of Bygot
Earl of Norfolk, Longa-spatha Earl of Salisburie, Quincie, and Lewis of
Bruges, both Earls of Winchester, all in this book mentioned: as also this of
Arundell, touching which, well am I assured, that until you add sable for a
color to the field of this coat, and an other Swallowe to make up the true
number of 6. this is imperfect Armory, and no ensign or arms pertaining to
the family of Arundels, (as you say it is) nor any coat of Arms at all.

VVIgot a Saxon was Lord of that honor, at the time of the Wallingford.
Conquest: who had one only daughter married to Robert d'Oyley, by whom he had
issue Maude his heir, who was first married to Miles Crispine, and after to
Brian filius-Comitis, by the favor of king Henry the first. Bryan taking part
with Maude the Empress, fortified this Castle of Wallingford against king
Stephen, who had erected a forte over against the same. But after that an
atonement was made between king Stephen and king Henry the second, Bryan
became professed in a Monastery, as also his wife: whereupon the honor of
Wallingfordwas annexed to the crown. Page 206. THe great trouble, and late
suite in the Star Chamber, for setting down in Pedigree a forged heir
general of Anthony Lord Gray of Ruthin, to the great danger of of
disinheriting an honorable person now living, might be a warning both to you,
and others, how they commit the like fault hereafter. Which notwithstanding, I
see it is not regarded, for that not long since I have seen a petigree made by
your self, more faulty then that before spoken of: which to let pass, I will
come to answer this title of Wallingford. Here you affirm, Robert d' Oyley to
have issue a daughter and heir named Maude, married to Miles Crispine: by which
imagined heir, you wrong most of the honorable families of this Realm now
living, descended of the said d'Oylye. And to redress this, I will here set
you down the true descent of the said Robert d'Oylye: in which it shall
appear, no such daughter ever to have been (as you affirm.) First by the
book of Domesday it is set down, that William the Conqueror did give unto
Robert d'Oylye these lands following: Watelinton, Garinges, Bernecester,
Hochenorton, Chedelinton, Eton, and Braiton, with many other goodly possessions
in the county of Oxford. Likewise in the book of Osney I find, that in the
time of the Norman conquest, there lived two brothers of the family of
d'Oyleys, Robert, and Nigell: and that Robert dyed without issue, leaving
Robert (his nephew by his brother Nigel) to succeed him in his possessions.
Also by diverse evidences in my custody, it is manifest, that the foresaid
Robert the nephew, founded the Abbey of Osney in the time of king Henry the
first, and had issue Henry d' Oyley Constable to king Henry the second: to
whom succeeded the second Henry d' Oylye his son, that was likewise
Constable to king Richard the first, and died without issue, leaving Margaret
his sister and coheire, married to Henry Newborough Earl of Warwick: of whom
that great and honorable family of Beauchamps Earls of Warwick did descend.
So that hereby you may see the true line of heirs males continued from the
first Robert, in William the Conquerors time, unto Richard the first, very
apparently proved: to the overthrow and avoiding of your feigned heir
general. Whereby also you may take a caveat, to alter and recall in again
your late coined pettigree, being of the same stamp. For proof, read these
deeds following.

NOtum sit fidelibus Sanctae Ecclesiae, etc. Be it known unto all faithful
people of the holy Church, that I Henry d' Oleio, by the consent of Robert my
brother the kings son, and other my friends and acquaintance, do give and
grant, in free and perpetual Alms, unto the Holy Church of Saint Marie of
Osney, for the soul of Henry the king, and for the soul of my father Robert
d' Oleio, who founded the same Church: and for the soul of Gilbert my brother,
and for the souls of all my predecessors, etc. ten pound land, etc. These
being witnesses. Hugh de Chanuill, Paganus Westbery, etc.

NOtum sit tam praesentibus quam futuris, etc. Be it known unto all men,
as well present as those that shall here-after come, that I Robert son of king
Henry, by the consent of Henry de Oleio my brother, and of all other my
friends, do give and grant, in free and perpetual Alms, to the Church of
Saint Mary de Osney, etc. ten pound land, etc. These being witnesses, Hugh de
Chanuill, Paganus Westbery, Hugh de Westberie, and Richard de Cahannes.

SCiant presents and futuri, etc. Let all men know that are present, and
those that shall be hereafter, that I Henry de Oilli, son of Henry de Oilli,
the kings Constable, have made a certain change with my Cannons of Osney, of
Diverse lands in my Manors of Cleinder, and Weston, by my own free will, and
by the consent of Sibill my wife, and by the counsel of my free mea: as well
for the commodity of my self, as also of my said Canons, which they held
within my said Lordshippes aforesaid, etc. Dated the fifth year of the reign
of king Richard the first: witness whereof, William Baiuell, Stephen de
Hampton, Hugh Delahese, Roger Azur my Sewer, and many others.

Walter Hungerford, high Treasurer of England to Hungerford.
king Henry the sixth, had issue Robert his son, commonly called Earl
Hungerford, whose grandchild by his son transported that inheritance to the
Hastings. Page 207. IN this descent of Hungerford, you have made the
grandchilde to be son to his grandfather. If you desire to know how: I
answer, in making Robert Earl Hungerford to be son to Walter Lord
Hungerford, Treasorer to King Henry the sixth, (who was in deed his
grandchild.) In which doing, you have not only bereaved the said Walter of
his lawful son: but also Robert Earl Hungerford, both of his father, and
mother. And to manifest, that there was a Robert between Walter which was
Treasorer to king Henry the sixth, and Robert called Earl Hungerford, I will
first here inserte the descent with the several marryages, beginning at the
said Walter Lord Hungerford, who married the daughter and heir of Peuerell, and
had issue Robert, that took to wife Margaret the daughter and heir of William
Lord Botreaux: by whom he had issue the second Robert Earl Hungerford, which
in the life of his grandfather Walter, and Robert his father, married the
daughter and heir of the Lord Mollens, and in her right was summoned to the
Parliament: Anno 25. of Henry the sixth, by the name of Robert Lord Mollens. And
after the death of the forenamed Walter, the said two Roberts were both at one
time of the Parliament, Anno 29. of Henry the sixth, the father by the name of
Robert Lord Hungerforde senior, and the son by the Name of Robert Hungerforde
Lord Mollens Junior. Which I take to be so strong a proof, as upon the sight
hereof, you will recant and subscribe to the same.

VVIdehay was the ancient seat of the Barons Saint Amend, Widehay.
whose inheritance and dignity came to Gerald Braybrooke, in right of his
wife: And Elizabeth, his grandchild by Gerald his son, transported the same
to William de Beauchampe, who left issue but one only son, which was a
bastard. Page 207. What an ungodly course is this you take, to deprive noble
men both of their honor and honesty, framing to some unnatural marriages,
falsifying the discentes of other, and making legitimate heirs, illegitimate?
which abuses, by reason of my oath taken at my creation, I may not let pass,
without telling you thereof. Understand therefore, that where you affirm
William Beauchamp Lord Saint Amond (who married Elizabeth grandchild to Gerald
Braybrooke) to have issue one only son, and he a Bastard: therein do you
greatly both wrong and scandalize him, for he had in lawful matrimony by his
said wife, Richard Beauchamp Lord Saint Amond, his legitimate son that
succeeded him in the dignity of Saint Amond, and married Anne the daughter of
Sir Walter Wrotesley knight. And therefore, very untruly have you charged the
said William, to have had any such Bastard.

THe Barons of Windsore took their original from William the Barons of
Windsore.
son of Other, that was Constable or keeper of Windsore Castle in the time of
king William the first: from whom also are descended the Fitz-Geraldes in
Ireland, Earls of Kildare, and Desmond: as Robert Glouer, called Somerset (the
most studious and skillful in Heraldie of all that society) has proved. Page
213. HEre would you impeache the credit of that worthy Officer of Arms
Robert Glouer, in making him the Author of your imagined dreams, he having
under his own hand in the Petigree of the honorable Lord Windsor, both denied,
that William de Windsor was son to Other, keeper of the Castle of Windsor: as
also, that the Earl of Kildare, and Desmond were descended from the said
William. By which your untrue misse-alledging the said Somersets works, to
serve your turn, you show your self very ungrateful toward him, out of
whose books, (in the custody of the late Lord Treasorer) you gathered the
flowers wherewithal you have made your imperfect garland, which you in your
last edition so much have boasted of. But here would I not, that you, or any
other should misconceaue my meaning, that I think or judge Somerset Herald
has written or set down in his said books any of these untruths: but
rather, that you, not rightly understanding them, nor able to discern the true
use of his travels, have thorough ignorance committed these your errors, in
affirming William de Windsor to be son to Other, and auncester to the Earls
of Kildare and Desmond in Ireland: of which two points you cannot prove any
one: for the original auncester of these before spoken of, was Walter the
son of Other, and not William son of Other: for Walter had two sons,
William, of whom are descended the Lords of Windsor: and Gerald, who was
auncester to the Geraldines Earls of Kildare and Desmond. And where you make
William de Windsor to be son of Other: therein are you also deceived, for the
same William you speak of, was son of Walter, and grandchild to Other: as
does appear by the Charter of king Henry the second here following,

HEnricus rex Angliae, and Dux Normanniae, and Aquitaniae, and Comes
Andegauiae: Archiepiscopis, Episcopis etc. Henry king of England, Duke of
Normandy, and Aquitaine, and Earl of Aniou: to all Archbishops, Bishops, etc.
Know ye that I have given and granted to William de Windsor, as his
inheritance, all the lands which before were the possessions of William son
of Walter his father, and of Walter son of Other his grandfather. Wherefore I
will etc. that he hold it, as his fee and inheritance, etc. peaceably, freely,
and honorably, even as his father and grandfather held the same, in the time of
king Henry my grandfather, and of my predecessors, in woods and plains etc.
Witnesses, William my brother, Reignald the Earl, and Ioceline Baillol etc.

William Rufus king of England, made William Earl Earls of Surrey.
Waren first Earl of Surrey, whose arms were, a shield gold checked azure. He
had issue a son, and a grandchild of the same name, succeeding him: but the
last had issue only a daughter, who marrying first with William, son of king
Stephen, and after with Hamelin base son of Geffrey Plantagenet, honored both
her husbands with this title. Hameline begot on her William Earl of Surrey,
who married the eldest daughter and coheire of William Earl of Penbrooke,
widow of Hugh Bygot. This William was father of John, who begat William, father
of John. Afterward, king Henry the fourth advanced Thomas Beauford to that
title and dignity, making him after Duke of Exceter, and Lord Chauncellor of
England, Page 223. ALthough I omit here to tell you, that the first William
Earl Warren was made Earl of Surrey by William Conqueror, and not by
William Rufus: yet will I (by your patience) put you in mind of an other
error by you here committed, of more importance, which is: if you remember, in
the title of the Earls of Norffolke, Page 370. You there have made Roger By
got Earl of Norffolke to be husband unto Maude the eldest daughter and coheire
of William Marshal Earl of Penbrooke: and now in this place, you make the
said Maude to be the widow of Hugh Bygot, father of the foresaid Roger: which
I take to be incest, for the son to marry his own mother. And therefore,
least all their modest posterity might blushe at such an incestuous Oedipus,
as your poetical fancy has brought upon the stage, I would wish you to
correct this your tragical fable.

KIng Richard the second made Thomas Holland Earl of Kent (being his half
brother by the mother) Duke of Surrey: Thomas Beauford.
who being atteinted, Thomas Beauford was advanced to that dignity, by king
Henry the fourth, and after made Duke of Exceter, and Chauncellor of England.
He dyed (as Walsingham says) Anno 1410. Page 223. Where you say, that Thomas
Beauford, after the attainder of Thomas Holland, was advanced to the dignity
of Duke of Surrey, and dyed Anno 1410. (as Walsingham says.) To the first I
answer, the said Thomas Beauford was never dignified with the title of Duke of
Surrey, by K. Henry the fourth, or any other king. And to prove the same, I
find, that the said king, in the 13. year of his reign, did create the said
Thomas Earl of Dorset: in which dignity he continued until the fourth year
of king Henry the fifth: in which year he sat in Parliament by that name of
dignity, and after was made Duke of Exceter. And therefore herein have you
failed. And to the second, concerning the time of Thomas Beaufordes death: it
makes me much to muse, how the said Duke should dye, Anno 1410, and being
deceased, how he should start up out of his grave, and make personal
appearance at the high court of Parliament holden at Westminster 1425.
fifteen years after, except you can show some strange Metamorphosis, or
prove that dead men being summoned, did take their places in that Parliament:
which cannot be without some Negromancie, or strange work beyond nature.

THe Barons Botreaux, alias Boterels, did bear for their Barons Botreaux.
arms, three toades sable in a field argent. The first of that family,
(named William) married Alice daughter of Richard Corbet, whose sister was
Paramour to king Henry the first, on whom he begot Reignald Earl of
Cornwall. From this William descended successively eleven Barons all called
Williams, except the third, and seventh, which were called Reignalds. Margaret
the sole daughter of the last of them, married Robert Hungerford: by whose
posterity that inheritance came to the family of Hastings. Which said
inheritance, was augmented by the marriage of the said Margarets grandfather,
with Katherine a Coheire of Katherine Twenge* and by the marriage of her great
grandfather, with the daughter and heir of Sir John Saintlow knight: and by
the marriage of her great great grandfather, with the daughter and heir of John
de Moeles, a rich Baron. Page 129. FIrst, in making Botreaux and Boterell to be
all one family, and name, you do much err: they being several, and not one:
as may be proved by William Botreaux Sherif of Cornwall, who lived in the ninth
year of king John, and bare for his Arms (as you fay) three Todes Sable: and
William Boterell, that lived in the fifth year of king Edward the first, (and
was summoned amongst other Barons, for the leuying of an army against
Llewellin Prince of Wales) did bear for his Arms, checkie gold and Gules a
cheueron Azur. By which two great differences, both of the name, and Arms, it
does evidently appear, that they were not one, but two several families.
Secondly, in affirming that William Botreaux married Alice the daughter of
Richard Corbet, sister to her that was Paramour to king Henry the first, and
mother to Reignald Earl of Cornwall, you are also greatly deceived: for the
mother of the said Reignald, was daughter and coheire of Robert Corbet, and not
of Richard: as by the gift of king Henry the first, to the said Robert his
Concubines father, of the borough of Alencester, in the County of Warwick, it
is manifested. But I need not strive much against you for this point, seeing I
may oppose your own narration, page 438. of your book, against your self:
and therefore I leave you to quarrel with your own memory, not doubting, but
you can take it best, to be controller to your self. Thirdly, your
Arithmeticall pen, can as well multiply, for a need, as detract when it list,
having as quick a slight to make Barons, as the heathens had to make gods,
which were something in name, but many times nothing in nature: for here you
make eleven Barons of the family of Botreaux, one to succeed the other, after
the first William. Whereas you are able to prove but four. And to make your
computation aright, you must begin first with William Botreaux, who began his
Baronie, at a Parliament holden at Westminster the first day of May, in the 24.
year of king Edward the third: which William had issue William, that was the
second Baron: who begat William the third, father of William the fourth, and
last Baron of that family. Of which second, and third Barons, you have made
the father to marry his sons wife, and the son to marry his own mother. To
which most unnatural matches I wonder how you could ever give your consent, you
being the only parent of seven of those eleven Barons, who had all their
conceptions and births in the womb of your pregnant brain. Lastly, I deny
that any of the said Williams, Lords Botreaux, did marie with any Katherine
that was coheire to Katherin Twenge, as you untruly have set down.

Pemsey Castle was sometime belonging to the Earl Morton: Pemsey castle.
afterward William son to king Stephen had it, who delivered up the same,
with the lands thereabout, unto King Henry the second. It was called the
honor of the Eagle, of Gilbert Lord of the Eagle, who (taking part against
King Henry the second, being deprived of all that he had, fled into
Normandy. Page 231. THis Castle took not the title of honor of the Eagle, of
Gilbert who took part against King Henry the second (as you say:) for King
William the Conqueror gave to Stephen Earl of Blois and Charters, with Ella
his daughter, the Earldom of the Eagle in Normandy, and the Castle and
honor of Pemsey in Suffex. Which foresaid honors the said Stephen enjoyed,
and afterward gave the same to Henry of Bloys his son: who enioied the same,
until he resigned them unto Richard his son, and became Abbot of
Glastenburie, and after Bishop of Winchester. This Richard being Earl of the
Eagle, and Lord of Pemsey, lived in King Stephens time, and was a witness to
the covenants of peace betwixt him and Henry Duke of Normandy, by the name of
Richard Earl of the Eagle. He gave his said Earldom, and honor of Pemsey,
to William Earl of Morton his Cosen germane, son to King Stephen. Which
gift, with the said titles of honor, King Henry the second did confirm: but
not long after* he constrained the said William to surrender unto him again,
as well those honors, as also all other lands that he had, both in Normandy,
and in England, upon condition, that the said king should re-assure unto him al
those lands which king Stephen his father was possessed of, at the death of
king Henry the first. And how truly you affirm, the honor of Pemsey to have
belonged to any Earl Morton before the reign of King Stephen (William son
to king Stephen being the first Earl Morton which enjoyed the same) it is
thought as unworthy of credit, as that before, where you allege, Pemsey
castle to have taken his first honor from Gilbert Lord of the Eagle, in the
reign of King Henry the second when it is truly proved, to be an honor at
such time as William the Conqueror gave the same in marriage with his daughter.

Five Earls of Sussex were of the family of the Albeneys, who Earls of
Sussex.
in like manner were Earls of Arundell. William de Albeney, son of William
Lord of Buckenham in Norfolk, was the first of them, who used for his Arms, a
Lion rampant in a field Gules. He was called Earl of Chichester, and of
Arundell: who had issue, by Adelize daughter of the Duke of Loraine and
Brabant, William the second Earl of Sussex and Arundell, father of William the
third Earl: which had issue (by Maude coheire of Ranulfe Earl of Chester)
William the fourth Earl, and Hugh that was the fifth Earl, both dying without
issue. After which time, that honor of Sussex lay dead, until that king
Henry the eight, in the 21. year of his reign, created Robert Radclife Earl
of Sussex. Page 234. IN this succession of Albeneys, Earls of Sussex, you have
taken great pains, making five of that surname, to have been Earls both of
Sussex and Arundell: when as you can prove but four in all to have been
Earls of that family, and but two of them Earls of Sussex, viz. William,
whom king Henry the second made the first Earl of Sussex, and Hugh his son,
who died without issue, in the 27. year of king Henry the third: for that
William whom you call the fourth Earl of Arundell, I deem as yet never
borne. And the first William, which married Queen Aelidise, the widow of King
Henry the first, who you say was both earl of Sussex and Arundell, I make
great doubt of, thinking you not able to make proof he was Earl of either.
For sure I am, that his own deed does show the contrary, that he was only
Earl of Chichester, and not of Arundell and Sussex: which to manifest I have
here set down his deed, as follows.

GVilielmus Comes Cicestriae, etc. William Earl of Chichester: to the Bishop
of Norwich, and to all faithful children of our holy mother the Church, and
to all men, as well French as English, etc. Knoweye, that I have given and
granted, to God and to the Church of Saint Mary's in Thetford, and to the
Monks there serving God: for the the souls of my father and mother, and
Queen Aelidise my wife, and the health of our children, in pure alms, the
lands that were Godricks in Ridlesworde, and in Guareshall, which belonged to
Garestorpe, which land the same day that I made this grant, one Robert held.
Witnesses, Raph the Chaplain, and Hubert de Montecaniso, with many others.

Lastly, where you say, that after the family of the Albeneyes were extinct,
the Earldome of Sussex lay dead, until he 21. year of king Henry the eight,
who then created Robert Radcliffe Earl of Sussex. To that I answer: it did
not lie dead all that while: for after the death of Hugh de Albeney, 1242. king
Edward the first, in the 18. year of his reign, made Richard Fitz-Allen Earl
of Arundell knight: at which time he also girded him with the sword of the
Earldome of Sussex. In whose issue it continued diverse discents: and then, by
attainture fell unto the crown. As in my book, entitled the Nobility of
England, which I mean shortly (God willing) to publish, you may see at large.

RIchard Earl of Clare, builded the Castle of Tunbridge, having Tunbridge.
had the said Tunbridge in exchange for Brionie in Normandy: for his
grandfather Godfrey, base son of William the second, Duke of Normandy, was
Earl of Aniou and Brionie. Pa. 243 THis descent of Godfrey Earl of Aniou, and
Brionie, is foreign, and bredde beyond the Seas in Normandy, from whence you
have had little intelligence: and therefore not so much to be condemned, for
mistaking the right father of the said Godfrey, making him the son of
William the second duke of Normandy, when as he was son to Richard the first
Duke of Normandy. Which fault (notwithstanding) I would wish you to amend in
your next edition: and also to take away from this Richard (his grandchilde)
the title of Earl, until such time as you have a better commission for making
of Earls. And for your warrant to do this, you shall have both the book of
Domesday, and diverse charters of William the Conqueror, wherein the said
Richard was a witness by the name only of Richard Fitz-Gilbert, without any
other title of honor.

THe Creuecueurs, (so named de crepito-corde) builded the Leeds castle.
Castle of Leedes: of which family, the first was Robert, who had issue
Daniell, that was father to Robert, who had issue Hamon, which married the
daughter and heir of the Baron of Folkestone, and by her had issue Hamon, the
father of Robert, who wanting issue, gave his patrimony to King Edward the
first. Page 244. THe family of Abrinces were Barons of Folkestone: from
Folkestone.
whom, by marriage, the same went to Hamon de Creuecueur, and by his daughter
to John of Sandwich* whose grandchilde by his son John, (named Julian)
carried that title to John Seagraue. Page 259. TO reconcile your
contradictions, in these two titles of Leedes Castle, and Folkestone, I think
it a very hard matter: for in the first you say, That Hamon Creuecueur (who
married the daughter and heir of the Baron of Folkestone (had issue Hamon,
that succeeded him: which Hamon had issue Robert, who dying without issue, gave
his patrimony to king Edward the first. And after, in the title of Folkestone
you affirm the contrary: saying, That the same Hamon had issue a daughter
that carried Folkestone, by her marriage, to John of Sandwich. By which thus
still overmuch busying your self in matters passing your skill, it makes you
so forgetful, that oftentimes you are feign to utter matters incoherent, and
much contradictorie. Wherefore understand, that Hamon Creuecueur, (who you say
married the daughter and heir of the Baron of Folkestone) had issue Hamon, who
succeeded his father: and he had issue Robert, (which died without issue) and
four daughters: Eleonor married to Bertram Criell, Agnes to John of Sandwich,
Isolde to Nicholas Lenham, and Isabell to Henry Hawt. Of which four daughters
you have left out the first, and two last, naming but only the second, married
to John of Sandwich: who was not the daughter of the first Hamon (as you
affirm) but of the second, whom you have casscered out of this descent. And
whereas, in the title of Leedes castle, you say, that the last Robert
Creuecueur, dying without issue, gave his patrimony to K. Edward the first.
Before I answer there unto, I first demand of you, how that may be? When your
self, in the title of Folkstone, have set down the said Roberts sister to
carry Folkestone by her marriage to John of Sandwich: which was a part of the
said Roberts patrimony. And for direct proof, that the said Robert did not
give his patrimony to king Edward the first (as you have said:) it appears by
an inquisition taken after the death of the said Robert, in the thirtieth
year of King Edward the first, that his foresaid four sisters were his
heirs, and that Eleonore the eldest had for her part of her brothers
inheritance, the Manor of Estwell in Kent, and Agnes the second sister had
Folkestone: the other two had other lands that descended to the said Robert
from his ancestors, which I take to be his patrimony.

HVbert de Burgo, was made Earl of Kent by king Henry the Earls of Kent.
third, and died without issue, Page 262. IF this be true, that Hubert de Burgo
Earl of Kent dyed without issue (as you here report he did) then does the now
Lord de La-ware wrong, to quarter the said Huberts Coat of Arms, pretending
thereby to be his heir. But whether the said honorable person does wrong
therein, or you wrong him in so saying? Let us examine this matter a little
better. First it does appear in a summons of the Nobility of this realm, for
the leuying of an army against Llewellin Prince of Wales, in the fifth year of
king Edward the first, that John de Burgo, Baron of Lammale, grandchilde to
Hubert by his son John, was by the name of John, son of John de Burgo,
called thereunto. Also by an inquisition taken after the death of the said
John, in the same kings reign, it was found, that Deruergulda the wife of of
Robert Fitz-Walter Lord of Woodham, and Hawise the wife of Robert Greylie of
Manchester, were the daughters and heirs of the said John de Burgo, and that
the foresaid Hawise did hold of the inheritance of Hubert de Burgo her great
grandfather, the Manor of Werkerley in Northamptonshire, and the Manor of
Portland in Essex. Which descent being thus far proved to Greyley, I doubt
not but you will confess, that Joan the only daughter of the said Robert
Lord Greyley was married to John Lord de La-ware. Which done, I hope you will
yield your self to have erred herein, and acknowledge the said noble person
now to be right heir, and that the said Hubert died not without issue, as you
very daungerously have affirmed he did.

HErbert married the sister of William Earl of Hereford, and Fitz-Herbert.
in her right was Lord of Deane, from whom is descended the noble family of
the Herberts. From hence also (if we shall credit the heralds, and Escucheons
of Arms) Anthony Fitz-Herbert, that great lawier, and Lord chief justice of
England, took his original. But, I think he rather descended from the
worshipful family of the Fitz-Herberts in Derbishire. Page 267. YOur often
and suspicious objections, whereby you call in question the credit of her
Majesty's Heralds (as though you judged them scarce worthy to be believed)
does proceed (as I suppose) from a malignant humor in you, rather then from
any grounds or sufficient reasons that might move you thereto. But I trust,
those of discretion will sooner give credit unto them, in matters that they
shall auerre by good warrantise, and authority, then to you, who ground your
contradicting arguments upon hear says, and opiniatiue imaginations. And
where you charge the Heralds, to have made Anthony Fitz-Herbert, (that was
Lord chief Justice of England) to be descended from that family of
Herberts, which married the sister of William Earl of Hereford: I say, they
have done therein like honest and learned Officers of Arms: and those that
have, or shall derive the said Anthony, or any of that family of
Fitz-Herberts, from any other original, then that aforesaid, they have and
shall err from the truth,

IN the time of king Edward the first, the barons of Winterborne Barons of
Wintenborne.
were the Bradstones, from whom, by the Ingeldesthorpes and Neuils, the
Viscount Montacute, and the Baron of Wentworth are descended, Page 271. YOur
Barons of Winterborne must be turned out of the plural into the singular
number: and where you make them Barons in the reign of king Edward the first,
therein are you much deceived: for Thomas Bradston the first and last Baron of
that surname, began his dignity at a Parliament holden at Westminster, in the
21. year of king Edward the third, and dyed about the 34. year of the said
kings reign, leaving issue a daughter and heir married to Poole, who had
issue a daughter and heir married to Ingeldesthorpe, which likewise had a
daughter and heir married to Neuill Marquis Montacute: who having diverse
daughters his heirs, one of them was married to Brown, (...), and an other to
Stoner, of whom the Lord Wentworth is descended. So, that hereby it may
appear, that the Vicount Montacute, and the Lord Wentworth, are descended from
Bradston, by these foresaid three several families, whereof you have left out
Poole the first of them, without which the other cannot descend from Bradstone.
And thus have you through ignorance obscured, and made imperfect this honorable
descent, to the prejudice of many worthy families descended of the same.

SVdley was lately the seat of Giles Baron Chandos, whose father Barons de
Chandos.
Edmond Bruges was created Baron Chandos by Queen Elizabeth, because he was
descended from the ancient family of the Chandos: out of which family issued
John Chandos Baron de Santo-Saluatore, that famous warrior, Page 272. YOu
think by your persuasions, to make men believe you have seen that which God
knows you were never near by many a mile: otherwise (I take it) you would
not do as here you have done, making Edmond Bruges father of the now Lord
Chandos, to be the first Baron of his surname, and that he was created into
that dignity by Queen Elizabeth: Because (say you) he was descended of the
ancient family of Chandos. So that here is both a cause lay de down, and a
time, for a color and shadow to this your untrue imagination: to the no small
prejudice of that honorable house. But, to manifest these your delusions, and
to restore again this honorable person to his right: know you for certainty,
that John Bruges, the grandfather of the now Lord Chandos, was the first Baron,
and not Edmond his father, (as you very unjustly have written.) And for proof
here of, I affirm, that the said John, was created Baron Chandos by Queen
Mary, at her manner of Saint James, the eight day of April, in the first year
of her reign, 1553. as by his letters patents, bearing date the same day and
year above said, it may appear. Which being true, I would now gladly know
here of you, how you can make good, that Edmond Bruges was the first Baron,
and had his creation by Queen Elizabeth.

Our Heralds have thrust upon us William Fitz-Eustace, to be Earls of
Gloucester.
the first Earl of Gloucester: But I suppose, there was never any such borne. I
have read in the history of Teukesbury, that about the time of the Conquest,
Bithricke a Saxon was Lord of Gloucester, who was much hated of Maude the
Conquerors wife, because he before that despised to take her to his wife. In
revenge of which disgrace, she caused him to be imprisoned, and dispossessed of
all his honors and lands. Whose titles and possessions were after given to
Robert Fitz-Hamon, the son of Hamon of Corbule: whose only daughter and heir,
named Sibill, was married to Robert Fitz-Roy, base son to king Henry the
first: Who was made the first Earl of Gloucester, commonly called the Consul
of Gloucester. This Robert had issue William, who had issue three daughters,
which carried this honor by marriage unto three families: Isabell the eldest,
marrying with John son to K. Henry the second, honored him with that title:
who being after king, made Almericke de Ebroice^, soun^ to Mabel the second
daughter, Earl of Gloucester: who dying without issue, the inheritance came to
the youngest daughter Amicia, that was wife to the Earl of Clare, and had by
him issue Gilbert Earl of Clare and Gloucester, who had issue Richard, father
of Gilbert the second, which had issue Gilbert the third, that was slain at
Sterling in Scotland: but during the nonage of this Gilbert the third, Rafe de
Mounthemerye (who had married Joan of Acres the kings daughter and widow of
Gilbert the second) was for a while called Earl of Gloucester. Afterward,
this honor (as some say) came to Peter of Gaueston (a Gascoyne) by right of his
wife, which was daughter to Gilbert the second. He dying without issue, this
honor descended to Hugh Spencer son of Eleonor, second daughter of Gilbert
aforesaid. Hugh Spencer being executed, this title came to Hugh Audley, who had
married the widow of Gaueston. Page 275. YOu here charge the Heraldes with
thrusting upon you one Earl that you cannot find, nor think as yet ever to
have been borne. And sure, I suppose this was but a flourish of your flowing
style, whereby you love to girde at Heraldes. Yet, grant they did obtrude some
such Earl, you are even with them: for you force on them here two Earls of
Gloucester which never attained unto that dignity, vidz, Peter de Gaueston, and
Hugh de Spencer. Wherefore, the better to satisfy you, and those that have
written Peter Gaueston to be Earl of Gloucester, and to have succeeded Raphe
Mont-Hermerye. I affirm, that the said Raphe Mont-Hermerye sat in Parliament
in the 27. year of king Edward the first, as Earl of Gloucester, and continued
in all Parliaments by that name, until the last year of the said kings
reign, when young Gilbert de Clare his wives son came of age: who the next
year after (being the first year of K. Edward the second) was placed in
Parliament by the name of Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester. He continued in
that dignity, until he was slain at Sterling in Scotland, in the sixth year
of the same kings reign, which was a year after the said Peter Gaueston was
beheaded by the Earl of Warwick. Which I hope is sufficient proof against
the said Peter. And touching Hugh de Spencer, that he was ever Earl of
Gloucester, I utterly deny the same: and therefore now it stands you upon,
being in the affirmitiue, to prove it: otherwise neither I, nor any other are
bound to believe you. Lastly, where you have made Sibill to be the only
daughter and heir of Robert Fitz-Hamon, and wife to Robert Earl of Gloucester,
called the Consul. I deny, not only that the one had ever any such daughter
named Sibill, but also that the other ever married any such wife. And for
proof hereof, I will desire no other then your own Author, the book of
Tewkesbury, which you have so greatly wronged.

IF it please you to believe our Heralds, Hertford had these Earls of Hertford.
Earls, Roger, who was also Earl of Clare: and those Clares, whom we have
said to be Earls of Gloucester: for Richard Clare, who dyed 1262. is plainly
named by Florilegus, to be Earl of Gloucester and Hertford. Page 309. TO this
your scoffing sport, that you make your self, upon the credit of Herauldes:
I answer, that there is great reason, (and so I hope all men will acknowledge)
that her Majesty's Heralds, invested officers of Arms (who at their creations
and admittances into their offices, are solemnly sworn to be true in all their
reports, and have their imploiments in the greatest affairs between Princes)
should be believed, in matters of their own profession, before others not of
like experience. And touching this Roger: whom you have brought upon the
Stage, by the name and title of Earl of Hertford: I say, it rests in you to
make proof of your affirmation, the Herauldes being quite against you: whom
you notwithstanding so injuriously traduce, and yet produce as Authors of your
own fantastique assertions. And for your better direction herein, I will here
inserte the said Rogers deed, by which it is very manifest that he was Earl
of Clare, and not of Hertford.

ROgerus Comes de Clare confirmauit donationem. H. Comitis Cestr. quam fecit
Sanctae Werburg. super Ecclesia de Deneford, and terram Ecclesiae, cum decimis
de molend. and omnibus pertin. and precipue illam virgatam terrae, quam Adeliza
de Claro-Monte aura sua dedit praefatae Ecclesiae. etc.

HAresfield, the Patrimony of Richard Earl of Clare, in Haresfield.
William Conquerors time, Page 312. THat there was one Richard Fitz-Gilbert, in
the time of William the Conqueror, which held Haresfield of the king, it is
manifest by the book of Domesday: but, that he was ever Earl of Clare, and
that Haresfield was his patrimony, I utterly deny. And for proof hereof, I
say, that he being the first of his name that ever came into this realm, and
that possessed any lands here, could have no possessions left unto him by his
Ancestors, which might be said to be his patrimony. And where you nominate
the said Richard to be Earl of Clare: that are you not able to prove, for in
diverse Charters of William the Conqueror, and William Rufus, the said Richard
is a witness, by the name of Richard Fitz-Gilbert Dapifer: as also in the
book of Domesday, by the name of Richard, son of Earl Gilbert. And this do
you your own self confess against your self, in the title of Clare, in your
book, Page 350.

Dunmow was the town of the Fitz-walters, who issued from Dunmow.
the family of the Clares. Iuga daughter of Raphe Baynard founded a Monastery
there, 1103. But William Baynard (of whom Iuga did hold) forfaited the Barony
of Dunmowe to the king, through fellonie. King Henry gave the same to Robert,
son of Richard, son of Gilbert, Earl of Clare, with the Castle of Baynards
in London, Page 332. HEre have you made Gilbert the grandfather of Robert
Fitz-Richard, to be Earl of Clare: which Gilbert never arrived in England,
till your pen conducted him hither: but was slain in Normandy by Raphe
Waceio, Anno 1033. Which was 33. years before the Norman Conquest: And Richard
his son was the first of that family that came into England with William the
Conqueror, who had issue Gilbert, and this Robert: to which Robert, king Henry
the first gave the Town of Dunmowe, by the name of Robert Fitz-Richard his
Sewer. As witnesses your Author of Dunmowe, whom you allege, though very
unfaithfully: for had you alleged the same truly, and put down what king
Henry he was, which gave to the said Robert Dunmowe (as your Author does) you
should then have disclosed your own error, and saved me a labor.

RIchard son of Gilbert, Earl of Angy in Normandy, (for Earls of Clare
his service in the Conquest) was by the Conqueror advanced to the honor of
Clare. He had issue Gilbert, who succeeded his father, and was the first that
was called Earl of Clare. Who had issue Richard Earl of Clare, which was
slain by the Welshmen. This Richard had issue three sons, Gilbert Earl of
Clare, that dyed without issue, Roger Earl of Clare (created Earl of Hertford
by Henry the second) and Robert his third son, from whom the family of
Fitz-Walters descended. Roger begat Richard Earl of Clare and Hertford, who
married Amicia youngest daughter and heir of William Earl of Gloucester: Page
350. YOur historical reports are very changeable: for in the title of
Haresfield, Page 312. you tell us that Richard was Earl of Clare in William
the Conquerors time: and now here, you affirm that Gilbert his son was the
first Earl of Clare, of that family. And again, in the title of Dunmowe,
there have you set down this Robert the third son of Earl Richard, truly,
to be the son of the first Richard that came into this land with William the
Conqueror: but here will you have him to be great grandchild to the same
Richard. Which by no means, the now Earl of Sussex will consent unto, because
thereby he shall loose two of his greattest ancestors, with their wives, they
being the daughters and heirs of Saint-Lyce Earl of Northampton, and the Lord
Lucy: which were both married, the one to the said Robert, and the other to
Walter his son: as more plainly does appear by the true descent here
following. Richard son of Gilbert Earl of Angy in Normandye, was Lord of
Tunbridge and Clare in England, by the gift of William the Conqueror, and had
issue Gilbert Earl of Clare, Roger that dyed without issue, 1173. and Robert
who was Sewer to king Henry the first, and Lord of Dunmow, by the said kings
gift. He married Matilda de Sainct-Lice lady of Bradham, and had issue Walter,
Lord and Baron of Woodham, that had to wife Matilde the daughter and coheire of
Richard Lucy, Lord chief Justice of England in Henry the seconds time. Of
which Walter, the honorable family of Fitz-walters took first their surname.
He dyed 1198. leaving the second Robert his son to succeed him: who dyed in
the 19. year of king Henry the third. So that, by this your mistaking, you
would cut off the first Robert and Walter his son, making the second Robert
to be the first that came from the maine line of the family of Clares. And for
proof hereof, I wish you to examine Gemiticensis, who will affirm the same,
to be true that I have here said.

GEffery Magnauill, made Walden the seat and head of his Walden.
honor and Earldom, Page 342. THe dignity and Earldom of the Magnauills,
whilst they were honored with the title of Earls, was Essex, and not Walden.
Well that family might be Lords and owners thereof, but that never the head
of their honor, and Earldom. Wherefore, if your Author so write, he did it
rather like a nouice, then an Herald: and your discretion may be suspected, in
that you played not rather your part, to teach him to speak more
Herauld-lyke, then to bring in his absurd terms for a testimony, amongst
Earledomes and Honors.

THe first Earls of Essex of the Norman race, was Geffrey Earls of Essex.
Magnauill, commonly called Mandeuill, son of William, by Margaret heir of
Eudo the Sewer: who was slain in battle in king Stephens time. There
succeeded him two sons, Geffrey and William, from whom, by a daughter, that
honor went to Geffrey Fitz-Pieres, whose two sons, Geffrey and William
succeeded in that honor. Geffrey dyed young, slain at the Tilte: William took
part with Lewis of France, against king John, and dyed without issue, 1227.
After whom succeeded Humfrey de Bohun, Earl of Hereford and Constable of
England, who had married their sister, Page 343. YOur indiscreet words used
in this place, may make those noble personages deceased to be called in
question for that which nature abhors: but it were better your pen should
prove a false witness, then so heinous a matter true. Shall we surmise (as
you write in this page) that Humfrey de Bohun, son of Henry, did marrye his
own mother. Assuredly we might seem in so doing, not only ouer-credulous,
but also irreligious. Yet you say here, Humfrey Bohun married the sister and
heir of William Magnauill Earl of Essex (who dyed without issue 1227.) Which
by no means we may believe, because the match were against nature, if it be
true, that Henry Bohun married with that sister and heir of William Magnauill
aforesaid: which is so undoubted a truth, that voluntarily it drops out of
your own pen. Page 479. of your book, in the title of the Earls of
Hereford. Besides that, it is most evident, that the said Henry, in the right
of his wife above mentioned, was the first Earl of Essex of that family: as
appears by a Charter of king Henry the third, in the 25. year of his
reign, concerning lands that he gave to the Abbay of Westminster: whereunto
the said Henry was a witness, by the name of Henry de Bohun Earl of
Hereford and Essex, and Constable of England. And further, to manifest that it
was not Humfrey the son of this Henry that married with Matilda, Know you,
that she died 1236. in the one and twenty year of king Henry the third,
which was during the life of the said Henry her husband, and four years before
he was a witness to the kings Charter aforesaid.

AFter the death of the family of Bigots, and Vffords, Richard Earls of
Suffolk.
the second advanced Michael De-la-Poole, from a Merchant, to the Honor and
dignity of Earl of Suffolk, and Lord Chauncellor of England. King Henry
the sixth created William his son, first Marquis, and after Duke of Suffolk.
He was beheaded on the Seas, and left issue John, who married the sister of
king Edward the fourth. Page 357. What is it that you will not undertake to
write, and publish of a mean person? when you very unjustly have wro^ged that
honorable family of De-la-Pooles, reporting Michael De-la-Poole, the first
Earl of that name, to have been advanced by Richard the second, from a
Merchant of Hull, (Page 549.) to the dignity of Earl of Suffolk, he being a
knight of the noble order of the Garter: by the Satutes whereof, none can be
elected unless he be borne gentle three discents, both of father and mother.
Also it does appear by an inquisition taken the 9. of Edward the third, that
sir William De-la-Poole knight Banneret, father of this Michael, was son and
heir of sir William De-la-Poole knight. All which testimonies might have
satisfied you, or any other reasonable person, both to have thought and written
more reverently of him. But not herewith contented, you after deprive him the
said Michaell, both of his son, and eldest grandchild, which succeeded him
in the said dignity, the one after the other, by the names of Michaell the
second, and Michaell the third: placing in their rowmes, as immediate
successor, and son to the foresaid first Michaell, William De-la-Poole duke of
Suffolk, his second grandchilde. In both which points how much you have erred
(to the great prejudice of the honorable Lord viscount Monta-cute, the Lord
Cobham, and the Baron Wentworth, with many other now living, descended of the
same honorable family) the true descent here following, will explain.

Michael De-la-Poole, Lord Wingfield, Earl of Suffolk, and knight of the
noble order of the Garter, son and heir of Sir William De-la-Poole knight
Banneret, and of Katherine his wife, sister of sir John Norwich knight, had
issue Michaell De-la-Poole, the second Earl of Suffolk, who died at
Haresflew, 1415. leaving issue two sons, Michaell De-la-Poole Earl of
Suffolk, that died at the battle of Agincourt, in the 3. year of Henry the
fifth, without issue, and William De-la-Poole Marquis, and afterward Duke of
Suffolk, who was beheaded on the seas. 26. of king Henry the sixth: whom you
make son to his grandfather Michaell the first of that name. And for the
better satisfying of the world, that this Michaell De-la-Poole the first Earl
of Suffolk, of that family, was not basely descended, nor a merchant of Hull
(as you and others after you have written) I have hereto added a deed of the
said Michaels before he was Earl, which does prove his father, mother,
brother, sister, and children.

MIchael De-la-poole, dominus Wingfield, etc. I Michael De-la-Poole I. Hayward
says M. De-la-poole was a merchants son of London.
Lord Wingfield, do confirm certain lands to the religious house of
Saintcleare, near unto Kingstone upon Hull, the which lands were before given
by sir William De-la-Pole knight my father, to pray for the good estate of king
Richard, and for Michaell De-la-poole, John, Thomas, William, Richard, and
Margaret my children, and for sir Edmond De-la-Poole knight, my Brother, and
Margaret Neuill my sister, and for the souls of sir William De-la-Poole my
father, and Katherin my mother, etc. Witnesses Alexander Archbishop of York,
Henry Percie Earl of Northumberland, Thomas Sutton, Robert de Hilton, and
Walter Fawconbridge, knights, with many others. Dated at Hull the first of
March, the seventh year of the reign of King Richard the second.

HEngham: the Barons thereof were called the Barons of Rhia, Hengham.
who descended from John Marshall, nephew of William Marshall Earl of Penbroke
(by his brother:) to whom King John gave the lands of Hugh Gurney a traitor,
together with the daughter, and coheire of Hubert de Rhia. From the Marshals
the same came to the Morleys, and from them, by the Louels, to Parker now Lord
Morley. Page 360. NOw coming to speak of the Barons of Rhia, let me, by your
patience, put you in mind of a late conference had before the now right
honorable Earl marshall of England, concerning the true coats of the two
families of Bygot Earl of Norfolk, and Marshall Earl of Penbroke. Master
Garter having before that time set down and quartered in diverse noble
personages atchieuements, for Marshals coat, quarterly gold and vert a Lion
passant Gules (a coat lately devised:) and for Bygots coat, perpale gold
and vert a Lion rampant Gules: neither of them both being in truth their right
coats. My self being commanded to say what I knew touching these matters,
showed, for Marshals coat, one fair deed with a seal of Arms thereto, of
John Marshall father of William Marshall Earl of Penbroke, and Anselme, that
was father to John Marshall Baron of Rhia: on which seal was written, John
Marshall, and in his shield or escucheon, a bend fuzulie. Also I showed a
transcript of an other deed of the said John, in which was written: John, son
of John the Kings Marshall, with the same Arms, of a bend fuzulie, testified
under the hand of an Officer of arms, long before that time deceased. Lastly,
I showed an old roll of Arms, wrought in colorus, in Henry the thirds time:
wherein was the same coat, viz. Gules a bend fuzulie gold, and over the
head thereof written the name of Marshall. All which proofs notwithstanding,
your self being there then present, very steadfastly denied the same to be
the coat of Marshall Earl of Penbroke, affirming that bend fuzulie to be the
peculiar coat of Marshall Baron of Rhia: who was (as you then said) of no
consanguinitie to Marshall Earl of Penbroke. For further maintaining of which
your speech, you then showed two new petegrees, lately contrived and made by
your consent, declaring the said two Marshals to be several families, and
not one. Since which time (perusing well your Britannia (fol. 360,) I find the
same there avouched by yourselfe for truth, which at that time you so
confidently denied before the said Earl Marshall: viz. That John Marshall
Baron of Rhia, was nephew to William Marshall Earl of Penbroke by his brother:
which is quite contrary to your speeches before used. By this your information
of these Marshals to be several families (without which you had no color to
maintain your error: for that the Barons of Rhia always used for their coat
of Arms the said bend fuzulie) the right coat of Marshall, is like now to be
neglected, and the Lion in the parted field used in stead thereof, the same
being the peculiar coat borne by Marshall and Bygot, when they were Marshals
of Englnd, and not belonging to any one private name: as by many other good
proofs it may appear. And because I would not have any heareafter to stand
doubtful which of us both are to be believed touching these two Marshals to
be descended of one parent. I will here set down the record that does warrant
the same. Which being proved, I trust you will show us some reason, why the
younger brother did bear the bend fuzulie, if not descended to him from his
father. That done, I will then show you proof, how and when, both the elder
Marshall, and Bygot did bear the Lion on the parted field, which you missed to
find in Master Somersets Notes, and Master Leylands twelve books lent you by
master John Stow: in whose custody I have seen diverse of them being most
excellent and rare works, touching the description of this Country, written
not upon here-say and reports, but upon his eyesight and long travel from
town to town, and place to place, upon the Kings charge and Commission, which
Books I wish might be published in the right Authors name.

EX Rotulo cartarum de Anno quinto Regis Iohannis: Johannes Mariscallus nepos
Guilielmi Marescalli comitis Penbroc. Habet terras in Norfolk, and Suffolk:
quae fuerunt Hugonis de Gornaco proditoris regis, and terram, quae fuit Hugonis
de Angee in Norfolk, and Kantelee and Castre, etc. Testibus I. Norwich
Episcopo Gulielmo Marescallo Commit. Penbroc. Galfrid. filio Petri Commit. Essex,
Roberto filio Rogeri, Hugone de Neuill. Dat. apud Merleberge. 16. Ianuarii.

KIng Stephen gave Norwich to his son William, from whom Norwich.
king Henry the second took it again, and kept it himself, although that
Henry his son, called the young King, had (when he had aspired unto the
crown) with great protestation promised the same unto Hugh Bygot, whom he had
drawn unto his faction. Bygot notwithstanding, following the young kings side
(who could not contain his hope offered, touching the kingdom, within the
bounds of right and reason) grieuouslie afflicted this city. And afterward
being made Earl of Norfolk, he is thought to have builded that Castle, upon a
high hill near to the Church: which being maruailous deeply entrenched about,
was in those days thought impregnable. But, Lewis the Frenchman, to whom the
seditious Barons of England had sworn their fidelity, easily took the same
by composition. We think in deed, that Bygot did build this Castle, because we
have seen their Lions saliant, in the same form engraven in stone, as the
Bygots used them in their seals, before they obtained the honor of Marshals.
Page 363. IF your words here had been but coniecturall, or gathered by
reports, as in many other places they are, you should have less discredited
your self, then by affirming you had seen that, which in truth you did never
see: for where you say: We think that the Bygots builded this Castle, because
we have there seen Lions saliant in the same form engraven in stone as the
Bygots used in their seals before they obtained the honor and office of
Marshall: certain it is, that on the said Castle there are no Lions saliant,
nor any such Ensign or token as the Bygots did bear in seal or shield, or
any Arms at all. And, for that you did of late, (as before) upon conference
had before the now Earl Marshall of England, affirm the said Lious saliant
upon the Castle walls of Norwich, to be the true Arms of the Bygots, before
they came to be Marshals of England, my self having seen diverse deeds of
the said Bygots to prove the contrary, the Seals whereof were, Shieldes
charged only with a plain Cross, (which coat you then avouched to be the
Arms of Vlster) whereupon, I for my better satisfaction therein, did ride to
Norwich for to search the truth of your speech: and going into the said castle,
I found over the first gate, two great stones fixed, of some yard square, and
upon each of them a Lion passant cowardie, their tails turning under their
bellies, and coming over their backs, but in no Shield or Escucheon. And
seeking more diligently all other places about the said Castle, I did find
over the hall door, other two like stones, with a Lion also upon each of
them, but contrary to the former, for these were passant, regardants with
their tails over their backs, and the ends in their mouths: yet neither in
Shield, nor Escucheon. And therefore no such coat armor is there upon the
Castle of Norwich, as you said you had seen, that the Bygots did use in
their Shieldes and Seals. In consideration of this my great pains, and
journey, I desire but that you will from henceforth make a difference between
the Antique fictions of a caruers brain, and the right ensigns of our
ancient Nobility: which you say, Were in King Henry the thirds time but
every man's own inventions, they being long time before, the honorable
rewards and tokens of valorous persons.

VVOrmegay, commonly called wrongay, was given by William Wormegay.
the third Earl Warren and Surrey, to Reignald de Warren his younger brother:
by whose grandchilde Nicholea, daughter of William his son, it was forthwith
translated to the Bardolphs, who bare for their arms, in a shield Azur three
Cinkfoyles gold: a great part of whose inheritance, together with the
dignity, fell to William Philips, and by his daughter, unto the viscount
Beaumount. Page 369. YOur bare imagination concerning the gift of Wormegay, by
William Earl Warren, to his younger brother, is nothing probable: for Reignald
de Warren had the same by marriage with the daughter and heir of William de
Wormegay, and not by any gift of his brother. And where you affirm, the said
Reignald had a grandchild by his son William, named Nicholea married to
Bardolph, I say he never had any such grandchild, but two others, called
Beatrix, and Isabell: which Beatrix was married to Bardolph: as by the
testimony of several deeds here following it may appear.

NOtum sit omnibus, tam praesentibus, quam futuris, quod ego Reginaldus, de
Warren, etc. Be it known unto all men, as well present, as they that shall be
hereafter, that I Reignald de Warren, have given my church of Plumbto^ to the
Canons of Southwark, for the health of my soul, and of Alice my wife, William
my son, Isabel the Countess my mother, and William Earl Warren my brother,
and of William de wormegay father of Alice my said wife, etc.

SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Gulielmus de Warren, etc. Let those men
know that are present, and they that shall come hereafter, that I William de
Warren, do give and confirm to the Canons of Southwarke, thirty Acres of land
in ^otis^ray, for the health of mine own soul, my father Reignald, my mother
Alice, and my wife Beatrix, my son Reignald, and my daughters Beatrix and
Isabell, and for all my ancestors, etc.

William the Conqueror made Raph the first Earl of Earls of Norfolk.
Norfolk: who (as I have said) stirring up new Rebellion, had for his
successor Hugh Bygot Earl of Norfolk: who had the third penny of the said
County (as appears in his Charter of creation) given him by king Henry the
first (whose steward he was.) After whom, in direct succession from father to
son, followed Hugh (that took part with Henry the young king, against king
Henry the second his father) Roger, which flourished in king John's time, Hugh
who died in the year of our Lord 1225. Roger who in right of his wife brought
into his family the Honor of Marshall of England, for he married Maude, the
eldest daughter and one of the heirs of William Marshall Earl of Penbroke: by
whom he had issue Roger earl of Norfolk, who being wounded with running at
the tilt, died without issue: and Hugh Bygot, Lord chief Justice being slain
in the battle of Lewis, his son Roger was placed after his uncles death in
the Earldome of Norfolk, and dignity of Marshal: who incurring the
displeasure of king Edward the second, was enforced to pass over all his
honors, and almost his whole inheritance to the king. Page 370. THe errors
herein are these: first you say, that Hugh Bygot was Earl of Norfolk, and had
the third penny of that County (as appears by his Charter of creation,
given him by king H. the first. For answer I say: you have not seen, nor can
prove any such Charter as you here avouch: neither was he the said Hugh, or any
of that family Earl before the first year of king Stephen, who then made him
Earl of Norfolk: because he being present at the death of king Henry the
first, testify before the Archbishop of Canterbury and other the Barons of
this realm, that he heard king Henry upon his death bed say, his will was,
that his Nephew Stephen, and not Maude his daughter, should succeed him in his
kingdom of England.

Secondly, where you reckon a confused succession of these Earls: saying, That
from the first Hugh in Henry the first time, succeeded in direct line from
father to son, Hugh that took part against king Henry the second, etc. To
this I answer, that you were in a Labyrinth, not able to find out what issue
there was betwixt the first and second Hugh. And to unfold this your error: I
affirm, that the first Hugh, and those that you say succeeded between from
father to son, to that Hugh, whom you name the second, were all but one
person: for he that was Steward to king Henry the first, and was after made
Earl of Norffolke by king Stephen, was the same person that lived in the time
of king Henry the second, and that took part with the young king against his
father.

Thirdly, where you affirm, that the last Earl Roger surrendered all his
honors, and almost all his inheritance unto king Edward the second, it seems
a matter unto me very unlike, that the said Roger dying in the life of king
Edward the first, could in the reign of king Edward the second make any such
surrender. But here have you done very wisely, in leaving out the cause of the
kings displeasure against the said Roger: for therein would you have disclosed
your own error. But, because I would not have you ignorant of the same, king
Edward the first in the fifteenth or sixteenth year of his reign, required
this Roger Bygot Eerle of Norffolke, Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, and
Humfrey de Bohun then Earl of Hereford, to go with him into France: whose
request these three noble persons refused, whereupon, at the said kings return
again into England, he forced Gilbert de Clare, and Humfrey de Bohun the
younger son of the soresaid Humfrey, to marrye with two of his daughters,
without either land or money, and the said Roger Bygot (to appease the kings
indignation) did make over unto him most part of his lands, with the office of
Marshall of England. And this was done by king Edward the first, and not by
Edward the second, as you have here set down.

KIng Edward the third, gave the Earldom of Cambridge Earls of Cambridge.
unto Edward of Langley his fifth son. Afterward, Richard his younger son
enjoyed the same honor, by the favor of king Henry the fifth. But he being
disloyal and ungrateful, plotting the death of that most excellent prince,
was beheaded, and the Earldom of Cambridge utterly decayed with him, Page
381. THe Earldom of Cambridge utterly decayed not with Richard of
Conesborough, younger son of Edmond of Langley Earl of Cambridge, and Duke of
York (who was executed in the third year of Henry the fifth, (as you say) but
was after revived again in Richard his son, whom king Henry the sixth, in
the fourth year of his reign created Earl of Cambridge, and after Duke of
York, Regent of France, and protector of England.

HVntingdon had these Earls, Syward and Walthe of his son, Earls of
Huntingdon.
after whom, by Maude his daughter, that honor came first to Simon Sant-lize
Earl of Northampton. After that, to David brother to Alexander king of Scots:
(for Maude was married to to them both: and had issue by both.) Whereupon, as
the princes favor and fortune changed, sometimes the Sant-lizes, and sometimes
the Scots enjoyed this honor, vidz. Henry the son of David, then Simon
Sant-lize son to the first Simon. And then Simon Sant-lize the third: who
dying without issue, William king of Scots, brother of the foresaid Malcolme,
succeeded: whom David his brother followed, and had issue that succeeded him,
John his son, surnamed Scote, that was Earl of Chester, and dyed without
issue, leaving for his successor, Alexander the second, which married the
daughter of king Henry the third; who possessed this honor but a while, Page
387. BEfore I enter to open your errors in this succession of the Earls of
Huntingdon, I would entreat you, of this number of eleven Earls, to put out
five of them at the least. And because you shall take them right, I will first
nominate unto you those which ought to stand, beginning with Walthe of Earl of
Northumberland, unto whom William the Conqueror gave in marriage with Judith
his niece the Earledomes of Huntingdon, and Northampton. This Walthe of had
issue Maude, who was given in marriage unto David, brother to Alexander king of
Scots: which David was after a witness to the Charter of king Henry the first,
touching lands and liberties that the said king gave unto the City of
London, by the name of David Earl of Huntingdon. After the death of David, the
foresaid Maude was married again to Simon Sant-lize a Norman gentleman, who
had with her the Earldom of Northampton. David before named, had issue Henry,
who in the life of his father was Earl of Huntingdon, and dyed in the 18.
year of king Stephen, leaving issue three sons, Malcolme, William, and
David. Malcolme being king of Scotts, rebelled against king Henry the second:
for which cause, the king seized into his hands the Earldom of Huntingdon.
After the said Malcolmes death, William his brother succeeded him in the
kingdom of Scotland. He likewise rebelled against his Lord king Henry the
second, and being taken prisoner, was carried into Normandy, Anno 1174. Where
he compounded to pay for his ransom ten thousand marks, and to release all
his title and interest of the Earledomes, both of Huntingdon, and
Northumberland. After which, king Henry gave the Earldom of Huntingdon to
David, the third son of David Earl of Huntingdon before mentioned. Which
David was a witness to the Charter of king Richard the first, of lands that
he gave to the Abbey of Peterborough, Anno 1189. by the name of David Earl of
Huntingdon. He dyed in the second year of king Henry the third, and left issue
John his son, surnamed Scotte, who succeeded him: which dyed without issue in
the 22. year of king Henry the third. Thus have I rightly set down the
succession of the Earls of Huntingdon, unto John surnamed Scotte: which
unless you can by good authorities disprove (as I assure my self you cannot)
I hope you will not only confess your error: but will abate in your next
impression those five, which in deed were never Earls of Huntingdon: vidz.
Syward who was but Earl of Northumberland: then the three Simons Sant-lizes,
that were Earls of Northampton only, and lastly, William king of Scotts.

Ashbye de-la-zouch was sometimes belonging to Alane de-lazouch Ashbye
de-lazouch.
Baron, who bare for his arms, a Shield gules ten bezants. He by marrying
the daughter of Roger Quincie Earl of Winchester, greatly increased his
inheritance. But calling in question of law, John Earl Warrin (who would have
his cause tried by sword, and not by law) he was by him slain in the kings
court at Westminster Anno 1279. and within a few years after, the daughters
and heirs of his grandchild carried this inheritance by marryage to the
family of Hollands, who were Barons a long time: whose inheritance passed to
the Louels and Saint-mawres. Page 399. BY aiming at successions without sure
ground, you still miss the mark whereat you do shoot: as here, when you
say, That the daughters and heirs of the grandchild of Alane Baron Zouch
were married to the families of Holland: Who long time continued in the name
and title of Barons: you being not able to prove but one of those daughters
married to Holland, and he no Baron, nor any of his posterity, other then of
your making. And where you say, That the said Hollands inheritance descended to
the families of the Louells and Saint Mawres, I answer: Well may you dream of
such a succession, but never can you produce any testimony for the same. For,
had you known the truth hereof, you would have said, that both Holland and
Saint-Mawre married the two daughters and coheires of Zouch: and not have made
Saint-Mawre to descend from Holland, when there was never any such matter.

NOw let us come to the Earls of Warwick. And to let pass Earls of Warwick.
Guare, Morindus Guy, that bare the bell of England, and others of like
account, whom the fruitful wits of our Herauldes were brought a bed with
all at one birth etc. Page 438. BY this may all men evidently see your
malicious and disdainefull humor against her Majesty's Herauldes of Arms, in
that you cannot be contented in many other places of your book, to make doubt
and question of their reports and doings, whether the same may be credited,
yea or no: but here most injuriously and falsely, you charge them to have
brought forth for Earls of Warwick, Guare, Morindus, Guy the bel-ringer, and
many others of that rank, of which, though Rouse of Warwick, and others have
written of Guy, yet are not you able to justify, that the Herauldes were
Authors of any such suspected Chieftaines. And in that you make your worship
merry (with The fruitful wits of our Herauldes: supposed by you, To have bin
brought a bed with those imagined Earls all at one birth.) I wonder that so
cunning a midwife should make us the reputed fathers of those which we never
wrapped up within the sheets or leaves of our Records. But such a midwife,
such a nursse are you, as have not only changed other men's children in the
cradle and sophisticated the reports of worthy Authors: but also most
ungratefully have charged the parents, and first collectors of many sound
notes (helpefull to your credit and labors) as the inuentors of your
misreportes, whereby you have not only falsified in your book, many things
concerning the discents of noble families, imagining of your own brain,
diverse nobles to have been, that never were, and extinguishing the memorial of
others that were: But also most untruly have made her Majesty's Herauldes the
Authors of feigned stories, and legends of lies, when beside concealment of
many favors received from the Heralds, you cease not to carpe at them, from
whose works you have borrowed the substance of your Herauldy, and the grounds
of your skill in discents, therefore owe them good words at the least, for
your own credit, least they should call for their lent feathers again, and
leave you naked of your Armorie, as Esops crow.

Earls of Leicester were of the Saxons, first Leofrike, who was Earls of
Leicester.
Earl there, in the year of our Lord 716. to whom in right line succeeded,
Algare the first, Algare the second, Leofrike the second, Leofestan, Leofrike
the third, who lies buried at Couentrie, Algare the third, whose sons were
Edwine Earl of March, Morkar Earl of Northumberland, and Lucie his daughter,
who first was married to Iuon Talboys borne at Aniou, after to Roger de Romara,
of whom was borne William de Romara Earl of Lincoln: when male issue of the
Saxons failed, and the naeme of a Saxon became despised, Robert de Beamont a
Norman, Lord of Pont-Audomare, and Earl of Millent, was created Earl of
Leicester, by king Henry the first. After him succeeded his son surnamed
Bossu, then his grandchild called Blanchmaine, and his grandchildes son
named Fitz-Parnell, all Roberts. This Fitz-Parnell (so called of Parnell his
mother, the daughter and only heir of Hugh Grantmaismill) dyed without issue.
Within a few years after, Simon de Mountford (who was descended of the kings
of France) Robert Fitz-Parnels sisters son, enjoyed this honor. After that,
Ranulfe Earl of Chester had it, not by right of inheritance, but by the
princes favor. Then Almericke the son of Simon de Montford, and after him,
Simon de Mountford his son, whom (being banished) king Henry the third sent
for out of France, and honoring him which the Earldom of Leicester, and other
great promotions, married him to his sister: he rebelling against his
sovereign, Edmond, surnamed Crouchbacke Earl of Lancaster, youngest son to
king Henry the third, had this honor given him by his brother. Afterward,
this honor lay hid (as it were) a long time amongst the titles of the family
of Lancasters: And Maude the daughter of Henry Duke of Lancaster, being married
to William of Bauare Earl of Holland, Zeland, etc. Added moreover to him the
Earldom of Leicester, she dying without issue, it came again to John of
Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, who had married Blanch, the other sister of Maude.
Since that, it continuaed to be all one with Lancaster, until the sixth year
of Queen Elizabeth's reign, when she made Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester,
Page 404.. HEre will we not stand to examine the truth of your Saxon Earls:
but receive them as mattter indifferent to fill up a room in your book. And
touching these other Earls of Leicester: I say, your wits have misconceiued
and brought forth Rainulph Earl of Chester, Almarike Earl Mountfort, Simon
his son, William of Bauare, and others, which as yet were never Earls of
Leicester, with whose untimely birth, you were so payned (as it seems) that
you quite forget four other Earls that were rightly invested, and succeeded
in that dignity vidz. Thomas and Henry, grandchildren to king Henry the third
by his son Edmond: After Henry, succeeded the second Henry his son: And
after him his grandchild by his daughter Blanch (called Henry of
Bullingbrooke) who was after king of England by the name of Henry the fourth.
And therefore I would entreat you to leave out in your next and fifth edition,
your first four Earls here mentioned: in which doing, you should make room
for the other four, whom very injuriously you have thrust out of their right
place of succession.

HInckley (if our Heraults deceive me not) had for Earls Hinckley.
thereof Hugh Grantmaisuill, great Steward of England during the reign of king
William Rusus, and of Henry the first, he had issue two daughters, Petronell
that was married to Robert Earl of Leicester (who in her right was high
Steward of England) And Alice married to Roger Bygot. etc. Page 399. Truly I
must needs confess that her Majesty's Herault has deceived you, and contrary
to your expectation, has answered some of your untruths: but that the
Heraults do affirm Hugh Grentemaisnill to be Earl of Hinckley I utterly
deny the same. And now comparing your speeches here, with those before in the
title of Earls of Leicester, I find them very variable, and your self
forgetful to contradicte your self: in so little a distance: for in that
before, you make erroneously Hugh Grantemaisnill to have had but one only
daughter and heir named Parnell, that was married to Robert Earl of Leycester,
and here you acknowledge that he had a second daughter named Alice, married to
Roger By got ancester to the Earls of Norfolk: By disanulling of which Alice,
you endanger the succession and inheritance of most of the Nobility of this
Realm, which are from her descended. But understand that I do not produce
this your assertion as erroneous in this place: but rather to confirm your
opinion here as true, that your own words before disagreeing from this
truth, may not receive any credit when they shall be read. Page 404. of your
book.

William Conqueror gave Pontfret unto Hildebert Lacy Pontfret.
a Norman, who builded there a Castle. He had issue Robert that succeeded him:
to Robert succeeded Henry, whose only daughter Albrede was married to Robert
de Luzures, unto whom she bare one only daughter married to Richard
Fitz-Eustace Constable of Chester, whose successors took unto them the name of
Lacie, and were Earls of Lincoln. Page 534. YOu have so long used this trade
of patching and peecing of Petegrees with untimely issue and unnatural
marriages, as many now well experienced do condemn you of palpable ignorance,
I wish you therefore some other practice more fitting your skill, and less
prejudicial to the common wealth, for here (as in many other noble families)
you have confused and falsified this petigree of Lacies, making Henry Lacie
Lord of Pomfret to have issue but one only daughter, and sole heir named
Albrede, when as he had a son named Robert that succeeded him, and no
daughter at all. After you avouch that daughter Albrede, to be wife to Robert
de Luzurs (a man as yet unborn) and to have issue by him a daughter and sole
heir, married to Richard Fitz-Eustace Constable of Chester. To which I
answer, that the same Albrede, who (you say) married Robert de Luzurs was the
widow of Henry Lacie, and not his daughter. And that daughter and sole heir
you affirm to be wife to Richard Fitz-Eustace, was the only heir of Eudo de
Luzurs by Albrede the relict of Henry Lacie, and not of Robert de Luzurs. And
for proof that Henry Lacie did marry with Albrede, and had issue Robert
Lacie, that died 1193. as also that the said Albrede after the death of Henry
Lacie, married for her second husband, Eudo de Luzurs, and had issue one sole
daughter and heir named Albrede, wife to Richard Fitz-Eustace, Constable of
Chester, I set you down these four deeds following.

REgi Angliae and omnibus fidelibus suis tam Franc. quam Angl. salutem. To the
king of England and to all his true and faithful people as well French as
English greeting. Know ye that I Robert de Lacie of Pomfred, for the health of
my soul, and Henry my son, and of all my auncesters, have given to Gilbert
the Ermite of Saint James of Notall, and to his ten brethren there serving God,
being of the same house and to their successors, the town of Nether Sutton,
with all such liberties and bondmen as Gilbert my father had, of the free gift
of William Duke of Normandy, the year after the conquest of England, etc.
Witnesses, Geffrey Estoteuile the Shiriffe, and Roger his brother, Sir Henry
de Alder, etc.

OMnibus ad quos praesentes peruenerint tam Franc. quam Angl. salutem. To all
to whom these presents shall come, as well French as English, greeting. Know ye
that I Robert de Lacie of Pomfret, for the health of my soul, and for the
soul of Henry my father, and Albrede my mother, and for the souls of all my
ancestors, and successors, have given and confirmed in perpetual Alms, to
the Abbay of Kirkestall, and to the Monks there serving God, four Hydes of
land, with a Mill in the town of Killinghale. Witnesses Henry the Archdeacon
the writer, William son of Richard, etc.

OMmibus ad quos praesentes peruenerint tam Franc. quam Angl. salutem. To all
to whom these presents shall come, as well French as English, greeting. Know ye
that I Eudo de Luzures have confirmed certain lands by my deed in Euerstone,
with the assent of Albrede my wife, and Robert Lacie her son, to Hugh de
Osmondwike, and to his heirs for ever, for homage and service, etc. These
being witness, Matthewe Vicar of Pomfret, Sir Richard de Thoresworth, etc.

NOuerint vniuersi per praesentes, quod ego Robertus de Lacy, etc. Know all
men by these presents, that I Robert de Lacie of Pomfret, have given, and
granted, and by this my deed, have clearly confirmed to Richard Fitz-Eustace,
and to my sister Albrede his wife, and to their heirs for ever, the towns of
Hotton, Newton, Locton, Euerston, and Broitton, with the half part of the town
of Riggeton, etc. Moreover, I do clearly acquit the said Eustace, and
Albrede his wife, and their heirs for ever, of all service, and homage due to
me, and my heirs for the same. Witnesses Sir Richard de Lunel Constable of
Pomfret, Sir William de Waterton etc.

ALencester (the free town) which king Henry the first gave Alencester*
to Robert Corbet, for love of his daughter. But he the said Robert, gave the
same town to William Botreaux, and Peter Fitz-Herbert, his gradchildren, Page
438. HEre are you to be commended, in reforming your own error: for in the
title of the Barons of Botreaux, page of your Book 229. You there have set
down Richard Corbet to be father to the concubine of king Henry the first.
And here you say that Robert Corbet was her father, which is true indeed, and
the other false: but as you have here in this place amended one error, so have
you likewise committed an other, in auouching Peter Fitz-Herbert, to be the
said Robert Corbets grandchilde, when as the said Robert (in your sense) had
neither son graundchild, nor great grandchilde, which was called by the name
of Peter Fitz-Herbert. And therefore, I marvel, from whence you have these
fabulous fragments.

BArons Burnell, were an ancient family here, until that in Barons Burnell.
King Edward the seconds time, the only daughter and heir of that house,
married first with John Louell, and after with John Handlo, whose son H^gh,
took to him the surname of Burnell, from whom the Radcliffes Earls of Sussex
are descended. Page 456. TO this may I answer as to many others: That you
write you know not what, otherwise you would not here so untruly have affirmed
Hugh Handlo, to be son of John Handlo, and Maude Burnell his wife: they never
having any such son, nor you any other proof then your own imagination for
the same: And for approbation hereof, it appears by diverse offices, in the
time of king Edward the third, that John Handlo, in right of Maude Burnell his
wife was seized of the Manors of Holgat, and Acton Burnell, for term of his
life, the Remainder to Nicholas Handlo, alias Burnell, son and heir of the
said John by Maude his wife. And therefore no such Hugh, as you avouch to be
son of John Handlo: but had you said, that Hugh had been grandchilde of John,
and son of Nicholas, then had you in this point saved your own credit, and
me a labor,

HArewood Castle came from the Curcyes to Waryn Ftz-Gerald, Harewood Castle.
whose daughter Margaret, was married first to Bauldwyn Rivers, son to the
Earl of Devonshire (who dyed before his father) and after she married Foulke
de Brent; from her it came by inheritance to G. Lisley, whose successors were
called Lords of the Isle, Rougemont and Harewood: But male issue failing, the
sister of the last Robert, transported this inheritance (by marriage) to
William de Alborough; by whose only daughter, it came to the Rythers, which
now holds the same, Page 535. YOur errors committed in this Title of Harewood
Castle, are worthy some censure: For, first you say, that Harewood Castle
came from the Curcyes to Waryn Fitzgerald, and that his daughter Margaret
carried the same by marriage to Bauldwyn Ryuers; Wherein, you are greatly
deceived: For Waryn Fitzgerald, which first possessed Harewood Castle, by
marrying the sister and heir of Curcy, had issue a son, and no daughter:
which son, had issue an other son and two daughters; and so your descent
very untrue in that point. Secondly, you affirm that after the death of the
said Margaret, Harewood Castle did descend by inheritance, to G. Lisley. To
that I answer; Had you known the truth of this descent, you would have set
down both the time, and how the said G. Lisley was the said Margarets heir,
whether by lineall, or collateral descent: but that being a matter too
intricate for you to perform, in steed thereof you were forced to leave for
his name a bare letter G. and his right of inheritance, for the readers of your
Book, to find in nubibus. And although for some special cause, I do forbear
here to lay open this honorable progeny of Lisles, yet by the way will I tell
you, that there was never any one of that family, whose name began with a G.
that possessed Harewood as an inheritance descended to him (from the foresaid
Margaret;) nor that wanting heirs male, his issue carried the same by marriage
to the family of Aldborough, as you very indiscreetly have here set down:
for all those Lysleys that were owners of Harewood, were called by the name of
John. Thirdly, that the sister and heir of Robert Lysley, transported this
inheritance by marriage, to William de Aldborough, I utterly deny the same; and
for proof say, that Elizabeth the wife of Sir William Aldborough was sister
and heir of John Lisley, in the time of king Edward the third, and not of
Robert. And lastly, whereas without any probability, you affirm, that the
foresaid Sir William Alborough had issue by his wife one only daughter and
heir, married to Sir William Ryther. I answer, that in saying he had but one
only daughter, you wrong diverse Worshipful families now living, that are
descended of Elizabeth an other daughter and coheire of the said Sir William
Aldborough, and his wife; who was first married to Sir Bryan Stapleton, and
after to Sir Richard Redman, as by an inquisition taken after the death of the
said Sir William Aldborough and Elizabeth his wife, in the. 12. year of king
Richard the second, it does appear.

FOkingham, now the habitation of the Clyntons, in ancient time Barons of
Fokingham.
the Barony of Gauntes, who descended from Gilbert of Gaunt, grandchild to
Bauldwyn Earl of Flaunders; to whom many goodly Revenues fell, by the bounty
of William the Conqueror: His son Walter of Gaunt begat Gilbert (created by
king Stephen Earl of Lincoln) and Robert of Gaunt: but the Earl left one
only daughter, married to Simon the third Earl of Northhampton, who dyed
without issue; to whom her uncle Robert succeeded in the Baronie, and was
father to Gilbert de Gaunt; to whom Lewis the Frenchman (called in by the
Barons against king John) granted the title of Earl of Lyncolne: whose son,
the third Gilbert, begat the fourth Gilbert, and Margaret, wife to William
Kyrdeston: which fourth Gilbert, having no children, made E. 1. his heir, and
king E. 2. gave this Barony to Henry de Bellement or Beaumonte. Page 412.
FIrst, in your assertion, that (Gilbert the Earl, son and heir to Walter de
Gaunt) had but one only daughter: It is manifestly to be proved that he had
two sons, and a daughter; both which sons had issue. Secondly, I say that
neither the daughter of Gilbert came to the inheritance, nor any such uncle
Robert succeeded her in that dignity: the right thereof ever remaining in her
brothers, who with their issue, succeeded in the dignity. Thirdly, that the
foresaid Robert was not father to the third Gilbert (as you report) whom Lewis
the Frenchman made Earl of Lincoln, but great uncle (if any such Robert were
ever at all:) and the better to manifest the same, I have here set you down
the rrueth of this descent, as ensues.

WAlter de Gaunt, son of Gilbert de Gaunt, that founded the House of Gauntes
in the city of Bristow in William Conquerours time, had issue Gilbert, (made
Ear of Lincoln by king Stephen) Walter, Henry, Bawldwyn, Gonora, and Agnes.
The said Earl Gilbert, married Hawise, daughter of the first William Romare
Earl of Lincoln, and had issue Gilbert, the second Earl of Lincoln,
disinherited by Henry the second, Bawldwyn Lord of Borne, and Alice wife to
Simon Sanctolice Earl of Northampton. Gilbert the second had issue the third
Gilbert, whom Lewis the Frenchman made Earl of Lincoln, and that died sanz
issue in Henry the thirdes time. Bawldwyn second son of the first Earl
Gilbert, was by the gift of his father Lord of Borne, and Deeping: he founded
the Abbay of Borne. 1140. in the honor of Henry the second his Master, and
died the 4. of May. 1156. leaving Emme his only daughter and heir, married to
Hugh Lord Wake of Lydell, of whom the noble families of Wakes descended. And
now to return again to Walter de Gaunt Lord of Folkingham, second son to
the first Walter, (whom you name Robert) he had issue Gilbert de Gaunt, father
to the second Gilbert: whose son, Gilbert the third, was the first Baron of
Folkingham; and was by that name in a Parliament holden at Worcester. 49. of
Henry the third. This Gilbert had great liuinges given unto him by Gilbert
the last Earl of Lincoln his kinsman: He died, leaving issue Gilbert de Gaunt
his son, (who was Baron of Folkingham. 24. E. 1. Nichola wife to Peter
Malolakue, and Margaret wife to William Kyrdeston. Thus by my long and
laborious journey, in the end, I have brought these honorable Families
descended of the Lord Wake, to their right and ancient Auncestor Gilbert de
Gaunt, the first Earl of Lincoln; whom you would have obscured, by making him
to die without heirs male, he having issue two sons, as before in this place
I have mentioned.

THis County of Lyncolne boasts of her Earls (after Egga, Earls of
Lyncolne.
and Morcar Saxous) William de Romara a Norman, borne of Luce (sister of
Morcar) and Roger Fitzgerald de Romara, to whom being dead (for neither his
son, who died before his father, nor his grandchild, used this title)
Stephen substituted Gilbert de Gand, whose daughter and heir Simon S. Lice
married, and succeeded in this honor: but he being dead, Ranulph Earl of
Chester, William de Romara his brother by the mother, (for Luce had now the
third time married Ranulph the second of Chester) obtained this inheritance and
honor of king Henry the third. Page 420. FIrst, where you affirm Simon de
Sanctolice to have been Earl of Lincoln in right of Alice his wife, daughter
of Gilbert de Gaunt Earl of Lincoln: I deny that there was ever any of the
Sanctolices Earls of Lincoln; as by their several deeds extant is to be
proved, wherein they write themselves only Earls of Northampton, and not of
Lincoln. Secondly, you say, that Ranulph of Chester the second, married Lucy
the mother of William Romara Earl of Lincoln, and begot on her Ranulph, who
succeeded his father in the Earldom of Chester, and obtained of Henry the
third the Earldome of Lincoln. In which saying, you have brought your self
into a laborinth of errors: for, if you mean (by second) the second Earl of
Chester, his name was Richard, and not Ranulph. If by that word (second) you
mean the second of that name; the second Ranulph married not Lucy, but Alice,
the daughter of Robert Earl of Gloucester, and had issue by her Hugh* Again,
if you confess that you mistook the third Earl for the second, and so meant
Ranulph the first to have been the same that married Lucy, Mother to William
Romara, and begot on her the second Ranulph, whom king Henry the third made
Earl of Lincoln: that is impossible to be true, that the second Ranulph
should be made Earl of Lincoln by king Henry the third, he being dead almost
an hundred years before the said king came unto the Crown. But to help you
out of this perplexity, and that your self, and others may be warned for
falling into the like error hereafter, I will set you down what I find by
Record and Evidences touching the same; which is, that Ranulph the first of
that name, and third Earl of Chester, had issue the second Ranulph and fourth
Earl of Chester (half brother to William de Romara) who married Alice
daughter to Robert Earl of Gloucester, otherwise called the Consul; and had
issue Hugh the fifth Earl of Chester, father of Ranulph the sixth, and last
Earl of Chester of that family: unto whom Henry the third gave the
Earldom of Lincoln. And for proof that it was this last Ranulph, to whom
king Henry the third gave the Earldom of Lincoln, and not Ranulph his
grandfather, (who you say, was brother to William Romara) peruse these two
Deeds following.

HVgo Comes Cestriae omnibus Baronibus suis et ministris. etc. Hugh Earl of
Chester, unto all his Barons, Ministers, and people, as well French as English,
and to all the faithful of the holy Church, as well Clergy as Laytie; and
as well these that are present, as they that shall come hereafter, greeting.
Know ye, that I have given, and confirmed by this my present Writing, unto the
Church of S. Augustine of Grimesby, and to the Chanons there, serving God, all
those Alms which Ranulph Earl of Chester my father did give, and confirm
unto them by his Writing. etc. Witnesses Richard son of the Earl, Ranulph
de Vir, Hachet de Ridefort. etc.

RAnulphus Comes Cestriae et Lincolinae omnibus Christi fidelibus. etc. Ranulph
Earl of Chester and Lincoln, unto all the faithful people of Christ, unto
whom this present writing shall come, sends health in the Lord. Be it known
unto you, that I have granted, and by my present writing confirmed to God, and
the Church of S. Augustine of Grimesby, and to the Canons there serving God,
for the health of my soul, and of my father and mother. etc. The fourth part
of that Manor which Hugh de S. Paul held of Ranulph my grandfather. etc.
which Ranulph Earl of Chester my grandfather gave unto them: and which Hugh
my father confirmed, according as their writing witnesses which the Canons
then had, and seven Rods of Land. etc. even as the writing of Gilbert of
Turfs, and the confirmation of William Romare, which they then had, do show.
Wherefore I will and straightly command, that the foresaid Canons may freely
and quietly possess the same. etc. Witnesses John the Earl my Nephew, William
of Cantelup, Fulco Fitz-Warin, Baldwyn de Ver, Henry de Ferraris.

THe first Lord of Couentrie was Leofrike, from whom by Luce his Niece
(daughter of Algar his son.) it passed to the Earls of Chester: for she
married the first Ranulph of Chester. etc. Page 434. FRom Lincoln to Couentrie
is a long and wearisome Lords of Couentrie.
Journey (especially) when the traveler is ignorant of the way, and wants a
guide; as here (it seems) you did, when you past from the one to the other:
and setting down the successions of the Earls of Lincoln, and Lords of
Couentrie; where, in the first you have made Luce (daughter of Algar the Saxon)
to be wife to Ranulph the second Earl of Chester: and after in the other (not
far distant) to be wife to Ranulph the first Earl of Chester; the one being
the father, and the other his son: But how lawful a thing it is for the
father to marry his sons wife, or the son his own mother (as your words
in these two places import) I refer my self to the judgment of the
indifferent readers.

COncerning the Lords of the Isle of Wight, After that William Fitz Osberne
was slain in the wars in Flaunders, and his son Roger banished, this
Lordship came into the Kings hands; and king Henry the first gave this
Island unto Richard Riduers Earl of Devonshire, with the fee of the manor of
Christchurch; where the said Richard builded a Castle, as he likewise Lords
of the Isle of Wight.
did at Caresbroke: But his son Bauldwyn was driven thence in the troublesome
times of king Stephen (when there were so many Kings or Tyrants in England, as
there were Lords, or keepers of Castles: of the which, every one challenged
the privilege of Coining money, and other rightes and royalties of the Crown)
yet his successors did after enjoy the same again. At length, Isabell wydow of
William de Fortibus, Earl of Albemarle and of Holdernes, the sister and heir
of Bauldwyn the last Earl of Devonshire of that family, with much entreatie,
passed over all her right by her deed, to King E. 1. Page 710. THis is quite
Camme from your words before in the title of Earls of Deuon. Page 144. for
there you affirm Bauldwyn Ryduers to be made the first Earl of Devonshire, by
king Henry the first: And now in this place, you make Richard father of the
said Bauldwyn, to be first Earl of Deuon in the same kings time: which
Richard must needs be understood to be that Richard which was father to
Bauldwyn, whom you say, was driven from the Isle of Wight in king Stephens
time, as in mine answer before to the Earls of Deuon more at large it does
appear. Thus your words in one place, being merely repugnant to those in an
other, what credit may any give to your writings?

THe owners of Skeleton Castle, were first Robert de Bruise a Skeleton Castle.
Norman; who had issue two sons, Adam that was Baron of Skeleton; and Robert
Lord of Auandale in Scotland: from whose posterity came the Kings of Scotland:
Peter Bruise the fifth in succession from that Adam, died without issue, and left
for his heirs his sisters, Agnes, marid to Walter Faulconberg, Lucy married to
Walter Twenge, from whom is descended the Baron of Lumley; Margaret married to
Robert de Roos, and Ladrina to John Bellaaqua, men of great account in that
time. Page. 556. WHat thanks you look for, I know not: but well assured I am
in this place, as in many others, you have deserved none: for few or none of
the Noble Families, with whom you have had to deal with, or to write off, but
that you have injured them in some one point or other. And now that we are come
to speak of the last Peter Bruise Baron of Skeleton, who dyed. 14. Kalendes of
October, 1273. I pray you let us examine a little that honorable the Lord
Lumley his descent; whom (in your own conceit) you have made much beholding
unto you, for adding to him one Auncestor (such as I dare boldly say) neither
he, nor any other as yet ever knew or heard of; I mean Walter Twenge, who (you
say) married Lucy the sister and coheire of Peter Bruise Baron of Skeleton, and
was Auncestor to the now Baron of Lumley. But that you may the better reform
this, with many other your faults, I will for your better instruction,
manifest unto you the name, and true husband of the said Luce: which was,
Marmaduke Twenge, a noble Baron in king Edward the first his time: who died in
the Kalendes of March. 1284. and was buried by his said wife Lucia in the
Church of Gwisborne, founded by Robert Bruise the Norman, his wives Auncestor.
1129.

DAnby came from the successors of Walter Twenge to the Latymers, Danby.
which were afterward Barons Latymers of Danby, from whom it passed by marriage
unto the Willoughbyes: which inheritance, with the honor, Ralph Neuill the
first Earl of Westmerland did purchase for his younger son George Neuill: in
whose issue it remains to this day. Page 556. THat Danby was the possession
of Walter Twenge, and that from his successors it came to the Latymers, who
were after Barons of Danby, I answer (as before in the title of Skeleton). That
there was never any such Walter yet borne; and then no such successors of his
could carry the same to the Latymers, as you very untruly have here set
down: for proof hereof, I refer me to the judgment of the honorable Lord
Lumley himself; who has this descent most exactly set down by that worthy
and late Officer of Arms, Sommerset Herault. And to the other, That Ralph
Neuell Earl of Westmerland, did purchase the said inheritance and honor, of
John Lord Latymer of Danby, for his younger son George: I grant for true,
that he purchased the Lands, but not the dignity: for John Neuill that sold
the said lands, had no fee simple in the dignity to sell but only an estate
for term of life: therefore can you not rightly say that Ralph Neuill Earl
of Westmerland, did purchase the dignity which George his son enjoyed. But
more agreeable to the truth had it been, if you had said, that George son of
Ralph Neuill in regard that he had the Lands whereof the dignity of Latymer
was erected, obtained the honor by the Kings free gift and favor, otherwise
that title and dignity had been extinct: for seldom shall you find, that the
Kings of this Realm did ever create or inuest any into a Baronie, which took
the name of dignity from an others peculiar place of inheritance or possession.

THe Barony of Burford (descended from the posterity of Theodericke The Barons
of Burford.
Saij) to Robert Mortimer; and from his posterity, to Geffrey Cornwall (that
came of Richard Earl of Cornwall, and King of Romans) his of spring having
continued Barons thereof to this day. Page 455. I Do much pity you, that in
such high sails of learning, you should have so little ballace of discretion:
You have a great facility, and a rare gift in the creating and making of
Barons with the dash of your pen: But it argues how shallow you are in the
true definition of a Baron, in that you will publish in print that the family
of Cornwalles were Barons of Burford; you being not able ever to make proof of
any one of them, to have had that dignity. Notwithstanding, diverse of that
surname have been Knights: of which number, king Henry the sixth did erect Sir
John Cornwall to be a Baron, and Peer of this Realm, by the name and title of
Lord Fanhope: which John, was both the first and last Baron of that family;
and therefore it stands now with your credit, to make proof of these your
Barons of Burford: which, I think, will be too hard and difficult a matter for
you to do.

KIng Stephen made Walleron Earl of Millent (brother to Earls of Worcester.
Robert Bossu Earl of Leicester) the first Earl of Worcester: whose children
left the Realm, and returned to their ancient patrimony in Normandy: And
that dignity lay void, until Richard the second bestowed it upon Thomas
Percy; who was after slain by King H. 4. Page 445. IS it possible? or, do you
think to persuade any senscible man to believe, that this late borne Britannia
was of your own collection? (you as it seems, not understanding the same.)
No, assure yourselfe: for who knows not, that the contents thereof are
neither taught, nor learned amongst children in Schools, and your self never
employed else where to attain the knowledge thereof. Many learned, think it
more fitter you had waded within the compass of your own profession and
knowledge, in which your errors would not so apparently have been descried, as
here they are. In this Title of Earls of Worcester, you make Walleron to be
the first Earl of Worcester: and that his issue did depart this Realm to
their ancient patrimony in Normandy: By which, if it were true, then were
there none of that progeny to be looked for here in this Realm of England
(to the great prejudice of many honorable Families descended of the said
Walleron.) But to reform this your error, I wish you to understand that the
foresaid Walleron, had issue Robert Earl of Millent, Worcester, and Lord of
Ponttadomara: which Robert did remain here in England, and married an English
woman named Mauld, Lady of Estrumenister, Moreys, and Rydlestone; And by her
had issue Henry, Peter, Mabell, and Mary: the two sons, and the youngest
daughter, dying without issue; Mabell the eldest daughter, was married to
William de Vernon, alias Ryduers* Earl of Devonshire; and had issue Bauldwyn
Earl of Devonshire, and Mary, first married unto Sir Robert Courteney, by whom
she had issue: (of whom all the Courteneys are descended:) After she married
Peter de Prouz, a noble Gentleman of Deuon: to which Peter, the said Robert
Earl of Millent and Worcester, did by his deed give in frank marriage with
the said Marie his grandchild, the third part of all his Land in England; and
unto Bauldwin his gran-child (by his daughter Mabell) all his Land in
Normandy, with the Manors of Estrumenister, Moreyes, and Riddleston in
England. So that here you are not only found to fail in your affirmation,
that there was not any Earl of Worcester between the said Walleron in King
Stephens time, and Thomas Percy, who had that dignity of Richard the second:
But also, in saying his issue returned to their ancient Patrimony in
Normandy; when it is manifest that his sole heir continued here, and left
issue: of whom are descended many of our noble Families at this present.

THe first Lord of Gillesland, was William Meschines, Lords of Gillesland.
brother to Ranulfe Earl of Carlell. Page 604. AS you did begin at the first,
so have you in your Book continued unto the end, making to some Nobles
unnatural marriages, and to others unlawful issue. In this place, you have
made the son to be brother to his own father, by affirming William Meschines
Lord of Gillesland, to be brother to Ranulph Earl of Carlell. And to prove
that the said William was son of Ranulph Earl of Carlell, and not his
brother, I will first for the better understanding of the reader hereof, set
down a brief of the said Williams descent, beginning at Hugh Lupus his uncle,
the first Earl of Chester, whose sister Margaret was married to Ranulph Earl
of Carlell, and by him had issue two sons, Ranulph the first of that name,
and third Earl of Chester; and William Mischines Lord of Gilleslande: and
that this is true which here I have incerted, read this Deed following:
which done, I trust you will not only recant your error, but also acknowledge
from whence you have received the truth hereof.

NOtum sit omnibus me Ran. Commit. Cestrae concessisse quando feci transferri
corpus Hugonis Comitis auunculi mei a cimiterio in Capitulum. etc. Be it known
unto all mem, That I Ranulph Earl of Chester, have granted at such time as I
caused the body of Hugh the Earl my uncle to be translated from the Church
yard, into the Chapter house: That on the day of my death, I should give
together with my body, to the Church of S. Werburge, Vpton, in pure Alms, free
from every thing, for the soul of the foresaid Hugh, and the health of my
soul, and the souls of all my kinsfolks. And whereas Hugh the Earl, before
had granted to the Church of S. Werburge, at the feast of the translation of
the same, the Privilege of a Fair: I also do grant and confirm the same.
Moreover, William Meschinus my brother, has given the Church of Destart.
Matthew of Ruelant has given the Church of Thurstanestone. etc.

An enforced Conclusion.
WHen as I had collected ready for the Press, so many of your defectes and
errors, (published in your so highly commended Britannia) as might well have
satisfied the world, that I undertook not this work in vain, nor yet
without good cause me moving thereunto. Then was I stayed in the printing
thereof, by the disturbance and indirect dealing of your friends the
Stationers, (who heretofore have made no small gain of your four former
Impressions) and thereby constrained abruptly here to make an end,
suppressing a great part of my first pretended purpose: yet before I do end,
I think it my duty, here to put the Nobility in mind, that your Book now
going in hand, may be both seen, and allowed, before it go to the Press, by
such as have both skill, and authority so to do: (I mean the Earl Marshall)
and not to pass as before it has done, to the prejudice of so many honorable
Families. And to the end the world may know with whose plumes you have
heretofore fethered your nest (besides the Heraults) I have hereunto annexed a
New-yeeres gift, dedicated to king Henry the eight in the. 37. year of his
reign, by that worthy and learned English Antiquarie Master John Leyland,
concerning his six years travail, and laborious Journey for the search of
Englandes Antiquities, upon the said Kings commission and charges: by which it
may appear unto the indifferent Reader, who was the first Author and contriuer
of this late borne Britannia, either he whose name is clean razed and blotted
out, or you that have both taken the title and whole credit thereof to your
self. Also, I may not here let pass the words of Master John Bale in his
declarations upon the same work, dedicated to King Edward the sixth: which are
these following. Blessed be the man which shall set this worthy work abroad:
and contrariwise, Cursed be he for ever and ever, that shall in spite of his
Nation, seek thereof the destruction.

John Leylands new years Gift, given of him to King Henry the. viii. in the.
37. year of his reign, concerning his laborious Journey and search for
Englandes antiquities.
WHere as it pleased your Highness, upon very just considerations, to encorage
me, by the authority Studium antiquitatis in principe.
of your most gracious Commission, in the XXXV. year of your prosperous
reign, to peruse, and diligently to search all the Libraries of Monasteries
and Colleges of this your noble Realm, to the intent that the Monuments of
ancient Writers, as well of other Nations as of your own Province, might be
brought out of deadly darkness to lively light, and to receive like thanks of
their posterity, as they hoped for at such time, as they employed their long
and great studies to the public wealth.

Yea, and furthermore, that the holy Scripture of God might both be sinceerely
taught and learned, all manner of superstition, Cura religionis in principe.
and crafty colored doctrine of a route of Roman Bishops, totally expelled
out of this your most catholic Realm. I think it now no less then my very
duty, briefly to declare to your Majesty, what fruit have sprung of my
laborious journey and costly enterprise, both rooted upon your infinite
goodness and liberality: qualities right highly to be esteemed in all
Princes, and most specially in you, as naturally your own well known
proprieties.

First, I have conserved many good Authors, the which Exemplaria veterum
authorum conseruata*
otherwise had bin like to have perished, to no small incommoditie of good
Letters. Of the which part remain in the Auctae Bibliothecae palatinae.
most magnificent Libraries of your royal Palaces. Part also remain in my
custody; whereby I trust right shortly, so to describe your most noble Realm,
and to publish the majesty of the excellent acts of your progenitors,
hitherto sore obscured, both for lack of imprinting of such works as lay
secretly in corners.

And also, because men of eloquence has not enterprised to set them forth in
a flourishing style, in some times past, Stylus agrestis veterum scriptorum.
not commonly used in England of Writers, otherwise well learned, and now in
such estimation, that except truth be delicately clothed in Purpure, her
written verities can scant find a reader. That all the world shall evidently
perceive, that no particular Region may justly be more extolled then yours, for
true Nobility and Virtues at all points renowned.

Farthermore, part of the exemplaries, curiously sought by me, and fortunately
found in sundry places of this your dominion, has been imprinted in Germany,
and now be in the Exemplaria praelis co^missa.
Presses chiefly of Frobenius; that not alonely the Germans, but also the
Italians themselves, that count (as the Greeks did full arrogantly) all other
Nations to be barbarous and unlettered, saving their own, shall have a direct
occasion, openly of force to say: That Britannia prima fuit parens, altrix
(addo hoc etiam, and iure quidem optimo) conseruatrix cum virorum magnorum, tum
maxim ingeniorum.

And, that profit has risen by the aforesaid journey, in bringing full many
things to light, as concerning the usurped Antiphilarchia repellens ambitiosum
To. Epi. Imperiu.
authority of the Bishop of Rome and his accomplices, to the manifest and
violent derogation of kingly dignity. I refer my self most humbly to your
most prudent, learned, and high judgment, to discern my diligence in the long
volume, wherein I have made answer for the defense of your supreme dignity,
alonely leaning to the strong pillor of holy Scripture, against the whole
College of the Romanistes, cloaking their crafty assercions and arguments,
under the name of one poor Pighius of Vltraiecte in Germany; and Albertus
Pighius.
standing to them as to their only anchor hold, against tempests that they
know will arise, if truth may be by lisence let in, to have a voice in the
general counsel.

Yet herein only, I have not pitched the supreme work of my labor,
whereunto your Grace, most like a kingly patron Affectus autoris erga patria^.
of all good Learning, did animate me. But also considering and expending with
my self, how great a number of excellent godly Wits and Writers, learned with
the best, as the times served, has been in this your Region: Not only at such
times as the Roman Emperors had recourse to it, but also in those days that
the Saxons prevailed of the Brytaines, and the Normannes of the Saxons, could
not but with a fervent zeal, and an honest courage, commend them to memory.
Else alas, like to have bin perpetually obscured, or to have bin lightly
remembered, as uncertain shadows.

Wherefore, I knowing by infinite variety of Books, and assyduous reading of
them, who has bin learned, and who Libri quatuor de viris illustribus, sieve de
scriptoribus Britannicis.
has written from time to time in this Realm; have digested into iiij. Books
the names of them, with their lives and monuments of learning: And to them,
added this little, De viris illustribus, following the profitable example of
Hierome, Gennadie, Cassiodore, Seueryane, and Trittemie a late writer: But
always so handling the matter, that I have more exspaciated in this camp, then
they did, as in a thing that desired to be somewhat at large, and to have or
nature. The first Book beginning at the Druides, is deducted unto the time of
the coming of S. Augustine into England. The second, is from the time of
Augustine, unto the aduente of the Normanes. The third, from the Normanes, to
the end of the most honorable reign of the mighty, famous, and prudent
Prince, Henry the. vij. your Father. The fourth, begins with the name of,
Your Majesty: whose glory in Learning, is to the world so clearly known,
that though among the lives of other learned men I have accurately celebrated
the names of Bladudus, Molmutius, Constantinus magnus, Sigeberius, Alfridus,
Principes eruditi.
Alfridus magnus, Athelstanus, and Henry the first, Kings and your
progenitors. And also Ethelward, second son to Alfride the great, Hunfryde
Duke of Gloucester, and Tipetote Earl of Worcester: yet conferred with your
Grace, they seem as small lights (if I may freely say my judgment, your high
modesty not offended) in respect of the day star.

Now, farther to insinuate to your Grace, of what matters the Writers, whose
lives I have congested into four Books, Ingenia scriptorum Britannicorum omni
genere eruditionis exercitata.
has treated of. I may right boldly say, that beside the cognicion of the.
iiij. tongues, in the which part of them has excelled; that there is no kind
of liberal science, or any feate concerning learning, in the which they have
not showed certain arguments of great felicity of wit. Yea and concerning
the interpretacion of holy Scripture, both after the ancient form and sense,
the scholasticall trade, they have reigned as in a certain excellency.

And, as touching Historical knowledge, there has bin to the number of a full
hundredth or more, that from time to Ingens numerus scriptorum rerum
Britannicarum.
time has with great deligence, and no less faith (would to God with like
eloquence) perscribed the acts of your most noble predecessors: and the
fortunes of this your Realm, so incrediblie great, that he that has not
seen, and thoroughly read their works, can little pronounce in this part.

Wherefore, after that I had perpended the honest and profitable studies of
these Historiographers, I was totallie enflamed with a love, to see thoroughly
all those parts of this your opulent and ample Realm, that I had read of in
Perogralio laboriosa totius Britanniae primae.
the aforesaid Writers: In so much that all my other occupations intermitted, I
have so trauayled in your Dominions both by the Sea coasts, and the middle
parts, sparing neither labor nor costs, by the space of these six years
past, that there is almost neither Cape nor Bay, Haven, Creek or Pere, River,
or confluence of Rivers, Breaches, Washes, Lakes, Meeres, Fennie waters,
Mountains, Valleys, Moors, Heathes, Forrestes, Woods, Cities, Burges,
Castles, principal manor Places, Monasteries, and Colleges; but I have seen
them, and noted in so doing: a whole world of things very memorable.

Thus instructed, I trust shortly to see the time, that like Descriptio totius
Britanniae primae in quadrata argenti tabula.
as Carolus magnus had among his treasures, three large and notable tables of
Silver richly enamiled: one of the syte and description of Constantinople; an
other of the syte and figure of the magnificent City of Rome; and the third
of the description of the World. So shall your Majesty have this your World
and Emperie of England so set forth in a quadrate table of Silver, if God
send me life to accomplysh my beginning, that your Grace shall have ready
knowledge at the first sight, of many right delectable, fruitful, and
necessary pleasures, by contemplation thereof, as often as occasion shall
move you to the sight of it.

And because that it may be more permanent, and farther Liber de Topographia
Britanniae primae.
known, then to have it engraued in Silver or Brass, I entende by the leave
of God, within the space of. xij. months following, such a description to make
of your Realm in writing, that it shall be no masterie after, for the Grauer
or Painter, to make the like, by a perfect example.

Yea, and to wade further in this matter, where as now almost no man can well
guess at the shadow of the ancient Restituta ve^tera locorum in Britannia
nomina.
names of Havens, Rivers, Promontories, Hills, Woods, Cities, Towns,
Castles, and variety of kinds of people: that Caesar, Liui, Strabo, Diodorus,
Fabius Pictor, Pomponius Mela, Plinius, Cornelius Tacitus, Ptolomeus, Sextus
Rufus, Ammianus, Marcellinus, Solinus, Antoninus, and diverse other, make
mention of. I trust so to open this window, that the light shall be seen so
long: that is to say, by the space of a whole thousand years stopped up, and
the old glory of your renowned Britain to reflorish through the world.

This done, I have matter at plenty already prepared to this purpose: that is
to say, to write an History, to the which De Antiquitate Britannica sieve de
Civilly historia, libri quinquaginta.
I intend to adscribe this title, De Antiquitate Britannica: or else, Ciuilis
historia. And this work I intend to divide into so many Books, as there be
Shires in England, and Shires and great dominions in Wales: So that I esteem
that this Volume will include a fifty Books; whereof each one, severally
shall contain the beginninges, increases, and memorable acts of the chief
Towns and Castles of the Province allotted to it.

Then, I intend to distribute into six Books, such matter Libri sex de
insulis Britanniae adiacentibus.
as I have already collected concerning the Isles adjacent to your noble
Realm, and under your subjection. Whereof three shall be of these Isles,
Uecta, Mona, and Menauia, sometime Kingdoms.

And, to superadde a work as an ornament and a right comely garlande, to the
enterprises aforesaid, I have selected stuff to be distributed into three
Books: the which I purpose thus to entitle, De nobilitate Britannica: Whereof,
the De nobilitate Britannica libri tres.
first shall declare the names of Kings and Queens, with their children,
Dukes, Earls, Lords, Captains, and Rulers, in this Realm, to the coming of
the Saxons and their conquest. The second, shall be of the Saxons and Danes, to
the victory of King William the great. The third, from the Normannes to the
reign of your most noble Grace, descending lyneally of the Brytaine, Saxon,
and Norman kings: So that all Noble men shall clearly perceive their lyniall
parentell.

Now if it shall be the pleasure of Almighty God, that I may live to perform
these things that be already begun, Conclusio a delectabili and vtili.
and in a great forwardness, I trust that this your Realm shall so well be
known, once painted with his native colors, that the renown thereof shall
give place to the glory of no other Region. And my great labors and costs,
proceeding from the most abundant fountain of your infinite goodness toward
me your poor Scholar, and most humble Servant, shall be evidently seen to
have not only pleased, but also profited the studious, gentile, and equal
Reeders. This is the brief declaration of my laborious journey, taken by
motion of your Highness, so much studying at all hours, about the fruitful
preferment of good letters, and ancient virtues. John Bale. Blessed be that
man which shall set this worthy work abroad: And contrariwise, Cursed be he
for ever and ever, that shall in spite of his nation, seek thereof the
destruction.


Christ continue your most royal estate, and the prosperity, with succession
in kingly dignity, of your dear and worthyly beloved Son Prince Edward:
granting you a number of princely Sons, by the most gracious, benign, and
modest Lady, your Queen Catherine.

Ioannes Leylandus Antiquarius.

Leylands supposed Ghost.
AM I deceau'd? or does not Leylands ghost,
Complain of wrong sustained after death;
As Virgils Polidore accusd his host
The Thracian King for cruel breach of faith,
And treasurs gaynd, by stoppinge of his breath?
Ah greedy Guardian that t'inioye his goods,
Did plundge thy princely Ward into the floods.
Am I deceau'd? or does not Leylands spirit
Complain with ghostes of English Notaries;
Whom Polidor Virgil robbed of merit,
Bereft of name, and sacked of Histories,
While (wretch) he ravished English Libraries?
Ah wicked Booke-theefe whosoever did it:
Should one burn all, to get one single credit?
Am I decau'd? or does not Leylands spirit
Make hue and cry, for some Booke-treasure stelth
Riffling his works, and razing name and merit,
Whereby are smothered a prince-giuen wealth,
A learned writers travail, wits and health:
All these he spent to do his cuntrie pleasure:
Oh save his name, the world may know this treasure.
I am deceau'd, for Leylands ghost does rest
From plaints and cries with souls of blessed men:
But Heaven and humane Laws cannot digest
That such rare fruicts of his laboriouse penn
Came to be drowned in such a thankles Denn.
And therefore heaven and all humanity does sue,
That Leyland dead, may have his titles due.

