A CATALOGVE and Succession of the Kings, Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls,
and Viscounts of this Realm of England, since the Norman Conquest, to this
present year, 1619.

TOGETHER, With their Arms, Wives, and Children: the times of their deaths and
burials, with many their memorable Actions.

Collected by RAPHE BROOK Esquire, York Herald: Discovering, and Reforming
many Errors committed, by men of other Profession, and lately published in
Print; to the great wronging of the Nobility, and prejudice of his Majesty's
Officers of Arms, who are only appointed and sworn to deal faithfully in
these causes.

Quam quisque norit Artem, in hac se exerceat. Printed by WILLIAM IAGGARD, and
fold at his house in Barbican. 1619.

TO THE HIGH AND Mighty Prince, JAMES, King of Great-Britaine, France, and
Ireland, etc.
Most Gracious Sovereign:
ALthough I think not the mean fruit of my Studies worthy so great a Patron
as your self, and therefore dedicate the same only to those Honorable Lords
your Commissioners for the Office of Earl Marshall of England, unto whose
Censure and Office, all matters of Honor and Arms belongs, and are
committed: (yet after fifty years labor and experience, Now treating of
Nobility, Honor, and Arms, which are derived from the fountain of Royal
authority of Kings and Princes, and being heereunto partly led by virtue of my
Office of Herald, wherein I have served your MAJESTY and the late Queen
ELIZABETH of famous memory, these forty years) I held it my bounden duty,
thus much at least (by humble Praeface) to intimate unto your HIGHNESS, that
here I discover and reform many things heretofore grossly mistaken, and
abused by ignorant persons; who venturing beyond their own element and skill
to write of this subject, have showed themselves more bold and busy, then
skillful in Herauldry, and have thereby so troubled the clear fountain of
Honorable Titles and Descents, flowing from your MAJESTY and former Princes,
that true Nobility is greatly blemished and obscured thereby. For the
amendment and prevention of these and the like abuses hereafter, I most humbly
pray a reformation, and that vpstarts and Mountebankes within this our
profession, may be prohibited to make their profit and credit, upon the
discredit and impouerishing of your MAJESTY'S poor servants the Officers of
Arms, who labor daily, and spend both their bodies and substance, faithfully
to preserve and keep in Register, the Descents and Achiuements of the
Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom, with their Noble and worthy Acts,
Marriages, Issues, and Arms, which is no easy thing now to do. And much more
harder it will be hereafter, if these busy bodies (catching by chance the
imperfect Notes of Heralds deceased) shall be suffered to publish in print
their own inventions, as true and infallible verities, whereby in time to
come, it will be hard to distinguish light from darkness, and truth from
falsehood, unless your Princely care and feeling hereof, may be signified
unto the Lords Commissioners to redress the same.

So most humbly praying your MAJESTY'S pardon, I beseech the King of Kings,
long to continue and prosper your happy Reign over us.

Your Majesty's most humble devoted Subject and Servant, RAPHE BROOK, York
Herald.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Edward Earl of Worcester, Lord Keeper of the Privy
Seal; Lodowicke Duke of Lenox, Lord Steward of his MAJESTY'S Household; George
Marquess of Buckingham, Master of his Majesty's Horse; Charles Earl of
Nottingham, High Admiral of England; William Earl of Penbroke, Lord
Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household; Thomas Earl of Arundell, and Thomas
Earl of Suffolk, Commissioners for the Office of Earl Marshall of England:
Privy Counselors to JAMES King of GREAT-BRITAINE, and Knights of the most
Noble Order of the Garter.
Right Honorable,
THE mean Artificer that found fault with Apelles, so long as he presumed not
vltra Crepidam, was heard and allowed so well; that the most Excellent Painter
thereupon amended his picture: and yet the same being the only one (perhaps)
of some ordinary person, well or ill done, could greatly hurt no man. But great
hurt and prejudice (my Lords) may ensue unto many, yea, even unto your selves
and your posterity (joined as they are, and may be, with other Noble families)
by the misshapen, ill wrought, and deformed Pictures of false Pedigrees and
Descents of English Nobility, which some busy Antiquaries (as they would be
called) of late intruding, have published in Print. It were therefore to be
wished, that Books of that kind should be examined by experienced Officers,
and therewith have your Lordships allowance, before they pass the Press. But
sithence hitherto it has bin neglected and lightly passed over, as a matter of
small importance, and of less profit; I trust I shall with your Honorable
favors, do my Prince and Country the service, yea my self and
fellow-Officers of Arms, the right; presuming not vltra Caduceum, to examine
the writings of these intruders, and reform their errors: whereof to give you
a taste.

John Stow (in the Vinnet of his Annals, printed 1592.) has made, Richard
Duke of York, and Anne Mortimer, to be Father and mother to K. Edward 4. in
doing whereof, he has made the said Richard to marry his own mother. M.
Milles (page 543.) says, that Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, by Margaret Lady
Mortimer his second wife, had issue, Henry Earl of Lincoln, Frances wife to
Henry Gray, Marquess Dorset, and Eleanor married to Henry Clifford Earl of
Cumberland; whereas the said Henry, Frances, and Eleanor, were the children of
Charles Brandon, by Mary the French Queen. M. Martin, in his History of the
Kings of England (page 60.) has. That King John of England, had issue four
sons; Henry, who was after King; Richard elect King of the Romans; William of
Valence Earl of Penbroke, and Guydo Disnay: which William and Guydo, were the
sons of Hugh le Brun, Earl of the Marches of Aquitain in France, and not King
John's.

What a confusion and trouble may this breed in after Ages; both for Descents,
Arms, and true Kindred: as also suits of Law, Duelloes, and Challenges; Nay
(my good Lords) were not the Crown so well established in the King, and his
Royal issue (which God long preserve:) what a Way is here opened (if it be
not stopped in time) for vain Titularies and Competitors to presume on? So
dangerous a thing it is, for the unskillful to deal in matters of Herauldry,
that are not sworn and professed Officers thereto. Had I been as forward to
set out mine own labors, as those have been to vent the imperfect Collections
of others, I might (I think) have written of this subject before some of them
were borne: for any time these fifty years, it has been my study. And when
I had almost finished a true Catalogue of the Kings, Princes, and Nobles of
this Realm, that have bin since the Normane Conquest, with intent to leave it
to posterity only in Writing, and in the Office and College of Arms (which
indeed ought to be the Storehouse of all honorable Actions and Designs) I
staide awhile at sight of the blind and misshapen whelps, which the ouer-hasty
brought forth. But now, as well for the Reasons afore-shewed, as also at the
instance of some of my Honorable Friends; I have thought meet (having first
made his Majesty acquainted therewith) to publish and present the same unto
your Lordships; wherein besides the errors above cited, your Honors shall have
here in the next leaf following, many others: yea, such as cry out to be
reformed, by your authority; which I trust of your own Noble care and
Honorable dispositions you will so execute, that henceforth the Nobility and
Gentry of this Land, together with the Officers of Arms, may hold their own
better: And that the undigested Notes of dead Heralds and Painters books (to
the prejudice of the living) be not published by any. And that in these matters
of Arms and Descents, none but sworn Officers of Arms may be suffered to
meddle; yea, and that amongst our selves, none may be suffered to give the
ancient Ensigns and tokens of Honor and Arms, unto such as have neither
Descent nor Deserts to commend nor enable them thereunto.

These and the like abuses done to our Profession, are enough (my good Lords)
for me to point at by way of Epistle, and fully sufficient (I hope) to draw
your Honorable cares for amendment thereof. But many more great errors have I
likewise discovered, yea (almost) in every page of my Book: which Book (with
my poor endeavors) I humbly offer unto your most Noble protection and
Patronage: And if your Honors shall be pleased, favorably to censure and
accept the same (as earnestly I wish and pray you) I shall think my pains
herein well bestowed, and take encouragement to perfect and finish a far
greater work begun in this my Profession: otherwise to do you the best service
I am able.

Your Lordships devoted in all duty and service, RAPHE BROOK, York Herald.

A CATALOGVE OF THE Kings of England, since the Norman Conquest, their Arms,
Wives, and Children.
WIlliam, sur-named the Conqueror (cousin unto King Edward the Confessor, in
the third and fourth degree) base son of Robert the sixth Duke of Normandy,
begotten of Arlet his Concubine, daughter of a Skinner and Burgess of the
City of Faloys; who having overthrown and slain King Herald in battle, was
upon Christmas day, in the year of Christ, 1066. crowned King of England, (not
by Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, because he was a very proud and lewd
liver) but by Aldred Archbishop of York; at which time, the said William
caused both the Bishops and Noblemen of the Realm, to swear fealty to him
before S. Peter's Altarat Westminster. He married Mauld, daughter of Baldwyn the
fifth Earl of Flanders (sur-named the Gentle) who dyed the second day of
November, 1083. and was buried at Cane in Normandy, in S. Mary's Church: and
William Conqueror her husband dyed at Roan, on Thursday, the 8. of the Ides of
September, 1087. the 51. of his Dukedom of Normandy, the 21. of his Kingdom
of England, and of his age the 74. and was buried at Cane in S. Stephens
Church, which he before had built. He had issue, 4. sons, and 6. daughters.

For the authority of the Arms of the Kings of England, from William
Conquerors time, to king Richard the first, I find none of any great credit,
but what has been used by traditions, that will I set down as I find them.

William Conqueror (as it is said) used the Arms of Rollo the Dane, and first
Duke of Normandy, which he bare as belonging to the Dukedom of Normandy:
Gueulles, deux Lions passant gardant, d'or.

His Issue.
Robert, sur-named Curtuoise, (which is, Short Boots) being Duke of Normandy,
was taken prisoner at Tenarchbray in Normandy, in the year 1106. and by
commandment of William his brother, he had both his eyes put out, and dyed in
the Castle of Cairdiffe, in the year 1134. when he had been prisoner there,
28. years, and was buried at Gloucester. He married Sibill, sister of William
Earl of Conuersana in Italy, by whom he had issue, William and Henry.

Richard, second son of William Conqueror, was slain in the New Forest by a
Stag, and was buried at Winchester.

William the third son, sur-named Ruphus, of his red hair, served under his
Father, at the battle of Gerberoth in Normandy, where he was wounded. After
being King, and hunting in the New Forest the second of August, Walter Tirrell
a French Knight, shot him with an Arrow, whereof he presently dyed, in the
year 1100. having reigned twelve years and eleven months, being 43. years
old.

Henry the fourth son, was borne at Selby in Yorkshire, 1070. and sur-named
Beauclarke (or sine Scholar) was by his Father knighted at Westminster, in the
year 1086.

Cicely eldest daughter, borne in Normandy, was Abbess at Cane, where she
dyed without issue.

Constance the second daughter, married to Alan Earl of Britain, sur-named
Fergant, dyed without issue, and was buried at S. Edmondsbury in Suffolk. This
is that Constance, which the honest man Dolman, alias Parsons, sets down to
have issue, Conan le Gross the second Duke of Britain, and Conan le Gross to
have issue Hoell, disinherited by his Father; and Bertha, married to Eudo Earl
of Porret.

Alice the third daughter, was married to Stephen, Earl of Bloys in France,
and had issue, King Stephen and others; and after professed her self a Nun, at
Marciquy in France, and was there buried.

Ela, in her childhood was promised in marriage, to King Herald of England,
but he refused her, and married another, by reason whereof, she died unmarried
without issue.

Gundred the fifth daughter, married William de Warren, a Nobleman of Normandy,
whom William Conqueror made Earl of Surrey, by whom she had issue, William the
second Earl Warren and Surrey, and dyed in childebed, at Castle-Acre in
Norfolk, and was buried at Lewis in Sussex, 1085.

Margaret the sixth daughter, promised to Alphonsus King of Gallicia in Spain,
and dyed without issue.

William Peuerell, base son of William Conqueror, was Lord of Nottingham, and
had issue, William a son.

King William Rufus.
WIlliam Rouse or Rufus, sur-named of his red hair, the third son of William
Conqueror. This William served under his Father at the battle of Gerberoth in
Normandy, where he was wounded: He began his Reign of King of England, the
ninth day of September, in the year of our Lord, 1087. and was crowned at
Westminster, by Lanfranke Archbishop of Canterbury, the first day of October.
He was of person a square man, red colored, his hair somewhat yellow, his
eyes not one like another; he was of mean stature, somewhat big bellied, he
was very variable, inconstant, covetous and cruel; he ouer-burdened his
Subjects with unreasonable taxes, pilled the rich, and oppressed the poor. And
being a hunting in the New Forest, the second day of August, in the year
1100. Sir Walter Tirrell, a French Knight, shooting at a Dear, unawares smote
him in the breast, that he fell down stark dead, and never spoke word. His
body being conuayed to Winchester, was there buried in the 43. year of his
age, having reigned almost thirteen years, leaving no issue to succeed him.

Les arms de son pere. King Henry the first.
HEnry, the fourth and youngest son of William Conqueror, was borne at Selby
in Yorkshire, 1070. and for his learning was called Beauelark; he was brought up
in the study of the liberal Arts at Cambridge, under Henry Newborough Earl of
Warwick. He began his Reign the second of August, and was crowned at
Westminster, by Maurice Bishop of London, (Anselme Bishop of Canterbury being
then in exile) the fifth of August, 1100. He was strong and mighty of body, high
of stature, amiable of countenance, black haired, fair eyes, broad breasted,
well in flesh, full of merry conceits, excellent in wit, eloquent in speech,
and fortunate in battle; and for these, he had three notable vices,
covetousness, cruelty and letchery. He married two wives, the first was Mauld,
daughter of Malcolme Canmoir, King of Scotland, (otherwise Malcolme with the
great head) she was married to him at London, in the year 1100. and lived with
him 17. years, and dyed in May, in the year 1118. and was buried at S. Peter's
church at Westminster, leaving issue one son and a daughter; she built a
house for leapers near London, called S. Gyles in the field.

His second wife was Adelicia, daughter of Godfrey, first Duke of Louaine, and
sister of another Godfrey, and Iocelyn of Louaine: She was married the 29. of
January, 1121. and continued his wife fifteen years, but had no issue by him.
She was after married to William de Albeney Earl of Arundell, by whom she had
issue, William the second Earl of Arundell, Godfrey, and Ioane married to John
Earl of Angi. This Henry dyed of a surfeit at Dennises, in the Forest of Lions
in Normandy, the first day of December, in the year 1135. being about 67.
years old, having reigned King 35. years and four Months.

In this Henry, ended the line of the heirs male of the Norman Kings, having
reigned here 69. years, after whom came the French, by marrying the heir
general.

Les armoiries de son pere. His Issue.
William, son of King Henry and Queen Mauld his first wife, was borne in the
year 1102. and being 14. years old, the Nobility did him homage, and three
years after, he married Mary, the daughter of Foulk Earl of Aniou; and the
same year was made Duke of Normandy, for which he did homage to King Lewis the
Gross of France, and after was drowned, coming out of Normandy into England,
the 26. of November, 1120. being then eighteen years of age, leaving no
issue of his body.

Mauld, the only daughter of king Henry the first, by Mauld his first wife, was
borne the fourth year of her Fathers Reign, and was married to the Emperor
Henry the fourth, for his second wife, being but seven years old at her
espousing, and married and crowned at eleven, at Mentz in Germany, in the year
1114. with whom she continued twelve years, and out-liued him, but had no
issue by him. After she married Geffrey Plantagenet, Earl of Aniou, son of
Foulke king of Jerusalem, in the year 1127 and had issue Henry, after King of
England; Geffrey, Earl of Nantes in Britain; and William, Earl of Poytou:
She was his wife 23. years, and a widow 17. years, and after dyed in Roan,
1167. and was buried at Bec Abbey in Normandy.

His Issue by Concubines.
Robert (of some Writers called the Consul of Gloucester) base son of King
Henry the first, begotten of Nest, the daughter of Rice ap Teuder, the great
Prince of South Wales, who was after married to Girald de Windsore, Constable
of the Castle of Penbroke. This Robert married Mabell, daughter of Robert
Fitz-Hamond, Lord of Glamorgan, by whom he had issue, William Earl of
Gloucester, and others, as in the Title of Earls of Gloucester is more at large.

Reginald, base son of King Henry the first, begotten of the daughter of
Robert Corbet, of Alencester in Warwickshire, had issue, four daughters his
heirs, as in the Title of Earls of Cornwall, is more at large.

Henry, slain in Anglesey in North- Wales, without issue.

Richard, Mary and Margaret were drowned, with their brother William, coming
out of Normandy into England, 1120.

Elizabeth, base daughter of King Henry the first, (begotten of Elizabeth,
sister of Walleran Earl of Meulan, and Robert Bossue Earl of Leicester) was
wife to Gilbert Strongbow Earl of Penbroke, and Mother to Richard Earl of
Penbroke, as in the Title of Earls of Penbroke.

Julian, Countess of Passy.

King Stephen.
STephen, Earl of Mortaine and Bolloigne in Picardy, third Son of Stephen,
Earl of Bloys and Champaigne, begotten of Alice, the third daughter of William
the Conqueror and Queen Mauld; was crowned King on S. Stephens day, by William
Archbishop of Canterbury, at Westminster 1135, by the plotting of his younger
Brother Henry, who was Bishop of Winchester, and Abbot of Glostenbury, and who
had drawn unto his Faction, William Archbishop of Canterbury, the very first
man that before had sworn fealty to Queen Mauld the Empress, and to stir up
the Nobility of the Realm against the said Mauld, protesting, that it was
baseness for so many great Peers to be subject unto a woman. And further, to
help forward this mischievous plot, (another of the same brood) Roger Bishop
of Salisbury, the late Kings Treasurer, protested, that the Nobility were free
from the Oath they had before made to Mauld the Empress, by reason that she
had married Geffrey Plantagenet, without their priuity and consent, (as though
free Princes could not marry without the consent of their Subjects) which false
instigations of these wicked Bishops, made the Nobility to forswear themselves,
in swearing fealty unto King Stephen a Usurper. And these were the fruits of
these honest Churchmen, who were the cause, and loss also of many a man's life.
This Stephen married Mauld, daughter of Eustace Earl of Bolloigne, Brother of
Godfrey and Baldwyn kings of Jerusalem, by whom he had issue, three sons and
two daughters: he reigned eighteen years, ten months, and odd days, and
dyed at Dover the 25. of October, 1154. being 49 years old, and was buried at
Feuersham in Kent, where his Queen and Son were also buried. She dyed at
Heningham Castle in Essex, the third of May, 1151. It is said, that King
Stephen entering this Realm, the sign being in Sagittarius, and obtaining
great victory by the help of his Archers, assumed the Sagitarius for his Arms.

Et portoit, gueulles a Sagitarius d'or. Their Issue.
Baldwyn the eldest son, dyed in his infancy, and was buried at London, in
the Priory of the Trinity within Aldgate, founded by Queen Mauld, wife to king
Henry the first.

Eustace second son, was by his Father created Earl of Bolloigne, and
married Constance, sister of Lewis the seventh King of France, and dyed without
issue the tenth of August, 1152. and was buried at Feuersham.

William the third son, married Isabell, daughter and heir of William the
third Earl Warren and Surrey, in whose right he was Earl Warren and Surrey,
Lord of Norwich and Peuensey, Earl Mortaine, and Lord of the Egle in Normandy.
He dyed in his return from Tholouz, in the year, 1160.

Mauld, the eldest daughter of King Stephen, dyed young, and was buried at
London, in the Priory of the Trinity within Aldgate, called Christ-Church, now
the Dukes place.

Mary, second daughter of King Stephen, was Abbess of the Nunnery at Rumsey in
Hampshire; after she forsook her habit, and married Matthew, Brother of Philip
Earl of Flanders, who (in her right) was Earl of Bolloigne, and had issue,
Ida and Mauld.

King Henry the second,
HEnry, the second of that Name, (sur-named Short-mantle, borne in France) Son
of Geffrey Plantagenet, Earl of Antou, and Mauld the Empress, daughter of
King Henry the first; began his Reign over this Realm of England, the
twentieth day of October, 1154. His first coming was to Winchester, where the
Nobles of the Realm came unto him, of who^ he took homage and fealty: then
coming to London, he was crowned at Westminster by Theobald, Archbishop of
Canterbury, the 17. of December, 1154. being then 23. years of age. He chose
to be of his Counsel, the grauest and wisest he could find, and such as were
best experienced in the Laws of the Land. He expelled by public Proclamation,
all strangers out of the Land, who had swarmed into England, in the time of
variance between king Stephen and him: amongst whom, William of Ypers Earl of
Kent, was also compelled to be gone; taking into his hands all such lands and
possessions as pertained to the Crown, which had been before alienated and
made away to any person of what degree soever. From Hugh Mortimer, he took the
Castles of Clebery, Wigmore and Bridgnorth. He married Elianor, daughter and
sole heir of William Duke of Aquitaine, Earl of Poictiers and Tholouze, the
fifth of that name, (begotten of the daughter of Raymond, Earl of Toulouse.)
This Elianors Title, was the chief cause of those bloody wars betwixt
England and France; yea, and the Bellows that blew that unnatural discord,
betwixt the Father and his Sons. She ouer-liued her husband, and did see
three of her sons to be kings; and dyed the third of the Kalends of April,
1204. This Henry dyed the 6. day of July, 1189. in the 61. year of his age,
when he had reigned 34. years, 9. months, and two days, and was buried at
Founteuerald, in the Duchy of Alanson, near to the Town of the Egle.

Et portoit, gueulles au deux leopard passant d'or. The Jssue of King Henry the
second, and Queen Elianor bis Wife.
William eldest son, borne in the year, 1152, to whom the Nobility swear
fealty at the Castle of Wallingford in Berkshire; he dyed in the year 1156,
being but five years old, and was buried at Reading, by his great
Grandfather, King Henry the first.

Henry the second son, after the death of William his Brother, was Duke of
Normandy Earl of Aniou and Main, and was crowned king in the life time of his
Father, the 1^. of June, 1170. His wife was Margaret, daughter of Lewis the
younger, king of France, and was married at Newburgh in Normandy, 1160. and she
was after crowned Queen at Winchester, 1163. He dyed at Marcell in Touraine,
the eleventh of June, 1182. and was buried at Roan.

Richard the third son, was borne at Oxford, 1157. and was sur-named of the
French, Cuer-de-Lyon. He was first created earl of Poyctou, and had the whole
Duchy of Aquitaine, for which he did his homage to King Lewis the younger, of
France, 1170. After he fell at variance with his Father, and maintained wars
against him: but he was afterward reconciled into his Fathers love again, and
succeeded him in his Kingdom.

Geffrey the fourth son, borne the fifth year of his Fathers Reign; he
married Constance, daughter and heir of Conan Duke of Britain, and did his
homage for the same to his brother Henry, and dyed at Paris, 1186. the 19, of
August, and was buried in our Lady Church there, having issue, Arthur, Duke of
Britain, borne after his Fathers death; and a daughter named Elianor, which
dyed in prison, in King Henry the thirds time. This Constance was also married
to Randoll Earl of Chester.

Philip the fifth son, was borne in the fifteenth year of his Fathers Reign,
and dyed young, and was buried in S. Paul's Church in London.

John the sixth son, was borne in the year 1166. and sur-named Sanz-terre
without Land; because when he was King, he resigned his Crown and Kingdom to
the Pope: which Pandulphus his Legate kept (for the space of four days) to
the Popes use. He was created Earl of Mortaigne, and had withal the
Earledomes of Cornwall, Gloucester, Derby and Lancaster, the Honors of
Wallingford and Nottingham, and lastly was King.

Mauld the eldest daughter, was borne in the third year of her Fathers reign,
and married Henry, sur-named the Lion, Duke of Saxony and Sardinia; she
suruiued her husband, and dyed in the first year of King Richard the first,
and was after buried by her husband in the Church of S. Blase at Brunswick,
leaving issue, Oath Emperor, Henry Duke of Saxony, and William, and a daughter
named Elianor.

Elianor second daughter, borne at Roan, 1162. married Alfonsus the ninth of
that name, King of Castile in Spain, and had issue, Sancheus that dyed young,
as also his brother Ferdinando; Henry King of Castile; Blanch Queen of France,
wife to Lewis the eight, and Mother of S. Lewis; Berengar married unto
Alphonsus King of Leon, Vrraca Queen of Portingall, and Elianor wife to King
James King of Arragon.

Ioane the third daughter, borne in the City of Angiers in France, 1166. being
but eleven years old, was conveyed to the City of Palermo, and there married
to William the second King of Cicill, Duke of Apulia, and Prince of Capua,
1177. and was crowned Queen at the same place. She had issue, a son named
Beaumond, who was Duke of Apulia, and dyed young: She was after married to
Raymond the fourth of that Name, Earl of Tholouze, and had issue Raymond, the
last Earl of that House or Family; and a daughter married to Berald of
Elbeine, Prince of Orange.

Issue by his Concubine.
WIlliam, sur-named Longspee (or Long-Sword) begotten of his Paramore, the Lady
Rosamond, daughter of Walter Lord Clifford, married Ela, daughter and heir of
William Fitz-Patricke Earl of Salisbury, and had issue, William Longspee a
Baron; Stephen second son; Nicholas Bishop of Salisbury; and Richard the
fourth son, was a Cannon at Bradstocke: Idona, married to William Beauchampe
Baron of Bedford; Ella, first married to the Earl of Warwick, and after to
Philip Lord Basset; and Isabell, first married to William Lord Vescy, and after
to Walter Lord Clifford, Father of Roger.

King Richard the first.
RIchard, third son of King Henry the second, was borne at Oxford, in the
year 1157, who for his invincible valor, and haughty courage, was sur-named
Cuer-de-Lyon, or the Lions Heart; and did bear on his Shield or Targe, for his
Arms, a Lion rampant, which was the first Arms that ever I have seen borne
by any in England. He began his Reign over England, the sixth day of July, in
the year of our Lord, 1189. being 35. years old. And upon the solemnizing of
his Fathers Funerals, he went to the City of Roan, where, on the twentieth of
July after, he was proclaimed Duke of Normandy. In the beginning of his reign,
Pope Innocent solicited him with many strong persuasions, and promises of his
blessings, to wage war in his own person against the Turks in the holy
Land, and to attempt the winning of Jerusalem from the Infidels; which journey
he undertook, because Frederick the Emperor, and Philip the second of France,
and Leopoldus then Archduke of Austria, and others had engaged themselves, to
further those attempts, that their general meeting should be in Sicilia: and
that such wealth and booty as God and good fortune should make them owners of,
should be equally shared and divided amongst them and theirs. King Richard to
supply his wants, and to furnish himself with money, he sold the Castles of
Barwick and Rokesbrough to the King of Scots, for ten thousand pounds; and the
Lordship and Earldom of Durham, unto Hugh the proud Bishop of that See, for a
great sum of money. He also enriched himself by the sale of sundry Honors,
Lordships, Manors, Offices, Privileges, Royalties, and other things;
protesting, that (for the performance of so great and honorable a service) he
was not unwilling to sell his City of London, if any were able to buy it,
rather then he would be chargeable unto others. His journey being performed,
and he proclaimed King of Jerusalem, and had the possession thereof, and after
making his return for England; was in great danger of shipwreck, where he
saved his life by swimming, near unto Histria, which lies between Aquileia
and Venice. And coming to the Territories of Leopold in Austria, he was by
him taken prisoner and sold to the Emperor Henry the sixth, for threescore
thousand Marks; which Emperor assessed him to pay for his ransom, one
hundred thousand pounds; for which, security being given, he was set at
liberty. He was first contracted in marriage to Alice, daughter of Lewis the
seventh king of France, but with her he never kept company, nor had any issue.

His second wife was Berengaria, daughter of Sanches the fourth, King of
Navarre, who married him at Ciprus, and accompanied him to the holy land. He
was slain by Bertram de Gurdonn, with the shot out of a Crossebow, at a Castle
of the Viscount of Limoges, called Chalons, which wounding him in the shoulder,
the Surgeons having drawn out the wood of the Arrow, and not the enuenomed
iron forke; mangled the Arm with cruel incisions, that the pains thereof
hastened his death, when he had reigned almost nine years. He was buried at
Founteuerard in France at his Fathers feet, the 6. of April, in the year
1199. without any lawful issue. He had two base children, Philip a son, and
Isabell a daughter.

King Richard the first did bear for his Arms in his Pauis or Shield, one
lion rampant: and this is the first Arms that ever I could see any authority
for.

King John.
John, the sixth and youngest son of King Henry the second, was borne in the
year 1166. and by his Father was made Earl of Moriton, and Lord of Ireland;
and by the bounty and gift of King Richard his Brother, he was Earl of
Cornwall, Lancaster and Somerset, and after his brothers death, at Roane he was
created Duke of Normandy. And lastly, upon the Ascension day, 1199. he was
crowned at Westminster, King of England. He was sur-named John Sanz-terre,
because (when he was King) he resigned both Crown and Kingdom to the Pope
which Pandulphe the Legate kept for the space of four days to the Popes use.
The whole course of this Kings government, was accompanied with continual
troubles; and his two Persecutors were Pope Innocent the third, and Philip the
second, then King of France. He married two wives, the first was Isabell,
daughter and co-heyre of William Earl of Gloucester, son of Earl Robert,
married to him when he was Earl Moritayne, the first of King Richard the
first, and after ten years (having no issue) was the first year of his
Reign divorced from him, under pretense of consanguinity, and married to
Geffrey Magna-vile, Earl of Essex; and after his decease, to Hubert de Burgo,
Earl of Kent, and dyed without issue.

Isabell, second wife to King John, was daughter and heir of Aymer, Earl of
Angolesme, by whom he had issue, as hereafter follows. This Isabell
ouer-liued King John, and married Hugh de Brun, Earl of the Marches of
Aquitaine, and Lord of Lusignan and Valence in Poyton, (to whom she should have
been married, before she married King John) by whom she had diverse children,
greatly advanced by King Henry the third, their half brother. This King, lying
in the Abbey of Swansteed, not far from Lincoln, was poisoned by a Monk, of
the Order of S. Bernard; who to make his match sure, and to avoid jealousy
and suspicion, first drank unto the King, and poisoned himself: the King
being brought from the said Abbey in a Horse-litter, unto the Castle of
Newarke, there dyed on S. Lukes night, the 14. Kalends of November, and was
after buried at Worcester, in the year 1216. when he had reigned 17. years,
five months, lacking eight days, at the age of 51. years.

This John, being King of England and Duke of Normandy, in right of his
Grandmother Mauld the Empress; and Duke of Aquitaine by Elianor his Mother,
joined the Arms of Aquitaine, being a Lion passant gardant, unto the Arms of
Normandy and England, making it Gueulles trois Lions passant gardant d'or.

King John's Jssue by Isabell his last Wife.
King Henry the third, borne at Winchester, the first of October, 1208. being
the tenth year of his Fathers Reign.

Richard, second son of King John, was borne the next year after his Brother
King Henry, by whom he was made Knight, and created Earl of Cornwall; and by
the Electors, chosen to be Emperor of the West, and crowned King of the Romans
and Almany, at the City of Acon in Germony; (others have, at Aquisgraue) He
married three wives; the first was Isabell, daughter of William Marshall the
younger, Earl of Penbroke, widow of Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Gloucester, by
whom he had issue, Henry slain at Vitirbo in Italy, and John, who dyed both
without issue. His second wife was Senchia, daughter of Raymond Earl of
Province, and sister of Queen Elianor his brothers wife, who was crowned with
him at Acon, and by whom he had issue, Edmond Earl of Cornwall, and others.
His third and last wife was Beatrix, Niece to the Archbishop of Coleyne. This
Richard dyed at his Manor of Barkhamsted, the 20. of April, 1271. others say,
1272. and his body was buried in the Monastery of Hayles in Glocestershire, and
his heart in the Abbey of Reuly at Oxford, which was of his foundation.

Ioane the eldest daughter, was married to Alexander, the second King of Scots,
who coming into England, to see her Brother King Henry the third, dyed at
London, and was buried in the Nunnery at Tarent in Dorsetshire, the fourth of
March, 1236.

Elianor second daughter, was first married to William Marshall the younger,
Earl of Penbroke, who dyed before the wedding Feast was ended. She married
after, Simon Mountfort Earl of Leicester (son of Simon Earl Mounfort in
France) who maintaining the Barons wars, against King Henry the third, was
slain at the battle of Euesham, 1265. After whose death, she and her
Children were banished England, and dyed in the Nunnery at Montarges in France;
as in the Title of Earls of Leicester is more at large.

Isabell youngest daughter, was borne in the year 1214. who being 21. years
of age, married the Emperor Frederick in the City of Worms in Germany, the
20. of July, 1235. She being his sixth Wife, had issue by him, Henry elected
King of Cicily, and Margaret, Wife of Albert Landgraue of Thurin: She dyed in
childbed the first of December, 1241.

Base Children of King JOHN.
Richard, base son of King John, with Hugh de Burgo Earl of Kent, overthrew
the Navy of Lewis the French Kings son, in the second year of King Henry the
third. He married Rohesia, daughter and heir of Richard de Dover, son and
heir of Fulbert de Dover, who built the Castle of Chilham.

Geffrey Fitz-Roy, base son of King John, who transported Soldiers into
France, when Archbishop Hubert forbad King John his Father to go thither.

Ioane, base daughter of King John, begotten of Agatha, daughter of William
Earl Ferrars and Derby, was married to Lewellin Prince of Wales, 1204. with
whom her Father gave in marriage, the Castle and Lordship of Elinsmere, in the
Marchesse of South Wales.

King Henry the third.
HEnry, son and heir of king John, was borne at Winchester, the first of
October, in the year 1208. being the 10. year of his Fathers Reign; and
being of the age of nine years, was crowned King at Gloucester, the 28. of
October, 1216. by Peter, Bishop of Winchester, and the Protection of him and
his Realm, was committed to William Marshall the elder, Earl of Penbroke; and
after his death, 1218. he was committed to Peter, Bishop of Winchester, by
whose counsel he was crowned the second time, at Westminster, in the fifth
year of his Reign. He had great trouble and wars with his Barons, and was
taken prisoner at the battle of Lewis in Sussex, 1263. and with him, Richard
King of Romans his Brother, and Prince Edward his son, with many others;
Simon Mountfort Earl of Leicester, Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, and
Robert Earl Ferrars and Derby, being the Ringleaders of the rebellious
Barons. Not long after, the King, Prince and others were set at liberty, and
raising new Forces, fought a battle at Euersham in Worcestershire, where the
Barons were discomfited, and Simon Earl of Leicester, with his eldest son,
and Sir Hugh Spencer, and many others of great account were slain. This
overthrow did utterly defeat the Barons, and deprived them of all their hopes;
and so revived the melancholy King, that now he began again to be sensible of
his strength, and resolved (with all speed possible) to break those chains,
with which so lately he was so strongly bound.

He married Elianor, second daughter and one of the co-heyres of Raymond
Berengarius, Earl of Prouence, by Beatrix, daughter of Thomas Earl of Sauoy,
and sister to the Earls Amee and Peter, and Boniface, Archbishop of
Canterbury. She was married at Canterbury, the 14. of January, 1236. and was
crowned at Westminster, the 19. day of January after. He fell sick at S.
Edmonds-bury in Suffolk, and dyed the 16. of November, 1272. when he had lived
65. years, and reigned 56. years, and 28. days, and was buried at
Westminster. She was his Wife 37. years, his Widow 19. years, and dyed a Nun
at Almesbury, the 25. of June, 1291. and was buried in her Monastery, the 11.
of September after.

Et portoit, d'engleterre, gueulles trois lions passant gardant d'or, arm and
lampasse d'azur. His Issue.
Edward eldest son, was borne at Westminster, the 28. of June, 1239, he was
sur-named Long-shanks, of his tall and slender legs, he was made knight in
Spain, by Alphonsus King of Castile, and Earl of Chester by his Father, after
the death of David Earl of Chester, without issue male.

Edmond second son, borne the 26. of January, 1245. sur named Crouchbacke, of
bowing in his back: He was entitled King of Cicilia and Apulia, and was
created Earl of Lancaster. He had the lands of Simon Mountfort, Earl of
Leicester, and Robert Ferrars Earl of Derby given him; who were disinherited,
for raising war with the Barons, against the King. He dyed at Bayon in
Gascoigne, the fifth of June, 1296. being 50 years old; as in the Earls of
Lancaster is more at large.

Richard third son dyed young, and was buried at Westminster.

John fourth son, dyed also young, and was buried at Westminster.

William fifth son dyed young, and was buried in the new Temple at London.

Henry fixed son dyed young, and was buried at Westminster.

Margaret eldest daughter, was the first Wife of Alexander the third, King of
Scots.

Beatrix second daughter, borne at Bordeaux in Gascoigne, married to John the
first, Duke of Britain, who had issue, Arthur and John.

Katherine third daughter, borne at London, 1252. dyed young.

King Edward the First.
EDward, eldest son of King Henry the third, was borne at Westminster, the
28. of June, 1239. was surnamed Long shanks of his long legs, and began his
Reign the 16. of November, in the year of our Lord, 1272. being then beyond
the Sea, coming homeward from the Holy Land; and the 19. of August, in the
second year of his Reign, both he and his Queen Elianor were crowned at
Westminster, by Robert Kilwarby Archbishop of Canterbury. At which Coronation,
Alexander King of Scots, and John Earl of Britain were present, with their
wives, who were both sisters to K. Edward. At which sollemnity, five hundred
great horses were let at liberty by the King of Scots, the Earls of Cornwall,
Gloucester, Penbrooke, Warren, and others as they alighted from their backs; and
it was free for any that could, to catch and have the^ as their own.

King Edward being returned out of Wales, diverse complaints were presented unto
him, against diverse of his Justices, namely, Sir Thomas Weyland, Lord
Chiefe-Iustice of the Kings Bench, Adam Stretton, William Brampton, Roger
Leicester, and John Luneth, all Justices of the said Bench. with Robert
Lithbury, Master of the Rolls; Sir Thomas Weyland, by a Quest of twelve men
was found guilty, accessory of a murder, for releeuing the murderer after the
deed done; For which, he took Sanctuary in the Church of the Friars Minors at
S. Edmonds-bury; from whence he was had, and brought and delivered to Sir
Robert Mallet Knight, who sent him to the Tower of London, and after banished
the Land, and all his goods confiscated to the Kings use. William Brampton,
Roger Leicester, John Luneth, and Richard Lithbury before named, being accused
of wrongful judgments, and other foul mis-demeanors, were delivered out of
the Tower of London, by paying each of them a thousand Marks fine; and Solomon
de Rogester, Thomas de Sudington, Richard de Boiland, and Walter de Hopton,
Justices that rode the circuites, were charged with the like offenses, and were
punished accordingly. Sir Raphe de Hingham, a Justice of great account and who
had the managing of the whole affairs of the Realm, was charged with many
notorious abuses, and purchased his peace with a great sum of money; Adam de
Stretten, Lord Chiefe-Baron of the Exchecquer, a man of great possessions, lost
all his livings, and 34. thousand Marks in ready money; and yet it was thought
he had great favor, in that he lost not his life.

King Edward married two wives, and had issue by them both. Queen Elianor his
first Wife, was sister of Alphonsus King of Castile, and daughter of Ferdinando
the third; She was married to him at Bures in Spain, 1254. and was crowned
with him, and lived with him 36. years, and dyed at Herdeby in Lincolnshire,
the 29. of November, 1290. and was buried at Westminster, and at every place
where she rested, coming from Herdeby, he erected a Cross.

Margaret his second wife, was sister of Philip the fair, King of France, and
eldest daughter of Philip the Hardy, son of S. Lewis; she was married unto him
at Canterbury, the 8. of September, 1299. She ouer-liued King Edward, and
remained a Widow ten years after, and dyed the 10. of Edward the second,
1317. and was buried in the Gray-Fryars in London, before the high Altar in the
Quier, which before she had built.

King Edward dyed at Brugh upon the Sands, in the year 1307. the seventh of
July, when he had reigned 34. years, seven months, and odd days, being 68.
years old, and was buried at Westminster; unto which Church he had given a
hundred pound lands a year.

Et portoit, de gueulles, au trois lions paffant gardant d'or, arm and
lampasse d'azur. His Issue by his first Wife.
John eldest son, borne at Winchester, and dyed a child, and was buried at
Westminster, the 8. of August, in the last year of King Henry the third.

Henry second son, dyed young, his Father being then in the Isle of Cicill,
and was buried at Westminster, the 20. of November, 1272.

Alphons third son, borne in the Town of Main in Gascoigne, as his Father
and Mother were coming out of the Holy Land to England, the 23. of November,
1273. and dyed at Windesore, the 4. of August, 1285. and was buried at
Canterbury.

Edward the fourth son, borne at Cairnaruon in North- Wales, the 25. of
April, 1284. After the death of Lewellyn ap Griffith, was created Prince of
Wales, by his Father, being the first of the Kings sons of England, that had
that Title. He was also Earl of Ponthieu, and of Chester, and was made Knight
by his Father, on Whitsonday, 1306.

Elianor eldest daughter, borne at Windesore, in the 50. year of her Fath^^^
Reign, and was married with a Proxy, to a Deputy for Alphons King of Arragon,
son of King Peter, who dyed before marriage, leaving his Kingdom to his
Brother James. She was after married at Bristow, 1292. to Henry the third Earl
of Barrie, in Champayne in France, and had issue, Edward Earl of Barrie, from
whom the Dukes and Earls of Barrie do descend. Ioane her daughter, was married
to John Earl Warren and Surrey in England.

Ioane second daughter, was borne at Acon in the Holy Land, where her Mother
remained, during her Fathers wars with the Sarrazins, and being 18. years
old, was married to Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Gloucester and Hartford, by whom
she had issue, Gilbert Earl of Clare, slain in Scotland without issue, and
others as in the Title of Earls of Gloucester. She married to her second
husband, Sir Raphe Mounthermer Knight, who (during his wives life) was Earl of
Gloucester, and sat in all Parliaments by that Title. She lived 38. years, and
dyed in the first year of the Reign of King Edward the second, and was buried
in the Friars Augustines in Clare.

Margaret third daughter, borne in the Castle of Windesore, 1275. and at 18.
years of age, was married at Westminster, on the 9. day of July, 1290. to John
the second Duke of Brabant, and had issue, John the third, Father of Margaret,
wife of Lewis of Mechlyn, Earl of Flanders, and Mother of the Lady Margaret,
heir of Brabant and Flanders, who was married to Phillip Duke of Burgundy.

Berengaria the fourth daughter, borne 1276. and dyed a child.

Alice the fifth daughter, dyed young.

Mary sixth daughter, borne at Windesore the 22. of April, 1279. was at ten
years of a^^ made a Nun, at Ambresbury in Wiltshire, at the request of Queen
Elianor her Grandmother, who at that time, was Lady Abbess there.

Elizabeth the seventh daughter, was borne in Rutland Castle in Flintshire,
1284. and being 14. years old, was married at London, to John the first of
that name, Earl of Holland, and Lord of Freezeland, who dyed two years after
without issue. After whose death, she was married to Humfrey de Bohun Earl of
Hereford, without any dowry, by whom she had issue, John and Humfrey, as in the
Title of Earls of Hereford.

Beatrix, the eight daughter of King Edward the first.

Blanch the ninth daughter, dyed a Child.

Issue by Queen Margaret, the second Wife.
Thomas, the fifth son of King Edward the first, was borne at Brotherton, a
little Village in Yorkshire, in the year 1300. and was (after the death of
Roger Bigot) created Earl of Norfolk and Marshall of England. He had two
wives, the first was Alice, daughter of Sir Roger Hayles, of Harwich in
Suffolk, by who^ he had issue, Edward and others, as in the Title of Earls of
Norfolk. His second wife was Mary, daughter of William Lord Ros, widow of Sir
Raphe Cobham, who out living him, married the third time, William Lord Bruise,
of Brember in Sussex.

Edmond the sixth son, was borne at Woodstocke in Oxfordshire, the fifth of
August, 1301. and was created Earl of Kent. He married Margaret, daughter of
John, and sister and sole heir of Thomas Lord Wake of Lidell in
Northamptonshire, and had issue, two sons that dyed without issue, and one
daughter, as in the Title of Earls of Kent. The daughter was Ioane, sur-named,
The fair Maid of Kent, first married to William Mountague Earl of Salisbury;
from who^ being divorced, she was after married to Sir Thomas Holland Earl of
Kent, and by him had issue, Thomas and John, both Dukes of Surrey, and Earls
of Huntington. Lastly, she married for her third husband, Edward the black
Prince, and had issue, King Richard the second. This Edmond was beheaded at
Winchester, the 19. of March, in the fourth year of King Edward the fourth his
Nephew.

Elianor the tenth daughter, was borne at Winchester, the 6. of May, 1306. and
dyed young without issue, and was buried in S. Peter's Church at Westminster.

King Edward the second.
EDward of Carnaruan, so named of the place of his birth, began his Reign, the
seventh day of July, 1307. and on the 24. day of February after, he with his Q.
Isabell, were crowned at Westminster, by Henry, Bishop of Winchester. He caused
Walter de Langton, Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield, and Lord Treasurer of
England, to b^ ^rrested by Sir John Felton, Constable of the Tower of London,
and sent to Wallingford, there to be kept prisoner, and his goods to be
confiscate and given to Pieres of Gaueston; which Pieres being before banished
England by the said Bishops means, was now sent for and received again into
most high favor, and made Earl of Cornwall, his principal Secretary, and
Lord Chamberlain. By whose company and society, he was suddenly corrupted;
whereby he neglected and disdained the good counsel and company of his
Nobility, giving himself to wantonness, passing his time in voluptuous
pleasure, and riotous excess. And to help this matter forward, Pieres
furnished the Court with Iesters, Ruffians, flattering parasites, and other
vile and naughty rybalds, that the King might spend both days and nights in
jesting, playing, banqueting, and other such dishonorable exercises. And to
advance those like unto himself, he procured for them honorable Offices and
preferments: all which, greatly increased the hatred of the Nobility, and the
more, in regard of his high and haughty carriage of himself. Being now advanced
to honor, he would not once yield an inch to any; which procured him great
envy amongst the cheifest Peers of the Realm; namely, Henry Lacy, Earl of
Lincoln; Guy, Earl of Warwick; and Almerick de Valence, Earl of Penbroke,
the Earl of Arundell, and others; who, upon such wrath and displeasure, as
they had conceived against him, thought it not meet to suffer the same any
longer; in hope that the Kings mind might happily be altered to better purpose,
if the corrupter thereof were once banished from him.

Hereupon they assembled together in a Parliament time, at the New Temple in
London, and there agreed, that the said Pieres should depart, and be banished
the Realm again the second time; and not to return again at any time after.
To this the King (but sore against his will) agreed, and made his Letters
Patents to the said Lords, to witness the same: and the Archbishop of
Canterbury did pronounce the said Pieres accursed, if he tarried any longer
then the time appointed him, and likewise all those that should aid, help, or
maintain him. Whereupon Pieres was constrained to ship himself at Bristow for
Ireland, though sore against the Kings will, threatening the Lords to be
revenged. But not long after, Pieres returned again into England, and came to
the King at York; at whose coming, the King greatly rejoiced; and lying in
the Bishops Palace, caused Pieres to be lodged in the Castle, not far from
him.

Not long after, the King was willing (for his recreation) to take the Sea,
leaving Pieres of Gaueston at York. The Barons pursued Gaueston, who fled to
Scarborough, where the Barons took him, and carried him to a place called
Blacklow, and there the 9. of June, caused his head to be stricken off.
Afterward, the young Prince, the Queen and Nobility, finding fault with the
two Spencers (Hugh the Father, and Hugh the son, for misleading and abusing
the King and State, in like manner as Gaueston had done) caused them likewise
to be taken and put to death, without any trial, or answer. Which done, the
Queen with her Son and the Nobility, called a Parliament, wherein King Edward
was judged not worthy to bear or wear the Crown; but (for diverse causes) was
to be deposed, and Prince Edward his son, to be chosen in his place. This
being agreed on, King Edward being all this while prisoner in Kenilworth
Castle, was taken and carried from thence by night, to Corffe Castle, and from
thence to Barkely Castle, where he was most cruelly murdered, by Thomas Gorney
and John Maltreuers, and others his keepers. He was deposed the 25. of January,
1326. when he had reigned almost twenty years, and was murdered the 21. of
September, 1327. and his body was buried at Gloucester.

He married Isabell, daughter of Philip the fair King of France, and sister
and heir of her three Brothers, Lodowike Hutin, Philip the long, and Charles
the fair. She was married in our Lady Church at Bolloigne, the 22. of January,
1308. being but twelve years old, and was his wife twenty years, and his
widow thirty, and dyed at Rising near London, and was buried in the
Gray-Fryars in London.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. His Issue.
Edward (sur-named of Windsore) eldest son, borne in Windsore Castle, the 13.
of October, 1312. the sixth of his Fathers Reign. He was first created Prince
of Wales and Duke of Aquitaine, in a Parliament held at York, 1322. and was
made Lord warden of England; unto whom all the Lords swore fealty, and received
the oath of allegiance. He was after King of England, by the name of King
Edward the third.

John (sur-named of Eltham) second son, was borne at Eltham, in the year
1315. and at twelve years of age, was created Earl of Cornwall, at a
Parliament held at Salisbury, 1327. and after dyed in Scotland at S. John's
Town, unmarried, 1333. and lies buried at Westminster.

Ioane eldest daughter, was borne in the Tower of London, and was married at
Barwicke (being very young) the eighteenth day of July, 1329. to David Prince
of Scotland, son and heir of Robert Bruise, being but seven years of age.
This David was after King, by the name of David the second. She was his wife
28. years, and coming into England to visit her brother King Edward the
third, dyed without issue, 1353. and was buried in the Gray-Fryars in London.

Elianor second daughter, was married to Reginald, second Earl of Gelders, for
his second Wife, and had given her in marriage, 15000. pounds, 1332. Who being
Vicar general of the empire, to the emperor Lewis of Bauaria, created him the
first Duke of Gelders. She had issue, Reginald and Edward, both Dukes after
their Father, and dyed without issue, leaving his Duchy and his Wife to his
Nephew William, Duke of Gulike, his half sisters son.

King Edward the third.
EDward, the third of that Name, borne in Windesore Castle, 1312. after the
deposing of his Father, began his Reign the 25. of January, 1327. and was
crowned at Westminster, the first day of February after, by Walter, Archbishop
of Canterbury.

And because he was but 14. years of age, and not able to govern of himself,
it was decreed, that twelve of the greatest Lords within the Realm, should
have the rule and government, until he came of more years: which were, the
Archbishops of Canterbury and York, the Bishops of Winchester and Hereford,
Henry Earl of Lancaster, Thomas of Brotherton, Marshall of England; Edmond of
Woodstocke, Earl of Rent; John Earl Warren, Thomas Lord Wake, Henry Lord
Percy, Sir Oliver Ingham, and the Lord John Ros; who were sworn of the Kings
counsel, and charged with the government, as they would answer the same.

In the first year of this Kings Reign, dyed Charles King of France, the
third Brother of Queen Isabell, Mother of King Edward the third; by whose
death, the Kingdom of France did descend to King Edward, by Isabell his
Mother, the only sister and heir of her three Brothers, Kodowike Hutin,
Philiple Long, and Charles the fair, Kings of France. But the said Kingdom
was usurped and possessed by Philip de Valois, Uncle to the said Charles, who
did intrude himself by force.

In the year 1339. King Edward going to make his claim to the Kingdom of
France, (prayed aid of the Flemings, who before had sworn, and bound
themselves in a bond of a Million of gold in the Popes Chamber, that they
should always help the King of France, and fight under his Ensign) for
release whereof, King Edward, by the persuasion of Jacques D'Artuell of Gaunt,
did quarter the Arms of France, with the Arms of England, and proclaimed
himself King of France. By which act, the Flemings held themselves discharged
of their band and oath. After, Charles the sixth French King of that Name,
envying greatly, that the Kings of England should bear the Arms of France,
(which was semie de luces) changed the same unto three De luces; of which
thing, King Henry the fifth of England took example and bare the like. By
reason whereof, the Kings of France, have ever since ceased to make any further
change of their Arms.

He married Philip, daughter of William Earl of Henault and Holland, and
sisters daughter of Philip of Valoys, King of France before mentioned. This
marriage was at York, the 24. of January, and she was crowned at Westminster,
the first Sunday in Lent following, 1327. She was his Wife 42. years, and dyed
the 15. of August, 1369. and was buried at Westminster. King Edward her
husband, dyed at Sheene, now called Richmond, the 21. of June, 1377. after he
had lived 65. years, and reigned 50. years, 4. months, and 28. days. His
body was conuayed from Sheene, by his four sons Lionell Duke of Clarence,
John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, Edmond of Langley Duke of York, and Thomas of
Woodstocke Earl of Cambridge, with others, and was buried at Westminster.

His Issue.
Edward eldest son (borne at Woodstocke the fifteenth of July, 1329.) was
created Prince of Wales, Duke of Aquitaine and Cornwall, and Earl of Chester,
and Earl of Kent in right of his Wife Ioane, daughter of Edmond Earl of Kent
(brother by the Father, to King Edward the second) She had bin twice married
before, first to the Earl of Salisbury, and after to Thomas Holland. She had
issue by Prince Edward, two sons, Edward borne at Angolesme, who died young;
and Richard borne at Bordeaux, who was after King of England, by the name of
King Richard the second.

This Prince had issue also, two bastard sons, Sir John Sounder, and Sir
Roger Claridon Knights; the latter was attainted in King Henry the fourths time.

William second son, was borne at Hatfield in Hartfordshtre, 1335. and was
sur-named William of Hatfield; he had his christen name of William Earl of
Henauls, his grand father, and dyed in his childhood, and was buried at York.

Lionell third son, was borne in the City of Antwerpe, the 29. of November,
1338. and was sur-named of Antwerpe. He had two Wives, the first was Elizabeth,
daughter and heir of William Burgh, Earl of Vlster in Ireland, in whose right
he was first created Earl of Vlster. And because he had with her the Honor of
Clare in Norfolk, as parcel of the Inheritance of her Grandmother (
Elizabeth, sister and co-heyre of the last Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester)
He was in Parliament, 1362. created Duke of Clarence; from which Dutchic, the
name of Clarenceux, King of Arms of the South parts of England, takes his
denomination. He had issue by the said Elizabeth, one only daughter named
Phillip, married to Edmond Mortimer Earl of March, Grandfather of Anne,
Countess of Cambridge, Grandmother of King Edward the fourth.

He was after married at Millaine in Lumbardy, to the Lady Violanta, daughter
of Galeazo, the second Duke thereof; as in the Earls of Clare is set forth.

John fourth son, borne at Gaunt in Flanders, 1340. was first created Earl
of Richmond, which was surrendered to John Duke of Britain, sur-named The
valiant, who had married Mary his sister, to whose Dukedom formerly it had
belonged.

This John married three Wives, the first was Blanch, daughter and heir of
Henry Duke of Lancaster (son of Edmond Croochbacke) by whom he had issue,
King Henry the fourth; Phillip, Wife to John the first, King of Portingall; and
Elizabeth, first married to John Holland Earl of Huntington, and after to Sir
John Cornwall Baron of Fanhope. His second Wife was Constance, eldest daughter
of Peter King of Castile and Leon, in whose right he entitled himself King of
both those Realms, and had issue Katherine, Wife to Henry the third, son of
King John, King of both those Realms.

His third Wife was Katherine Swynford, Widow of Sir Otho or Otes Swynford,
Knight of Lincolnshire, daughter and co-heyre of Sir Pain Roet, alias Guien,
King of Arms, a Gascoigne borne, whose other daughter Anne, was married to Sir
Geffrey Chaucer Knight, the Poet. By this Katherine Swinford, he had issue
before marriage, and made legitimate by Act of Parliament, the 20. year of
King Richard the second; John Earl of Somerset, Thomas Duke of Excester, and
Earl of Dorset, Henry Bishop of Winchester, and Cardinal; and Ioane, first
married to Raphe Neuill, first Earl of Westmerland, and after to Robert
Ferrars, Baron of Ouesley. These children begotten of Katherine Swynford, were
sur-named Beauforts, of Beaufort Castle in France, where they were borne.

Edmond of Langley fifth son, was created Earl of Cambridge, in the 36. year
of King Edward the third, and after Duke of York, 1386. He married Isabell,
daughter and co heir of Peter, King of Castile and Leon, as in the Title of
Earls of Cambridge and Dukes of York.

William, sur-named of Windsore, where he was borne, dyed young.

Thomas the youngest son, sur-named of Woodstocke (where he was borne) was by
King Richard the second, first created Earl of Buckingham, and after D. of
Gloucester, as in those Titles is more at large.

Isabell, eldest daughter of King Edward the third, was married at Windsore to
Ingelram de Guisnes, Lord of Coucy, Earl of Soysons, and Duke of Austria, whom
King Edward her Father, made Earl of Bedford, by whom she had issue two
daughters, Mary, married to Henry of Bar, and Philip, Wife to Robert Vere
Earl of Oxford, Duke of Ireland, and Marquess of Dublyn, who after forsook
her, and married one Lancerona, a Ioyners daughter, who came into England with
Queen Philip out of Bohemia.

Ioane second daughter, married by Proxy to Alphons, the eleventh King of
Castile and Leon.

Blanch third daughter dyed young, and was buried at Westminster.

Mary fourth daughter, married to John Mountfort Duke of Britain.

Margaret youngest daughter, was the first Wife of John Hastings Earl of
Penbroke.

King Richard the second.
RIchard the second, borne at Bordeaux, son of Edward the black Prince, and
grandchilde to King Edward the third, being eleven years old, began his
Reign the 21. day of June, in the year of our Lord, 1377. and was crowned
King at Westminster, the 16. of July. In beauty, bounty and liberality, he
far passed all his Progenitors; but was overmuch given to rest and
quietness, little regarding matters of Arms: and being young, was most ruled
by young Counsel, regarding little the Counsel of the sage and wise men of
the Realm. Which thing, turned this Land to great trouble, and himself to
extreme misery; For being first disgraced by his Cousin, Henry of Bullingbroke,
Duke of Hereford, son of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, he was at length by
him (with the general consent of a whole Parliament) deposed from his Crown
and Kingdom, the 29. of September, 1399. and committed to prison, and
afterward wickedly murdered. For being sent to Pomfret Castle to be safely
kept, and Princely maintained; was shortly after by King Henry's direction and
commandment, (who feared least his Estate might be shaken, so long as King
Richard lived) wickedly assaulted in his lodging, by Sir Pieres of Exton, and
eight other armed men, from one of which (with a Princely courage) he wrested a
brown Bill, and therewith slew four of them; and with an admirable
resolution, fought with all the rest: until coming by his own Chair (in
which the base cowardly Knight himself stood for his own safety) he was by
him stricken with a Pole-axe, in the hinder part of his head, that presently he
fell down to the ground and dyed, when he had reigned 22. years, 14. weeks,
and two days.

He married two Wives, the first was Anne, daughter of the Emperor Charles the
fourth, and sister of Wenceslaus, Emperor and King of Bohemia, who was crowned
Queen the 22. of January, 1384. having been his Wife ten years, and dyed at
Sheene in Surrey, 1394. and was buried at Westminster without issue.

His second Wife was Isabell, daughter of Charles the sixth, King of France,
whom he affianced in the 19. year of his Reign, she being then but 7. years
old: by reason whereof, he never had any company with her. She was after the
said Richards death, sent back again into France, being then not full twelve
years old, without any dowry, because the marriage was never consumated. The
Lord Henry Percy had the conuaying of her, in the year, 1401.

Et portoit, France seem escar^elle d'engleterre. King HENRY the Fourth.
THE right of the Crown of England, after the death of King Richard without
issue, ought to have descended to Edmond Mortimer, Earl of March, son and
heir of Roger Mortimer, whose Mother Philip, was daughter and heir of
Lionell, Duke of Clarence, third son of king Edward the third. Which
notwithstanding, Henry, sur-named of Bullingbroke, Duke of Hereford, and son
and heir of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, fourth Son of king Edward the
third, was elected king, and began his Reign the 29. of September, 1399. After
which, he made many new Officers, viz. Thomas his second son, he made Lord high
Steward of England. The Earl of Northumberland, Constable of England. The
Earl of Westmerland, Marshall of England, etc. and was crowned at Westminster,
the 13. of October after. The Dukes of York, Surrey and Albemarle, with the
Earl of Gloucester, bare the Canopy over him (which Office, now the Barons of
the Cinque Ports do execute) Sir Tho: Dymmoke (ancestor of the now Noble and
worthy knight, Sir Edw. Dymmok of Lincolnshire) was Champion, and rode 3. times
about the Hall in complete armor, challenging any that should gainsay the
kings right, throwing down his Gauntlet to maintain the same. He created Henry
his eldest Son, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, Earl of Chester, and heir
apparent to the Crown; and at his death, he gave him this charge to keep (as
he would answer the same before God) viz. To minister the Laws indifferently,
to ease the oppressed, to beware of flatterers, not to defer justice, nor to be
sparing of mercy. Punish (quoth he) the oppressors of thy people, so shall thou
obtain favor of God, and love of thy subjects; who, whiles they have wealth,
so long shall thou have obedience; but being made poor by oppressions, will be
ever ready to stir and make rebellion and insurrection.

He yielded to God his spirit, the 20. day of March, 1412. the 46. year of his
age, when he had reigned 13. years, six months, lacking ten days. His body
being conveyed to Canterbury, was there buried.

He married two Wives, the first was Mary, second daughter and co-heyre of
Humfrey de Bohun, Earl of Hereford, Essex and Northampton, and Constable of
England, who dyed in the year 1394. and was buried at Canterbury.

His second Wife was Ioane, daughter of Charles King of Navarre, and Widow of
John Mountfort Duke of Britain, who dyed at Hauering in the Bower in Essex,
without issue, the tenth of July, 1437. and was buried at Canterbury.

His Issue by his first Wife.
Henry eldest son, was created Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall and Earl of
Chester, in the first year of his Fathers Keigne. This Henry, in the time of
his Fathers banishment, was sent into Ireland; and, upon hearing of his Fathers
ariuall into England, King Richard caused him to be imprisoned with Humfrey,
son and heir of Thomas of Woodstocke, in the Castle of Trime in Ireland; but
in the first year of King Henry the 4. they were both delivered, and coming
into England, Humfrey dyed of the plague at Chester.

Thomas second son, was created Duke of Clarence, in the eleventh year of
King Henry the 4. and in the 8. year of King Henry the 5. he was made
Lieutenant General of France and Normandy; and (in the year after) was slain
at Bangy-Bridge in France, by the Duke of Orliance. He married Margaret,
daughter of Thomas Holland Earl of Kent, and Widow of John Beaufort Earl of
Somerset; as is more at large in the Title of the Dukes and Earls of Clarence.

John third son, was made Duke of Bedford, the 11. year of King Henry the 4.
his Father; and in the fifth year of Henry the 5. his brother, he was by
Parliament made Regent of England, and Head of the public Wealth. He knighted
King Henry the 6. his Nephew, at a Parliament held at Leicester, in the 4.
year of his Reign. And in the first year of the said King Henry the 6. being
made Regent of France, Charles King of France dying: the most part of France
was delivered to him by the Nobility there, to the use of King Henry the sixth.
His marriages and death is more at large in the Title of Bedford.

Humfrey, fourth son of King Henry the 4. was by his Brother King Henry the
5. made Duke of Gloucester; and in the first year of Henry the 6. he was made
Protector of the Kingdom of England, for 15. years, during the said kings
minority; and was styled, Humfrey, by the grace of God, Son, Brother and
Uncle to Kings, Duke of Gloucester, Henault, Holland, Zeland and Penbroke, Lord
of Friezland, great Chamberlain of England, Protector and Defender of the
Kingdom and Church of England. He had two Wives.

His first Wife was Iaquet, daughter and heir of William, Duke of Bauaria, and
Earl of Holland, who was before betrothed to John Duke of Brabant, and was
therefore after divorced from this Humfrey without issue.

His second Wife was Elianor, daughter of Reginald, Lord Cobbam of Sterburgh in
Surrey, who for witchcraft and poysonings, was much defamed. Queen Margaret,
Wife to King Henry the sixth, enuyed greatly his estate and government, and
practiced with others, his overthrow and destruction; for after, he was found
murdered in his bed, at Bury in Suffolk, and was after buried at S. Albons in
Hertfordshire.

Blanch eldest daughter, was married at Collen, to William Duke of Bauaria,
son and heir of Lewis of Bauaria. After she married the King of Arragon: and
thirdly, she married the Duke of Bar, but had no issue by any of them.

Philip, second daughter of King Henry the 4. was married to John, King of
Denmark and Norway, and dyed without issue.

King HENRY the fifth.
HEnry the fifth, sur-named of Monmouth in the Marches of Wales, where he was
borne, in the year 1388. He began his reign, the 20. day of March, in the
year of our Lord 1412. And the ninth day of April after, he was crowned King
at Westminster, by Thomas of Arundell, Archbishop of Canterbury. Which done, he
called before him all his young Lords and Companions, that were followers of his
young actions; to every of them he gave rich gifts, and commanded, that as
many as would change their life and manners, (as he intended to do) should
follow him still; and to those that would persist in their former life and
conversation, he commanded upon pain of death, never after to come in his
presence. This Prince, by the instigation and prouokement of some of these
unthrifty and lewd Companions, in his Fathers days, smote the then Lord
Chiefe-Iustice of the Kings Bench, a blow on the Face: for which, he was by
his Father imprisoned, and put from his place of being President of the Kings
Counsel; which Office (to his great grief and disgrace) the King gave to
Thomas Duke of Clarence, his second son.

This King following his Father used every day when no state was kept, after
dinner, to have a Cushion laid on the cupboord, and there to lean a whole
hour or more, to receive Petitions and hear complaints of whosoever would
come. And in those days, when the King dyned in his Chamber, the Steward of
the Household, sat always in the Hall, under the Cloth of Estate, the same
being rolled up above his head, and such Knights with him, as waited that time
upon the King. He dyed in the Castle of Boys de Viscenne, not far from Paris,
the 13. day of August, 1422, when he had reigned nine years, five months, and
odd days, being 36. years old, and was buried at Westminster.

He married Katherine, daughter of Charles the sixth, King of France, at Troyes
in Champaigne, the third of June, 1420. and the 14. of February after, she was
crowned at Westminster, and was his Wife, two years and three months. She was
after married to a Noble Gentleman, named Owen Theodor of Wales, by whom she
had issue three sons, Edmond, Jasper and Owen; Edmond was made Earl of
Richmond; and married Margaret, daughter and sole heir of John D. of Somerset,
and had issue, King Henry the seventh: Iaspher the second son, was Earl of
Penbroke, and after Duke of Bedford. This Queen Katherine dyed at Bermondsey
in Southwarke, the second of June, 1436. and was buried at Westminster, leaving
issue by King Henry the fifth her husband, King Henry the sixth. This King left
Seem de lices, and bare three.

Et portoit, France, escartelle d'engleterre. King HENRY the sixth.
HEnry the sixth, borne at Windsore, being an infant not nine months old,
began his Reign the last of August, in the year of our Lord, 1422. The
government of his Realms was committed to Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, and the
guard of his person to Thomas Duke of Excester, and to John Duke of Bedford,
the Regiment of France. These his three Uncles, with great wisdom and valor
discharged the trust committed unto them. This Henry, on the sixth of November,
1429. in the 8. year of his Reign was crowned at Westminster with
solemnization. He took his journey to France, and coming to Paris, was
received with great solemnity: and on the 17. of November, 1431. was crowned
King of France, in our Lady Church in Paris.

He espoused Margaret, daughter of Reyner, Duke of Aniou, (and titulary of
Cicily, Naples and Jerusalem) by Proxy at the City of Towers in Touraine, in
Saint Martyns Church, by William de la Pole his Procurator, in the presence of
the French King and Queen; which King, was Uncle to the Brides Father, and
the French Queen, Aunt to her Mother. She being conveyed to the Abbey of
Tichfield, was there solemnly married to King Henry the sixth, the 22. of
April, 1445. and was crowned at Westminster, the 30. day of May after. In the
33. year of this Kings Reign, he lost the battle at S. Albons; and was
tataken prisoner at the battle of Northampton, by the Earl of Warwick, the
38. year of his Reign; and the year after, was delivered again by Queen
Margaret his Wife, after the second battle of S. Albons; but in the same,
after the battle at Mortimers Cross, the King and Queen fled to York; and
the Earl of March, coming to London with his power, was proclaimed King of
England. And in the fourth year of his Reign, he took King Henry, near the
Abbey of Selby in Lancashire, and brought him prisoner to the Tower of London.
And in the ninth year of his Reign, King Henry the sixth, was again
delivered, by the Duke of Clarence and the Earl of Warwick.

King Edward flying into Flanders, was proclaimed a Usurper; but the next year
after, King Edward returning again into England, and coming to London, took
king Henry in the Bishops Palace, and after gave battle to the Earl of
Warwick, at Barnet, where the said Earl, with his brother John Neuill
Marquess Mountague were slain. And in the same year, 1471. he also gave a
great overthrow to Queen Margaret, at Tewkesbury; in which battle, the said
Queen, with Prince Edward her only son, were taken prisoners; Prince Edward
being first stricken by King Edward, Richard Duke of Gloucester, stabbed him to
the heart with his Dagger. The Queen his Mother was conuayed to London, where
she remained in prison, until Reyner her Father purchased her deliverance with
great sums of money; who after returning to her own Country, there dyed.

After this battle at Tewkesbury, King Edward the fourth came to London, on
the 21. of May, 1471. with thirty thousand men: and the same night, King Henry
was murdered in the Tower of London, and the morrow after, brought into S.
Paul's Church in London, in an open Coffin barefaced, where he bled: From
thence he was conuayed to the Blacke-Fryars, and there also bled. Lastly, his
body was conuayed to Windsore, and there buried.

King Edward the fourth.
EDward, Earl of March, borne at Roan in Normandy, son and heir of Richard
Plantagenet Duke of York, by Cicely Neuill, daughter of Rafe, Earl of
Westmerland; about the age of eighteen years, began his Reign, the 4. day of
March, 1460. and was crowned at Westminster, the 28. of June after.

Philip Commines, writing of the death of this King Edward the fourth, says.
The late King Edward the 4. of England, being heir of the House of York,
utterly destroyed the House of Lancaster, under the which, both his Father and
he had lived many years. And although the said King Edward had done homage to
King Henry the 6. being of the house of Lancaster: did he not afterward hold
him prisoner many years, in the Tower of London, where in the end he was
murdered? Have we not seen also (says he) the Earl of Warwick, principal
Governor of all the said King Edwards Offices (after he had put to death all
his enemies, especially the Duke of Somerset) in the end became deadly enemy
to the king his Master, gave his daughter in marriage, to Edward Prince of
Wales, son of King Henry, attempted again to set up the house of Lancaster,
past with the said Prince into England, discomfited in the field and slain,
both he and his brother, with many other Noblemen their kindred, and others,
who in time past had done the like to their enemies? After all this, the
children of these, when the world turned, revenged themselves, and caused (in
like manner) the other to die. For after King Edward was quiet in his place and
Realm, and received yearly out of France, 50000. Crowns, paid him in the
Tower of London, and was grown so rich, that richer he could not be; he dyed
suddenly, as it were of melancholy, because of the French Kings marriage with
the Lady Margaret, the Duke of Austriches daughter. For so soon as he was
advertised thereof, he fell sick, and began then to perceive, how he had been
abused, touching the marriage of his daughter, whom he had caused to be called
the Lady Dolphinesse: then also was the pension (which he had received out of
France) taken from him, which he called Tribute, etc.

He married Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Wooduile Earl Rivers, and Iaqueline
his Wife, Duchess of Bedford, and Widow of Sir John Gray, slain at S.
Albons, where he was knighted, the day before his death, by King Henry the
sixth. After whose death, she was privately married to King Edward the fourth,
the first day of May at his Mannot of Grafton in Northamptonshire, 1464. and
the next year after, was crowned Queen at Westminster, the 26. day of May.
She was his Wife, 18. year, eleven months, and nine days, and in the
beginning of King Edward the fifth (her sons Reign) she was forced to take
Sanctuary at Westminster; and after, having all her lands and possessions
seized upon by King Henry the seventh, lived in mean estate in the Monastery
of Bermondsey in Southwarke, where not long after she dyed, and was buried at
Windsore, by King Edward her husband, who dyed before at Westminster, the 9.
day of April, 1483. at the age of 41. years, when he had reigned 22. years,
one month, and odd days.

His Issue.
Edward, eldest son of King Edward the fourth, borne in the Sanctuary at
Westminster, the 4. of November, 1471. the tenth year of his Fathers Reign; at
that time King Edward was expulsed the Realm, by the Earl of Warwick; but
Fortune changing, the Father was restored, and the Son created Prince of
Wales, and Earl of Chester, the first of July.

Richard, second son of King Edward the fourth, borne at Shrewsbury, and
being but a child, was created Duke of York. He was betrothed unto Anne,
daughter and heir of John Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshall, Warren and
Nottingham; but he enjoyed neither wife, nor life long, for he was (with his
brother Edward) murdered in the Tower of London; which place ever since is
called, The bloody Tower.

George third son, was also borne at Shrewsbury, and being very young, died
and was buried at Windsore.

Elizabeth eldest daughter, borne at Westminster, the 11. of February, 1466.
she was promised in marriage to Charles the Dolphin of France, wooed and
courted by Richard Duke of Gloucester, her unhappy Uncle, after he had murdered
her two Brothers, and he then King; but after she was married to King Henry the
seventh.

Cecily second daughter, was motioned to marry James, Prince of Scotland and
Duke of Rothsay, but it took no effect, and so she was married after to John
Viscount Wells, whom she out-liued, and married again to one Kyme of
Lincolneshire, and dyed without issue.

Anne third daughter, married to Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, Earl
Marshall, and Lord Treasurer of England, and had issue, two sons who died
very young. She dyed without issue, and was buried at Framingham in Norfolk.

Bridget fourth daughter, was borne at Eltham in Kent, the tenth of November,
1480 and was a Nun at Dartford, where she remained till she dyed.

Mary fifth daughter, was promised in marriage to the King of Denmark; but she
dyed before marriage, in the Tower of Greenwich, 1482. and was buried at
windsore.

Margaret sixth daughter, dyed in her Infancy.

Katherine seventh daughter, married William Courtney, Earl of Devonshire, and
Lord of Ochampton, and had issue, Henry Earl of Devonshire, whom Henry the
eight created Marquess of Excester, 1525.

His Bastards.
Arthur Plantagenet, base son of King Edward the fourth, begotten of
Elizabeth Lucy, was created Viscount Lisle at Bridewell in London, the 26. of
April, 1533. in right of his Wife Elizabeth, sister and heir of Sir John Gray
Viscount Lisle the Widow of Edmond Dudley. This Arthur had issue three
daughters; Bridget, Francis and Elizabeth, as is more at large in the Title of
Viscounts.

Elizabeth, base daughter of King Edward the fourth, married to Sir Thomas
Lumley Knight, who dyed before his Father George Lord Lumley, and had issue,
Richard Lord Lumley, that dyed the second of King Henry the eight; and George
Lumley a second son.

King EDWARD the fifth.
THis young King, being under the protection of Richard Duke of Gloucester his
unnatural Uncle, at the death of his Father being in Wales, was brought and
lodged in the Bishops Palace of London, the 4. day of May, 1483. The Queen
his Mother, with his young brother the Duke of York being in the Sanctuary at
Westminster; Richard, the then Protector, sent the honest Lord Cardinal to the
Queen, for the delivery of the said Duke of York out of the Sanctuary; who
by his sweet and poisoned words, and protestations to his Mother, that it would
be for all their good to deliver him: This young Prince was delivered, and
brought to the King his Brother, in the Bishops Palace of London, and from
thence conuayed to the Tower of London, with show of preparation for the day of
Coronation; where they remained some two months. At which time, the said
Protector sent one Green (a trusty servant of his) unto Sir Robert
Brakenbury, then Constable of the Tower, to murder the said two Princes; who
stoutly denying to do so foul an act, Sir James Tirrell, a servant of the
said Protectors, was sent to Brakenbury the day after, to have the keys of the
Tower, and custody of those two Infants delivered to him. Which being done
accordingly, the young King and his brother were shut up together, and al
company removed from them, saving that miscreant dog, that was to execute that
bloody and butcherly act; who about midnight, brought a rout of Runnagates
into their Chamber, who suddenly lapping them up amongst the clothes of their
bed, smothered these two sweet Babes, the Lords Anointed.

This young King, was at his Fathers death, eleven years, five months, and
five days old.

King Richard the Third.
RIchard the third, borne at Fotheringhay Castle in Northamptonshire, third
son of Richard Duke of York, and brother to King Edward the fourth, Lord
Protector, and murderer of king Edward the fifth his Nephew: And (by common
report) a monster in nature; for he had many teeth when he was borne. He was
very much deformed of his body; of stature he was but low, croocke-backed, his
left shoulder much higher then the right, his visage uncomely, his complexion
swart, his left arm withered almost to the bone. He made his conscience in all
things to serve his will, though his will could not be obtained, without the
effusion of guiltless blood. He was so cunning a dissembler, that he would
accompany (most familiarly) with such as inwardly he hated in his heart. He
spared no man's death, whose life resisted his ungodly purposes.

This Richard, was honored with the Title of Gloucester, a title and name ever
ominous, all of them dying violent and untimely deaths: which he regarded not,
his destiny enforcing, his aspiring mind gave him no rest, until his
restless body found it lastly in the grave. He was slain at a battle fought
at Redmore near Bosworth, the 22. of August, 1485. when he had reigned two
years, two months, and fine days.

The slain body, all tugged and torn naked, and not so much as a clout left
to cover his shame, was trussed behind Blanch Sengler, his Pursuiuant of Arms,
like a Hog or Calfe, his head and arms hanging on the one side of the horse,
and his legs on the other side, all besprinkled with mire and blood, and was so
brought to Leicester, and there for a miserable spectacle, the space of two
days lay naked and unburied: his remembrance being as odious to all, as his
person deformed and loathsome to be looked upon. Lastly, his body was buried at
Leicester, without any Funeral pomp. He married Anne, second daughter and
co-heyre of Richard Neuill, Earl of Warwick and Salisbury, and had issue,
Edward their only child, created by King Edward the fourth, Earl of
Salisbury, and by his Father, Prince of Wales, as in the Earls of Salisbury is
set forth.

King HENRY the Seventh.
HEnry, earl of Richmond, borne in Pe^broke Castle, son of Edmond of Hadham,
Earl of Richmond, and Margaret his wift, daughter and only heir of John
Beaufort, D. of Somerset: which Edmond of Hadham, was son and heir of Owen
Tudor, begotten of Queen Katherine, Widow of King Henry the fifth, and
daughter of Charles the sixth French King. This Henry fled into Britain, in
the first year of King Edward the fourth; and in the second year of king
Richard the third, he arrived and landed at Milford Haven in Wales, and with a
small power came to Leicester, and at a little Town thereby called Bosworth,
where a cruel battle being fought; King Richard was slain in the Field; and
his Crown which he ware (being found) was by the Earl of Derby and others, put
upon this Henry's head, and presently proclaimed King of England in the Field,
1485.

He married Elizabeth, eldest daughter of King Edward the 4. the 18. day of
January, 1485. she being nineteen years old, whereby was united the two
Families of York and Lancaster, to the great joy of all English Subjects,
betwixt whom, infinite contentions and mortal wars, had formerly consumed
and destroyed many thousands of noble and valiant Gentlemen. She was crowned
at Westminster, the 25, of November, 1487. the third of her Husbands Reign,
and continued his Wife, 18. years, and 24. days, and dyed in Childebed in the
Tower of London, the eleventh of February, being the day of her birth, 1503.
and was buried at Westminster.

His Issue.
Arthur, eldest son and heir, borne at Winchester, the 20. day of September,
1486, who, by his Father was created Prince of Wales, in the fifth year of his
Reign, Duke of Corn^ill, and Earl of Chester; who, upon the 14 day of
November, 1501. being fifteen years old, married Katherine, daughter of
Ferdinando King of Spain^; she being then about eighteen years of age. This
marriage was solemnized in ^he Cathedral Church of S. Paul in London, and
within 4. months and 19. days after, he dyed at Ludlow, the second of April,
1502. he being then 15. years 6 months, and 13. days old, and was buried at
Worcester, in S. Mary's Church.

Henry second son, borne at Greenwich in Kent, the 22. of June, 1491. In his
infancy he was created Duke of York, and Marshall of England; and after King
of England.

Edmond third son, was borne in the year 1495. and was created Earl of
Somerset, and dyed young at Bishops Hatfield, being not sine years old, 1499.
and was buried at Westminster.

Margaret eldest daughter, borne the 29. of November, 1489. and being 14.
years old, was married to James the fourth, King of Scotland, 1503, and had
issue, James the fifth, King of Scotland, Arthur and Alexander, and one
daughter, all which but the eldest, dyed without issue young. She married to
her second husband, Archibald Douglas, Earl of Anguish, 1514. by whom she had
issue, Margaret, married to Matthew Earl of Lenox, who had issue, Henry Lord
Dernley, after King of Scotland in right of Mary Queen of Scotland his Wife,
by whom he had issue, James, King of great Britain, 1618.

Elizabeth second daughter, borne the second of July, 1492. and dyed the 14. of
September, 1495. and was buried at Westminster.

Mary third daughter, was first married to Lewis King of France, who lived not
long with her, but dyed without issue. After whose death, she married for her
second husband, Sir Charles Brandon a Noble Knight, and after Duke of Suffolk,
as in the Title of Earls of Suffolk is more at large.

Katherine fourth daughter, borne upon Candlemas day, 1503. in the 18. year of
her Fathers Reign, who dyed young.

King HENRY the Eight.
KIng HENRY the eight, borne at Greenwich, the 22. of June, 1491. and at the
age of twelve years, was by his Father, created Duke of York, and (after his
Brother Arthurs death) Prince of Wales. And in the 18. year of his age, he
began his Reign of King of England, the 22. of April, and on the 25. day of
June after, was crowned with his Wife Queen Katherine, at Westminster, 1509.
And in the fourth year of his Reign, he won Turwin and Turney; having
under his Banner, the Emperor Maximillian, with most of the Nobility of
Brabant, Planders and Holland. And in the 37. year of his Reign, the Town of
Boloigne was yielded unto him; he being there in person, at the winning
thereof. He married six Wives, and died on Thursday, the 28. of January,
1547. when he had Reigned King, 37. years, and ten months.

His Wives.
KAtherine, the first Wife of King Henry the eight, was daughter of Ferdinando
the sixth, King of Spain (and the Widow of Prince Arthur his brother) and was
married to King Henry the eight, the third of lune, 1509. and was crowned with
him, the 25. day of June after: And twenty years after was divorced from him,
by the Bishop of Canterbury. She dyed at Kimbalton in Huntingtonshire, the 8 of
January 1535. and was buried in Peterborough Church.

ANNE, the second Wife of King Henry the eight, was second daughter of Sir
Thomas Bullen, Earl of Wiltshire and Ormond. She was first created
Marchioness of Penbroke, having one thousand pounds a year given her to
maintain her estate; and was married to him in the Closet at White Hall, the
25. of January, 1533. and was crowned at Westminster, on Whitsunday the first
of June. She was his Wife, three years, three months, and 25. days, and
after was beheaded in the Tower of London, the 19. of May, 1536. and was buried
in the Chapel, within the said Tower.

Jane the third Wife, was daughter of Sir John Seymour Knight, and sister of
Edward, Earl of Hartford and Duke of Somerset. She was married unto King Henry
the eight, the 20. day of May, which was the very next day after the beheading
of Queen Anne. This Jane, was his Wife one year, five months, and 24. days,
and dyed in childe-bed of King Edward the sixth, the 14. of October, 1537. and
was buried at Windsore.

ANne of Cleue, the fourth Wife of King Henry the 8. was sister of William,
Duke of Cleue, and was married unto him at Greenwich, the 6. of January, 1540.
in the 31. year of the said Kings Reign, and was his Wife six months, and
the year after was divorced, and by Act of Parliament decreed, that she
should be no more called nor taken for Queen; but should be called the Lady
Anne of Cleeue. She remained in England, long after King Henry's death, and was
marshalled with the Lady Elizabeth, going through London, to the Coronation of
Queen Mary, 1553.

KAtherine Howard, the fifth Wife of King Henry the 8. was daughter of Lord
Edmond Howard, brother of Thomas Howard, the third Duke of Norfolk of that
Family, and was married to the said King, the 8. of August, 1540. at
Hampton Court, and was his Wife, one year, six months, and 4. days. She was
convicted of adultery, and by Parliament adjudged to be beheaded in the Tower
of London, the 12. of February, and was buried in the Chapel there, by Queen
Anne Bullen, 1542.

KAtherine Parre, widow of John Neuill, Lord Latimer, and daughter of Sir
Thomas Par of Kendall Knight, and sister of William Par, Marquess of
Northampton, was sixth Wife to King Henry the eight, and was married to him at
Hampton Court the 12. of July, in the year 1543. She was his Wife, 3. years,
6. months, and 5. days. She was after King Henry's death, married to Thomas
Seymour, Lord Admiral, and after his decease, she married Edward Burgh, son
of Thomas Lord Burgh. She dyed in childbed, 1548.

Issue by his first Wife.
Henry, first son of King Henry the eight, begotten of Queen Katherine his
first Wife, was borne at Richmond in Surrey, the first of January, 1509. who
lived not full two months, and dyed the 22. of February after, and was buried
at Westminster.

Another son, whose name is not well known, borne of Queen Katherine his
first Wife, in the sixth year of his Reign, who dyed very young. The death of
these two Princes. King Henry took as a punishment from God, for begetting
them of his Brothers Wife.

Mary, the third child and first daughter, begotten of Q. Katherine, was borne
at Greenwich in Kent, the 18. of February, 1518. who out-liuing her younger
brother King Edward the sixth, and being then Queen, and 36. years old,
married Phillip King of Spain, to the great dislike of many her loving
Subjects, and small content to her self, as more at large in place convenient
will be showed.

Issue by his second Wife.
Elizabeth, second daughter of Henry the eight, begotten of the Lady Anne
Bollen, his second Wife, was borne at Greenwich, upon Sunday, the seventh of
September, 1534. and was christened of Doctor Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury,
etc. She succeeded her Sister Queen Mary, as Queen of England; and was for
wisdom, virtue, piety and justice, not only the mirror of her Sex, but a
pattern for Government, to all the Princes of Christendom.

Another man-child had Queen Anne, but still borne, the 29. of February,
1535. to the great grief, both of the Father and Mother.

Issue by his third Wife.
Edward, the sixth and last child of King Henry the eight, begotten of Jane
Seymour, his third Wife; was borne at Hampton Court, the 12. of October, 1537
being cut out of his Mothers womb (as Julius Caesar is said to have been)
Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk,
were his Godfathers, and Lady Mary his sister, his Godmother. He was first
created Prince of Wales; and after the death of his Father, crowned King of
England.

A base Son by his Concubine.
Henry Fitz-Roy, base son of King Henry the eight, begotten of Elizabeth,
daughter of Sir John Blount Knight (then Lady Talboys) and borne in the Manor
of Blackmore in Essex, in the year 1518. who being eightene years of age,
was created Earl of Nottingham, at the Kings Palace of Bridewell; as in the
Title of Nottingham is set forth.

King EDWARD the Sixth.
EDward, the sixth of that Name, son of king Henry the eight, and Lady Jane
Seymour (his third Wife) was borne at Hampton Court, the 12. of October, 1537.
And in the 29. year of his Fathers Reign, being cut out of his Mothers womb,
and six days after was created Prince of Wales; and after his Fathers death,
was proclaimed King, the 28. of January, 1547. being then nine years old, and
lying at Hatfield, the Nobility conducted him to London, and so to the Tower.
During the time of his abode there, his Uncle Edward Seymour, Earl of
Hertford, was chosen and made Protector, and chief Governor of the Kings
person, until he came to the age of eighteen years.

The sixth of February after, the Lord Protector knighted King Edward in the
Tower of London; which done, King Edward presently after, knighted Sir Henry
Hoblethorne, then Lord Mayor of London, and Sir Henry Portman, one of the
Judges of the Kings Bench. The 17 of February, the Lord Protector was created
Duke of Somerset, and the 20. of February, King Edward rode through London to
Westminster, and was there crowned.

In the life time of King Henry the eight a marriage was treated of, between
Mary, late Queen of Scotland; Unto which, a Parliament at Edinburgh had
consented, in the year 1543. but that took not effect; for she was after
married to the Dolphin of France.

This Noble Prince dyed at Greenwich, the 6. of July, 1553. being the seventh
year of his reign, and the seventeen year of his age, and was buried at
Westminster, the 9. of August after.

Queen Mary.
MARIE, eldest daughter of K. Henry the eight, by Katherine his first Wife, was
borne at Greenwich, the 18. of February, 1518. and began her Reign the 6. of
July, and was proclaimed Queen, the 17. day of the said Month, in the year
1553, In her young years she was sued unto, to be married to the then
Emperor, the King of Scots, and the Duke of Orleance in France. But all these
failing, at thirty six years of age, she married Phillip, King of Spain, to
the great dislike of her Subjects, and small content of her self. She was
crowned at Westminster, the last of September, in the year aforesaid, and dyed
at S. James by Charing-Crosse, the 17. of November, 1558. when she had reigned
five years, four months, and eleven days, being 42. years old, and was
buried at Westminster, leaving no issue of her body.

Queen ELIZABETH.
ELizabeth, second daughter of King Henry the eight, and Queen Anne Bollen his
Wife; was borne at Greenwich, the seventh of September, 1534. And by the great
favor and grace of God, was advanced to the Imperial Throane, passing many
dangers of life, wherewith she was oppressed (being a prisoner) during her
sisters Reign. Upon the seventeenth day of November, 1558. she was proclaimed
Queen of England, France and Ireland; and upon the fifteenth of January after,
was crowned at Westminster, by the Bishop of Carlisle. She was for wisdom,
virtue, piety and justice, not only the Mirror of her Sex; but a Pattern
for Government, to all the Princes of Christendom.

She dyed at Richmond, the 24. of March, 1602. being 69. years, six months,
and 17. days old, when she had Reigned 44. years, four months, and seven
days.

Her body being brought to White Hall, and her Statue made very like in her
Parliament Robes, with a Crown Imperial on her head, and a Scepter in her
hand, was on Thursday, the 20. of August, carried in a Chariot, drawn with
four horses covered with black Velvet, to S. Peter's at Westminster; and after
all ceremonies performed, was buried in a fair Toomb, made by commandment of
King James.

King JAMES.
I Ames, King of Scotland (only son and heir of Henry Stewart, late King of
Scotland, and of Queen Mary his Wife, Dowager of France, and daughter and
heir of James the fifth, King of Scotland) was borne in Edenburgh-Castle, the
19. of June, 1566. and was proclaimed King of England, France and Ireland, at
London, the 24. of March, 1602. being then 36. years of age. And on the 25. of
July after, 1603. was crowned (with Queen Anne his Wife) at Westminster, by
the hands of the most reverend Father in God, John whitift, Archbishop of
Canterbury; in the presence of the Nobility and States of the Realm. Whose
greatness, with all honor, happiness and peace, God now sanctify and increase
in him and his issue, to all posterity. This potent and magnificent Monarch of
Great- Britain, married Anne, daughter of Frederick the second, King of
Denmark and Norway, and Sister to Christian the 4. now King of Denmark, 1618.
She was borne at Scanderburgh, the 12. of December, 1574. and at the age of 16.
years was married by Proxy, at Groningburg in Denmark, the 20. of August, 1590.
unto this most high and most mighty Prince, by whom she has had most royal
Issue, as follows.

Their Issue.
Henry, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, was borne on
Tuesday, the 19. of February, 1593. and dyed without issue, at S. James House
near Charing-Crosse, and was buried at West minster very Prince-like, the 7.
of December, 1612.

Robert Stewart second son, dyed very young.

Charles, Duke of Albany, Marquess of Ormond, Earl of Ros, and Lord of
Ardmanoch, third son of James, King of Great-Britaine, was borne the 27. of
February, 1600. and was created Duke of York at White Hall, on Tuesday the 6.
of January, 1604. and after, on the 4. of November, 1616. he was likewise at
White Hall created Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester.

Lady Elizabeth, borne the 19. of August, 1596. was married to Frederick,
Elector Palatine of the Rhyne, and has issue, Henry Frederick, and Charles
Lewis.

Margaret, borne the 24. of December, 1598. and dyed in Scotland young.

Mary, borne in England, and dyed an Infant, and was buried at Westminster.

Sophia, borne at Greenwich, and dyed an Infant, and was buried at Westminster.

A CATALOGVE OF THE Dukes and Earls of Clare and Clarence, their Arms, Wives,
and Children.
RIchard Fitz Gilbert, Earl of Aucencis and Brionniae in Normandy, came into
England with William the Conqueror, who gave him the Towns and Castles of
Clare in Suffolk, and Tunbridge in Kent, with diverse other great Seigneuries
in England. This Richard married Roheisia, daughter of Walter Gifford Earl of
Longueuile in Normandy, and had issue, Gilbert, Roger Lord of Clauering, Walter
a great Baron and Founder of Tinterne Abbey, 1^31 and Robert Lord of Woodham
Water, and was after slain in Wales, in the year, 1136.

GIlbert Fitz-Richard, son and heir of Richard aforesaid, was the first
Earl of Clare, and married Adeliza, the daughter of the Earl of Cleremont,
and had issue, John the second Earl of Clare, who dyed without issue; Richard
Earl of Clare, whom some say, dyed before his Father; Gilbert sur-named
Strongbow, Earl of Penbroke, Walter and Heruy de Montmauritio, and dyed in the
year, 1152.

Et portoit, d'or au trois cheurons de gueulles. RIchard Fitz-Gilbert, third
Earl of Clare, and Lord of Tunbridge in Kent, married Adelize, sister of
Randoll Earl of Chester, and had issue, Gilbert that dyed without issue, and
Roger who was after Earl of Clare and Hartford. This Richard dyed in the
year, 1156.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. Place this Catalogue of Clare and Clarence,
betwixt page 52. and 53.

GIlbert, Earl of Clare and Hartford after his Father. He married (as William
Gemeticensis has) Elizabeth, sister of Walleran, Earl of Meullent, and dyed
without issue.

ROger de Clare, brother and heir of Gilbert aforesaid, was Earl of Clare
and Hartford. He married Mauld, daughter and heir of James S. Hillary (she
married after, William Earl of Arundell) and had issue, Richard Earl of Clare
and Hartford, and others; and died in the year, 1174.

Et portoit, d'or trois cheurons de gueulles. RIchard, Earl of Clare and
Hartford, son of Roger aforesaid, married Amicia, second daughter and one of
the heirs of William Earl of Gloucester, and had issue, Gilbert Earl of
Clare, Hartford and Gloucester; and Ioane, wife to Rice Grig, Prince of
Demiciae, and dyed in the year 1218. and was buried in the Priory of Tunbridge.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere'. GIlbert, Earl of Clare and Hertford, and
Earl of Gloucester by his Mother Amicia (after the death of his two Aunts
without issue.) He was a witness to King Henry the thirds Charter, of Lands
that he gave (in the 9. year of his Reign) to the Abbey of Peterborough, by
the name of Gilbert, Earl of Clare, Hertford, and Gloucester. He married
Isabell, third sister, and one of the heirs of Anselme Marshall, Earl of
Penbroke, and had issue, Richard Earl of Clare, Hertford and Gloucester, and
William de Clare; Isabell, wife to Robert Bruise; Amie, wife to Baldwin Earl of
Deuon, and others. He dyed at Penrose in Britain, as the Book of Teuksbury
has, 1230. and lies there buried.

Et portoit, d'or trois cheurons de gueulles. RIchard de Clare, the second
Earl of Gloucester, son of Gilbert aforesaid, married first Margaret,
daughter of Hugh de Burgo Earl of Kent, but by her he had no issue. His second
wife was Mauld, daughter of John Lacy Earl of Lincoln, and Constable of
Chester, by whom he had issue (as the book of Teukesbury mentions) Gilbert,
the second Earl of Gloucester, etc. Thomas de Clare, that was Steward of the
Forests in Essex; Be^es, Treasurer of York Mynster; Isabell, a Nun at
Barking; Margaret, Wife to Edmond Earl of Cornwall; Rose, Wife to Roger Lord
Mowbray. This Richard dyed at Fsmeresfield in Kent, 1262. and lies buried at
Teukesbury; but others have, he dyed in France, and was brought into England,
and buried at Teukesbury.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. GIbert de Clare (sur named the Red) after
the death of Richard his Father, was Earl of Clare, Hertford, and the third
Earl of Gloucester of that sur-name. He married two Wives, the first was
Alice, daughter of Hughle Brun, Earl of Angolesme, and the Marchesse of
Aquitaine, and had issue, Isabell, Wife to Morris Lord Berkley. This Alice fell
lunaticke, and was divorced from this Gilbert: After which, he took to wife
Ioane (sur-named of Acres) daughter of King Edward the first; with whom the
said Gilbert had neither lands nor money, but only the Kings favor, which
before he had lost, for refusing to go with him the said King to the aid of
Guy, Earl of Flanders, against the French King, 1287. He had issue by his last
wife Ioane, John that dyed young, leaving his three sisters his heirs:
Elianor, wife to Hugh Lord Spencer; Elizabeth, first married to John Burgh
Earl of Vlster in Ireland; and after to Theobald Lord Verdon; and lastly, to
Sir Roger Damory, Baron of Armoy in Ireland; Margaret the 3. daughter, was
first married to Peter or Pieres of Gaueston, Earl of Cornwall; and after to
Hugh Lord Audley the younger, who after was Earl of Gloucester. This Gilbert
dyed in Wales, 1295. and was buried at Teukesbury. After the death of this
Gilbert, the Title of Clare fell to the Crown, which after King Edward the 3.
bestowed that Title on Lyonell his son.

Et portoit, d'or au trois cheurons de gueulles. LYonell (sur named of
Antwerpe, the place of his birth) third son of King Edward the third, was
created Earl of Wiltshire, in the 26. year of his Fathers Reign; and in the
36. year of the said Kings Reign, he was created Duke of Clarence. He married
to his first wife, Elizabeth, daughter and heir of William Burgh Earl of
Vlster, and had issue, Phillip his only child, married to Edmond Mortuomary,
Earl of March and Vlster: and to his second wife he married Violenta, daughter
of Galeas, Viscount of Millayne, and sister to John Galeas, first Duke of
Millaine, in whose right, the State and Lords of Italy did fully determine to
crown him King of Italy; but half a year before the time appointed; he dyed
at Venice, 1368. and was there buried, having no issue by his last Wife.

Et portoit, France seem and D'engleterre escartelle au lambell d'argent, en
chescun point au Canton de gueulles. THomas Plantagenet, second son of King
Henry the fourth, and brother to King Henry the fifth, was created Earl of
Albemarle, and Duke of Clarence, in the year 1411. He was also Lord Steward of
England, and Constable of the Kings Host, and Lieutenant General of his Army
in France and Normandy. He was also President of the Kings Counsel, after
Prince Henry his brother was dismissed that Office, for striking the Lord
Chiefe-Iustice, and after was slain at the battle of Bangy, by the Duke of
Alanson (and the treachery of Andrew Forgusa a Lumbard, whom he overmuch
trusted) and with him was slain, the Earls of Tankeruile, Sir Gilbert
Vmfreuile, the Earl of Kent, and the Lord Ros: and the Earls of Somerset,
Suffolk, and Perch, with the Lord Fitz-Walter, were taken prisoners, the 9. of
King Henry the fifth, leaving no issue of his body, and was buried in Christ
Church in Canterbury.

Et portoit, France seem, escartelle D'engleterre au lambell d'argent charge de
trois cantons de gueulles. GEorge Plantagenet, borne at Dublyn in Ireland,
third Son of Richard Duke of York, and brother to King Edward the 4. was
created Duke of Clarence, 1461. and after the death of Richard Neuill Earl of
Warwick, his Wives Father, he writ himself, George Duke of Clarence, Earl of
Warwick and Salisbury, Lord of Richmond, and great Chamberlain of England.
He married Isabell, eldest daughter and co-heyre of Richard Neuill, Earl of
Warwick and Salisbury aforesaid, and had issue Edward, commonly called Earl
of Warwick (who dyed without issue, being beheaded in the Tower of London, the
15. of King Henry the 7.) and Margaret, Countess of Salisbury, who was wife to
Sir Richard Pole Knight, Father of Henry Lord Montague, and Reginald Pole
Cardinal; which Margaret was also beheaded, in the 33. year of King Henry the
eight. This George was secretly murdered in the Tower of London, 1477. and was
buried at Teukesbury.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls of Arundell, with
their Arms, Wives, and Children.
ROger Montgomery, Earl of Belesmo in Normandy, son of Hugh Montgomery and
Sibell his wife, daughter of Herfastus the Dane, (brother of Gonor, wife of
Richard the first Duke of Normandy of that name) came into England with William
the Conqueror: unto whom the said William did give (for his good service) the
Earledomes of Arundell and Shrewsbury. He married Mabiria, daughter and heir
of William Taluays, with whom he had all her Fathers Inheritance, (as William
Gemiticensis has, page 686,) and had issue five sons and four daughters,
viz. Hugh and Robert, both Earls of Arundell and Shrewsbury; Roger the third
son (surnamed Pictauensis) was Lord of the Honor of Lancaster; Arnulph the
fourth son, was Castle-keeper of Penbrooke, and Philip was the fifth son.
His daughters were, Emma, Matilda the second daughter was married unto Robert
Earl of Moretaigne; Mahell was the third daughter, and Sibell the fourth
daughter was married unto Robert Fitz-Hamon, Lord of Glamorgan in South Wales;
which Robert, founded or re-edified the Monastery of Tewkesbury. This Earl
Roger was left by William Conqueror to be Governor to his son William Rufus,
and was after slain at Cairdiffe in South Wales, 1091. and was buried in the
Abbey at Shrewsbury, which before he had founded.

HVgh de Belismo, son and heir of Roger aforesaid, was after his Father,
Earl of Arundell and Shrewsbury, and was slain at Anglesey in North Wales,
1098, (by Magnus, a Pirate of the Isles of Orcades) with the shot of an Arrowe
which struck him in the eye. He dyed without issue, and was buried by his
Father in the Abbey at Shrewsbury. I find no Arms borne by him.

RObert de Belismo, after the death of Hugh his Brother, was the third Earl of
Arundell and Shrewsbury; who entering into rebellion, manned and fortified his
Castle of Arundell, against King Henry the first, 1103. and was by the said
King banished England, and his Castle and Honor of Arundell given in dower to
Queen Adeliza, the Wife of King Henry the first. And after being taken at the
battle of Trenchbray in Normandy, with Robert Courtoise Duke of Normandy,
were both brought into England and imprisoned in the Castle of Cairdiffe, where
they had their eyes put out, and remained prisoners during their lives, as in
the title of Shrewsbury is more at large.

WIlliam de Albeneio, son of William de Albeneio who came into England with
William the Conqueror, and had given him the Castle of Bockenham and the Manor
of Wymondham in Norfolk, to hold of the King to him and his heirs to be the
Kings Butlers at their Coronations. He was after Earl of Chichester, in the
19. year of King Stephen as does appear by the Charter of King Stephen, of
the pacification of the troubles betwixt him and Henry Duke of Normandy
(Holinshed, page 63.) and diverse other the said Williams own Charters. He
married Queen Adeliza the widow of King Henry the first, and daughter of
Godfrey Duke of Loraine, with whom he had the Castle and Honor of Arundell
(being her dower) which Mauld the Empress afterward proclaimed him Earl
thereof (which title it is said) that King Henry the second confirmed to the
said William and his heirs in the first year of his Reign. This William,
with Reginald de Warren, conducted Mauld the daughter of King Henry the first
into Saxony, to be married unto Duke Henry, after Emperor in the year 1114. He
founded the Priory of Bockenham, and dyed in the third year of King Henry the
second, and was buried in the Priory at Wymondham by his Father, leaving issue
by his wife Queen Adeliza, two sons, and a daughter, viz. William, Godfrey,
and Alice; which Alice was married to John Earl of Angie.

WIlliam de Albeney, the son of William and Queen Adeliza, was the second
Earl of Arundell of that name: he was always faithful unto King Henry the
second, and aided him against Henry the young King his son, and took
prisoners at the battle fought at Saint Edmundsbury, 1173. Robert Earl of
Leicester, Hugh Earl of Chester, and Hugh de Chasteles a Frenchman with many
others, and sent them into Normandy to King Henry the second, who imprisoned
them in the Castle of Faloys. He married Mauld daughter and heir of James de
Santo Hillary, and the widow of Roger Earl of Clare, by whom he had issue,
William the third Earl of Arundell and Alan; and after dyed at Wauerly the 4.
Ides of October, 1177. and was buried at Wymondham (as Matthew Paris has, page
127.)

Et portoit de gueulles au lion rampant d'or, arm and lampasse d'azure.
WIlliam de Albeney, the third Earl of Arundell, unto whom (as Roger Houeden
has, page 320.) King Henry the second in the year 1177. did give the
Earldom of Sussex: At which time he restored to Robert Earl of Leicester,
and Hugh Earl of Chester, all their Lands which they were seized of fifteen
days before the war began. He married Mabell, daughter of Hugh Keuilioc
Earl of Chester, and second sister and co-heyre of Randoll Blundeuile, the
sixth Earl of Chester: and had issue, two sons and four daughters, viz.
William and Hugh, both Earls of Arundell and Sussex, who died without issue:
Mabell the eldest daughter, was married unto Sir Robert Tatesall Knight;
Isabell the second daughter was married to John Fitz-Alan, Lord of Clun and
Oswaldstre; Nicholea the third daughter was Wife to Roger Lord Somery; and
Cecily the fourth daughter, was married to Roger Lord Monthault of Hawarden in
Flintshire. This William dyed in the year 1196. and was buried at Wymondham.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. WIlliam de Albeney the fourth Earl of
Arundell, and second Earl of Sussex of that name, dyed without issue, in his
return from Jerusalem, in the year of our Lord, 1221. and was brought into
England, and buried at Wymondham. Leaving his rich patrimony to his Brother
Hugh, who being under age, Hubert de Burgo Earl of Kent and Chiefe-Iustice of
England had his Wardship.

Et portoit, gueulles au lion rampant d'or, arm and lampasse d'azure. HVgh de
Albeney, second son of William the third, and Brother and heir of William de
Albeney, the fourth Earl of Arundell, was the fifth and last Earl of Arundell,
and third Earl of Sussex of that Family. He married Isabell, daughter of
William Earl Warren and Surrey, and dyed without issue, and was buried at
Wymondham by his Ancestors, in the year of our Lord, 1243. the 28. of King
Henry the third, leaving his four sisters his heirs, who made partition of
his Lands in the year above said. Mabell the eldest sister, had the Manor of
Bockenham; Isabell the second sister had the Castle and honor of Arundell;
Nicholea had the Manor of Barrow; and Cecily the fourth sister had the Manor
of Rising in Norfolk, with diverse other Lands, and were married as aforesaid.

Et portoit les arms de son friar. RIchard Fitz-Alan, Lord of Clun and
Oswaldstre in Wales, (son and heir of John Fitz-Alan, grandchilde of another
John Fitz-Alan and Isabell d' Albeney his wife (by their son John) was the
first Earl of Arundell of that surname. This Isabell being the second sister
and co-heire of Hugh de Albeney, had the Castle and Lordship of Arundell by
partition allotted to her for her part. Which Castle and Seigneury of Arundell,
being now descended unto this Richard, he claimed the Title and Name of Earl
of Arundell; and by reason of the possession thereof only, was without any
other creation, Earl of Arundell, and had place and voice in Parliament, by
the name and title of Richard Earl of Arundel; as more at large is set down
in an Act of Parliament, made the eleventh of King Henry the sixth; by occasion
of that memorable competition between John Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, and John
Fitz-Alan Lord Maltreuers, for the said Earldom of Arundell, as hereafter
is set forth. This Richard married Alizon, daughter of the Marquess of Saluce
in Italy; by whom he had issue, Edmond Earl of Arundell; Isabell wife to Hugh
Lord Spencer, Earl of Winchester; Mauld married to Phillip Lord Burnell; and
Margaret the third daughter was married to William Boteler, second Baron of
Wemme. He dyed in the 30. year of King Edward the first; and his wife dyed in
the year, 1292. the 21. of Edward the first.

Et portoit, gueulles au lion rampant d'or, arm and lampasse d'azure. EDmund
Fitz-Alan, son and heir of Richard aforesaid, was after the death of his
Father, Lord of Clun and Oswaldstre, and second Earl of Arundell of that
surname. He married Alice, daughter of William, and sister and heir of John
Earl Warren and Surrey, by whom he had issue Richard a son, and two
daughters. Alice the eldest daughter was married to John de Bohun, Earl of
Hereford and Essex, and Constable of England; Jane the second daughter, married
Warren Lord Lisle. This Edmund was borne in the Castle of Malborough: he was
very hateful to Queen Isabell, who by the means of her Minion Roger Lord
Mortimer, was taken at Shrewsbury, and brought to Hereford, and there beheaded,
in the twentieth year of King Edward the second.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. RIchard Fitz-Alan, son of Edmond
aforesaid, was the third Earl of Arundell of that sur-name, Lord of Clun and
Oswaldstre (and by his Mother Earl Warren and Surrey, Lord of Bromfield, Yale,
Chircland, and Dinas bran in North- Wales.) He was restored in blood by King
Edward the third, and entailed the Castle, Honor, and Lordship of Arundell, in
the 21. year of king Edw. the third, to himself for term of life, the
remainder to his heirs male of his body begotten and to be begotten of the
body of Elianor his Wife, Daughter of Henry Plantagenet Earl of Lancaster, and
Sister of Henry Duke of Warwick; by whom he had issue, three sons, and
four daughters, viz, Richard after Earl of Arundell, Sir John of Arundel,
knight (that married Elianor, daughter of John Lord Maltreuers, and sister and
heir of Henry Baron Maltreuers; in whose right he was after Lord Maltreuers,
and sailing into little Britain, was drowned near unto the Coast of Ireland,
the fifteenth of December, 1379. Leaving issue, John Lord Maltreuers, and
others.) And Thomas the third son of the said Richard, was Archbishop of
Canterbury, and L. Chancellor of England. Alice the eldest daughter was married
to Thomas Holland, Earl of Kent; Elianor the second daughter dyed young; Joan
the third daughter was married to Humfrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford, etc. and
Mary the fourth daughter, was married unto John Lord Strange of Blackmere. This
Richard dyed in the Castle of Arundell, the 49. of King Edward the third, and
was buried in the Priory of Lewis.

Et portoit, gueulles au lion rampant d'or, at me and lampasse d'azur. RIchard
Fitz-Alan, son of Richard aforesaid, was the fourth Earl of Arundell and
Surrey, and Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter. He married Elizabeth,
daughter of William de Bohun, Earl of Northampton, and had issue three sons,
and four daughters, viz. Thomas Earl of Arundell and Surrey; Richard and
William dyed both young without issue. Elizabeth the eldest daughter, was
married to Thomas L. Mowbray Earl of Nottingham; and after to Sir Robert
Gousell knight. Joan the second daughter, was married to William Beauchampe
Baron of Abergauenny (Father of Richard Earl of Worcester.) Margaret the third
daughter, was married to Sir Rowland Lenthall knight, and had issue, Edward
that dyed without issue. Alice the fourth daughter was married to John Charlton
Lord Powis, and dyed without issue. This Richard the fourth Earl of Arundell,
married to his second wife, Phillip daughter of Edmond Mortimer Earl of March,
widow of John Hastings Earl of Penbrooke, and had issue John that dyed young.
This Richard, with Thomas Duke of Gloucester, Thomas Earl of Warwick, and
Thomas Mowbray Earl Marshall and others, combined and swear each to other,
against Robert Vere Duke of Ireland, and Michael de la Pole Duke of Suffolk,
for abusing and misleading the King. For which, and some other causes King
Richard the second objected against them, some of them were banished, others
condemned to perpetual prisonment, and this Richard beheaded at the Tower Hill
by London, whose body was buried in the Augustine-Fryars, in London, the 21. of
King Richard the second.

Et portoit, lez arms de son pere. THomas Fitz-Alan, son of the aforesaid
Richard, was restored in blood the first year of King Henry the 4. and was the
fifth Earl of Arundel and Surrey of that name. He married Beatrix, base daughter
of John king of Portingall, in the City of London, 1405. in the presence of
King Henry the fourth, but had no issue; by reason whereof; all his Lands
pertaining and belonging to the Earldomeof Surrey, was divided and went amongst
his sisters before mentioned, and the Earldome of Arundell, with the Lands
thereunto belonging and intailed, went to John Fitz-Alan Lord Maltreuers, son
of John Lord Maltreuers, grandchild of John Fitz-Alan, Lord Maltreuers, and
Elianor his wife, sister and heir of Henry Lord Maltreuers: (which last John,
was Uncle of this Thomas the fifth Earl of Arundell, who dyed in the year of
our Lord God, 1416.

Et portoit, gueulles au lion tampant d'or, arme' and lampasse d'azur. John
Fitz-Alan Lord Maltreuers, son of John Lord Maltreuers, granchilde and heir
of John Fitz-Alan Lord Maltreuers, and Elianor his wife, sister and heir of
Henry Lord Maltreuers: upon whom (as next heir male unto Thomas Fitz-Alan,
Earl of Arundell aforesaid) the Castle and Seigneury of Arundell descended, by
virtue of the entaile formerly made by Richard Fitz-Alan the third Earl of
Arundell, in the 21. year of King Edward the third. In right of which his
possession of the said Castle and Lordship of Arundell, the said John
Fitz-Alan Lord Maltreuers by Petition in Parliament, the 11. of King Henry the
sixth, pursued his claim to the Earldom of Arundell (before set on foot by
his Father John Fitz-Alan Lord Maltreuers, upon the death of Thomas Fitz-Alan
late Earl of Arundell) alleging that all his Ancestors, as well before as
since the Conquest, which had been seized of the Castle, Honor and Seigneury
of Arundell, had been Earls of Arundell. Unto which Petition, John Mowbray
Duke of Norfolk appeared, who as heir to Elizabeth, second sister and
co-heire of the foresaid Thomas Earl of Arundell (from whom the said Duke
stood already possessed of the Earldom of Surrey) made his claim likewise to
the Earldom of Arundell. Whereupon the King and the Lords then assembled in
Parliament, upon a deliberate hearing of the matter, approving the aforesaid
allegations of the Lord Maltreuers, touching the Castle and Seigneury of
Arundell; and finding him accordingly to be by descent lawfully seized of the
said Castle and Seigneury of Arundell; did by act of Parliament declare the
said John Lord Maltreuers to be without any other creation, Earl of Arundell.
This John married Mauld, daughter and heir of Robert Louell and Elizabeth
Brian his wife, daughter and heir of Sir Guy de Bryan the younger, and had
issue, Humfrey Fitz-Alan the seventh Earl of Arundell; and Amicia married to
James Boteler Earl of Ormond and Wiltshire. He dyed in the thirteenth year of
King Henry the sixth, and was buried at Lewis in Sussex.

Milles, page 656. sets down, that King Henry the 6. by his Charter bearing
date the 12. year of his Reign, did give the Dukedom of Torraine to this
John and his heirs male. To this, M. Camden in the Margent of this my Book,
replieth and says, That true it is this John had the profits of the said
Dukedom given him, but not the Title, Name, and Style of Duke. Which I
marvel greatly at, considering that in his last Impression of his Britannia,
page 310. he says, that this John was created Duke of Torraine Which if he
say truly, then had he both the name and style of Duke.

Et portoit, lez armoiries de sonpere. HVmfrey Fitz-Alan, after the death of
his Father was the seventh Earl of Arundell, and dyed young without issue, in
the sixteenth year of the Reign of King Henry the sixth, leaving William his
Uncle to succeed him in the Earldom of Arundell.

Et portoit, guenlles au lion rampant d'or, arm and lampasse d'azur. WIlliam
Fitz-Alan, Uncle and heir of Humfrey aforesaid, was the eight Earl of
Arundell of that name, and Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter. In this
Williams time the 18. of king Henry the 6. there grew a question in Parliament
for precedence of place, between him and Thomas Earl of Devonshire; who
alleged, that the said William Earl of Arundell, holding by the late creation
(as he supposed) of John Fitz-Alan Lord Maltreuers, in the 11. year of the
fore-saide King, ought not to have priority of him: whereupon the Act of
Parliament aforesaid concerning John Earl of Arundell, was had into
consideration by the King and the Lords of the upper house, and the Lords
Comitties, after great consultation and perusal of Evidences (as is there
said) did conclude, that the said William was not Earl by way of any late
creation, but was declared Earl of Arundell, in as much as he was Lord and
Heritor of the Castle, Honor, and Seigneury of Arundell: and that the Name and
Title of Earl, belonged to the said Castle and Honor, and had always done to
the Lords of the said Castle, of time that no mind is, and long before. So as
it was then by the King, with the advice of the Lords spiritual and temporal,
declared and decreed, that the said William Earl of Arundel should have, keep,
and enjoy his seat, room, and place in the Parliaments and Councels, and in
other places in the Kings presence, by way of pre-eminence and worship, as
ever had any of his Ancestors, Earls of Arundell before this time; as in the
said Parliament Roll is more at large. This William married Joan, daughter of
Richard Neuill Earl of Salisbury, and sister of Richard Neuill Earl of
Warwick, by whom he had issue, Thomas Fitz-Alan the 9. Earl of Arundell;
William, George, and John, and a daughter named Mary; and dyed in the third
year of King Henry the seventh.

Et portoit, le^ arms deson pere. THomas Fitz-Alan, after the death of William
his Father, was the ninth Earl of Arundell of that name, Lord Maltreuers, and
Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter, and married Margaret, daughter of
Richard Wooduile, Earl Rivers and Baron of Wimington, slain at Banbury the
10. of King Edward the fourth, and second sister and one of the heirs of
Richard Earl Rivers her brother; and had issue, two sons and two daughters,
viz. William the tenth Earl of Arundell, and Edward: Margaret the eldest
daughter, was married unto John de la Pole Earl of Lincoln; and Joan the
second daughter was married unto George Neuill, Baron of Abergauenny. He dyed
in his Park of Dunlee, the 16. of King Henry the 8. and was buried at Arundell
the 21. of November, 1524.

Et portoit, gueulles au Lion rampant d'or, arm and lampasse d'azur. WIlliam
Fitz-Alan, son and heir of Thomas aforesaid, was the tenth Earl of Arundel,
Lord Maltreuers, Clun, and Oswaldstre; he married to his first Wife, Anne
daughter of Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland, and had issue Henry the
eleventh Earl of Arundell, Anne and Katherine, which two daughters dyed both
without issue. His second Wife was Elizabeth daughter of Robert Willoughby Lord
Brook, by whom he had issue two daughters, Margaret and Elizabeth that dyed
also without issue. This William dyed in the 35. year of King Henry 8. and was
buried in the Castle of Arundell, 1543.

Et portoit, le^ armories de son pere. HEnry Fitz-Alan, son of William
aforesaid, was after his Father Earl of Arundell, Lord Maltreuers, Clun, etc.
and Knight of the honorable Order of the Garter. He married two Wives; the
first was Katherine, daughter of Thomas Gray Marquess Dorset, Lord Bonuile and
Harington, and sister of Henry Gray Duke of Suffolk; by whom he had issue
Henry Lord Maltreuers, which married Anne, daughter and sole heir of Sir John
Wentworth Knight, and died and was buried at Bruxels without issue, 1556. being
but nineteen years of age. He had also two daughters his heirs, Jane the
eldest was married to John Lord Lumley, and had issue Charles, Thomas, and
Mary, which dyed all three without issue. Mary the second daughter and
co-heire, was married to Thomas Howard the last Duke of Norfolk of that
family; and had issue Phillip Howard after Earl of Arundell. This Henry married
to his second wife, Mary daughter of Sir John Arundell of the West Country
Knight, the widow of Robert Radcliffe Earl of Sussex, by whom he had no
issue. He was Governor of Callis when King Henry the eight besiedged Boloine,
and Lord Marshall of his army, Lord Chamberlain to King Henry the eight, King
Edward the sixth, and Lord Steward of the Household to Queen Mary and Queen
Elizabeth, and dyed very old the 25. of February, 1579. the 22. of Queeene
Elizabeth, and was buried at Arundell with his Ancestors.

Et portoit, gueulles au Lion rampant d'or, arm and lampasse d'azur. PHillip
Howard eldest son of Thomas late Duke of Norfolk, attainted as aforesaid, and
of Marie his wife, second daughter and co-heire of Henry Fitz-Alan abouesaid
(unto whom was conveyed the Castle and Honor of Arundell) did in right thereof
(upon the death of Henry Fitz-Alan his grand father) assume the Name and Title
of Earl of Arundel, being not as yet restored in blood, and by that name was
summoned to the Parliament holden at Westminster, the 16. day of January
following, in the 23. of Queen Elizabeth, and sat there in presence of the
said Queen as Earl of Arundell almost two months before his restitution in
blood, which was concluded in the upper house of Parliament, on the tenth day
of March after, as does appear by the Iournall book of that Parliament. He
married Anne daughter of Thomas Lord Dacres, and sister and co-heire of George
Lord Dacres of Gillesland, by whom he had issue Thomas Howard now Earl of
Arundell, 1619. This Phillip was attainted of Treason the 14. of April, 1589.
and died a natural death in the Tower of London, the 19. day of November, 1595.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. THomas Howard Earl of Arundell and Surrey,
the only son of Phillip Earl of Arundel, was restored in blood by King
James in the second year of his reign, 1604. and after made one of the said
Kings most Honorable Preuy Council, Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter,
and one of the Lords Commissioners for the office of Earl Marshall of
England. This Noble Lord out of his love and honorable disposition (with the
other Lords Commissioners) was the means that his Majesty did augment and
double the pensions of the Kings Heralds and Pursuiuants of Arms, with an
allowance of ten pounds the year for ever, toward the maintenance and
repairing of their Office or College. He married Aletheia youngest daughter and
coheire of Gilbert Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, by whom he had issue James Lord
Maltreuers, and Knight of the Bath, Sir Henry Howard knight of the Bath: Thomas
and Gilbert died both young, William and Charles Howard, Anno 1618.

Et portoit, Gueulles a un band enter six croislets botonny siche d'argent. A
CATALOGVE of the Earls of Albemarle, with their Wives, Arms, and Children.
STephen, son of Eudo, Earl of Blesensis and Champaine, by Matild his Wife,
half sister by the Mother to William Conqueror, was Lord of the City of
Albemarle in Normandy, (by the gift of Odo, Bishop of Bayon and Earl of Kent
his Uncle) Of which City, King William Rufus in the sixth year of his Reign,
did not only create him Earl of, but also gave him the Isle of Holdernesse,
with the Castle and Town of Bitham, and other great Seigniories and Lands in
England and Normandy. In the five and twentieth year of King Henry the first,
this Stephen was Witness to the said Kings Charter of Lands that he gave to
the Abbey of Reading. He married (...) daughter of Roger Mortimer, son of
Raphe, and had issue three sons and four daughters; William Earl of
Albemarle, Stephen, and Ingeram: the daughters were all married out of England,
but the youngest, who was first married unto William de Romare, Earl of
Lincoln, and after to Peter de Brus, who dyed in the Holy Land, in the six
and twentieth year of King Henry the first.

Et portoit, Gueulles a un Croix patee vaire. William surnamed le Gros, son
of Stephen, was after the death of his father Earl of Abemarle, and Lord of
Holdernesse; he married Cicely daughter of William Fitz Duncan (son of
Malcolme King of Scots) by Alice de Rumely Lady of Harwood, with whom he had in
marriage the Honor and Lands of Crauen in Yorkshire, and had issue Hawis his
only daughter and heir, first married to William de Magnauile Earl of Essex,
and after to William de Fortibus, (or de Forts) Baron of Olem, by whom she had
issue William de Forts Earl of Albemarle, father of Aueline, wife of Edmond
first earl of Lancaster (son of King Henry the third:) lastly the said Hawis
married Baldwin de Betun. This William le Gross founded the Abbey of Melsa,
Anno one thousand one hundred and fifty, and dyed the seven and twentieth
year of King Henry the second, and was buried in the Abbey of Thornton, which
was of his own foundation.

Et portoit, les arms de son Pere'. William Magnauile Earl of Essex, and
Lord of Please; and in right of Hawis his wife, daughter and heir of William
le Gross, was also Earl of Albemarle, and Lord of Holdernesse, in the year
of our Lord one thousand one hundred seventy and nine, and died at Roane, in
the second year of King Richard the first, without issue.

Et portoit, escartelle d'or and gueulles. WIlliam de Fortibus, Baron of Olem,
second husband unto Hawis Countess of Albemarle, Daughter and heir of William
le Gross, in whose right he was Earl of Albemarle, and Lord of Holdernesse,
by whom he had issue, William Earl of Albemarle (father of Aueline wife of
Edmond Earl of Lancaster.) This William de Forts, by the name of Earl of
Albemarle, in the sixth year of the reign of King Richard the first, was a
witness to the said Kings Charter of Lands that he gave to Reginald de
Argentyne, and died in the seventh year of King Richard the first.

Et portoit, d'argent au le chef d'gueulles. BAldwine de Betun (by consent of
King Richard the fir^^ married, and was the third husband to Hawis Counte^ of
Albemarle, Daughter of William le Gross; in whose right (...) was Earl of
Albemarle, and Lord of Holdernesse, by who^ he had issue one only daughter his
heir named Hawis, whi^^ was married to William, son and heir of William
Marsh^^ Earl of Penbrooke, and died without issue. Master Lambert in his
Perambulation of Kent page 533. says, That this Ba^^^ wine de Betun lived, and
was a Testie in the seventh year (...) King John; and therefore I hold him
the third husband to Hawis Countess of Albemarle, and not the second, as
Ma^ster Camden and Master Milles have set him down to be, her other two
h^^bands being dead long before. This Baldwine dyed in the thirteenth year o^
King John, and was buried in the Abbey of Meaux, whereof he was the Founder.

Et portoit, d'argent band de six d'argent and de gueulles, au chef d'or.
WIlliam de Fortibus, son of William de Forts by Ha^^ Countess of Albemarle
aforesaid, after the death of his mother, and her three husbands, was the sixth
Earl of A^bemarle, and Lord of Holdernesse: He married Auelyne daughter of
Richard Lord Montfichet, and by her had issue William which was after Earl of
Albemarle. This William died in the six and twentieth year of King Henry the
third, and was buried in the Abbey of Meaux.

Et portoit, d'argent au chef de gueulles. William de Fortibus, the last of
that name and Family, was the seventh Earl of Albemarle, and Lord of
Holdernesse, etc. He married to his first wife Christian daughter of Alan Earl
of Galloway in Scotland, who died without issue, the 30. year of King Henry
the third, and was buried in the Abbey of Thornton. His second wife was Isabel
daughter of Bauldwine, the fourth of that name Earl of Deuon, and sister and
heir to Baldwine the fifth and last Earl of Deuon of the surname of Rivers; by
whom he had issue two sons, and two daughters. Thomas the eldest son died
without issue, and was buried at Stamford; William the second Son died at
Oxford without issue, and was buried by his brother; Auice the eldest sister
died also without issue, and was buried in the Abbey of Melsa; and Aueline the
second sister and co-heire of Baldwine aforesaid, was married in the fifty
four year of king Henry the third, to Edmond Crooke-backe Earl of Lancaster,
second son of the said king Henry the third. This Countess of Albemarle and
Deuon, and Lady of the Isle of Wight (for so she writ her self) over lived her
husband, and in her widdow-hood sold the Isle of Wight, and a great part of the
Earldom of Deuon, and counseled her daughter Aueline to give her whole
inheritance, after her death (from the Courtneis her next heirs) to Lord
Edmond her husband and his heirs, which she accordingly did. This William died
in the fortith year of king Henry the third, and was buried in the Abbey of
Meaux.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere'. THomas of Woodstocke, sixth son of King
Edward the third, was by King Richard the second, created Earl of Albemarle,
(he was also Earl of Buckingham and Northampton, Duke of Gloucester and
Constable of England) and married Elianor daughter and co-heire of Humfrey de
Bohun Earl of Hereford, Essex, and Constable of England, and had issue,
Humfrey Earl of Buckingham, and Anne married to Edmond Earl Stafford. This
Thomas of Woodstock was taken by force out of his Castle of Plessy in Essex, by
Thomas Mowbray Earl Marshall of England, and conveyed secretly to Callis, and
there most cruelly murdered: his body being brought over into England, was
buried at Westminster the xxij. of King Richard the second, 1398.

Les arms de france seem, and D'engleterre escartelle, a la bordute d'argent.
EDward Plantagenet, son and heir of Edmond of Langley Duke of York, in the
thirteenth year of King Richard the second, was Earl of Rutland and Cork,
his father then living; and in the one and twentieth of the said Kings reign,
he was created Duke of Albemarle, from which Dukedom he was deposed by
Parliament, in the first year of King Henry the fourth. He married Phillip
daughter and co-heire of John de Mohun Lord of Dunsten, and was slain at the
battle of Egencourt 1415. and was buried at Fotheringale without issue.

Et portoit, france seem and D'engleterre escartelle, a lambell de trois points
perpale gueulles and d'argent, charge' de six chastells d'or and six lions
rampant gueulles. THomas Duke of Clarence (second son to King Henry the
fourth, in the thirteenth year of his Fathers reign, was created Earl of
Albemarle, and was after slain by the Duke of Orliance at Bangie bridge in
France, the ninth of K. Henry the fifth, without issue; and his body being
brought over into England, was buried in Christ-Church in Canterbury.

Et portoit, les arms d'France seem escartelle, D'engleterre, au lambell
d'ermyn trois cantons gueulles. RIchard Beauchampe, Earl of Warwick
(Lieutenant General under John Duke of Bedford Regent of France) was by King
Henry the sixth created Earl of Albemarle. He married for his second wife
Isabell the Widow of Richard Beauchampe Earl of Worcester (his cousine
Germane) daughter and heir of Thomas Lord Spencer, and Earl of Gloucester, by
whom he had issue Henry Duke of Warwick, etc. He dyed at Roan in the 17. year
of King Henry the sixth, and was buried at Warwick.

Et portoit, gueulles a vne fees and six croiseletz d'or. A Catalogue of the
Earls of Anguish and Kyme, their Arms, Wives, and Children.
GIlbert Vmfreuile, Earl of Anguish, Lord of Prodhoo, Otterborne, Harbotle,
and Ridesdale, a man of great Fame here in England in King Henry the thirds
time, and King Edward the first; married and had issue Gilbert and Robert, both
Earls of Anguish.

Et portoit, gueulles a vne quintfoile and le champe croisele patee d'or.
GIlbert Vmfreuile, son and heir of Gilbert aforesaid, was after the death of
his Father also Earl of Anguish, Lord of Prodhoo, etc. He fought the battle
of Argile: after which, he with William Valence Earl of Penbroke, encountered
Robert Brus King of Scots, at S. John's Town in Scotland. This Gilbert sat in
Parliament held at Northampton in the first year of King Edward the first, by
the name and Title of Earl of Anguish, in which year he died without issue.

Et portoit, les arms de son Pere'. RObert Vmfreuile (second son of the
first Gilbert, and brother and heir to the last Gilbert) was after his Brother
Earl of Anguish, Lord of Prodhoo, etc. He sat in Parliament held at
Westminster, the second year of King Edward the second, and so continued unto
the seventeenth of the same Kings reign, as Earl of Anguish, and then dyed.
He married Luce daughter and heir of Phillip de Kime, a great Baron, and had
issue Gilbert, Robert, and Thomas; and a Daughter named Elionor, married to Sir
Gilbert Borrowdon, Knight.

Et portoit, les arms de son Frere'. GIlbert Vmfreuile (son and heir of
Robert) was after his Father Earl of Anguish, Lord of Prodhoo, Otterborne,
Harebotle, and Ridesdale, and by his mother Lord of Kyme. He married to his
first wife, Jane daughter of Robert Lord Willoughby; and after, he married
Matild, daughter and heir of Sir Thomas Lucy of Cockermoth knight, and dyed
without issue in the year 1384. (His last wife was married afterward unto
Henry Percy first Earl of Northumberland.) This Gilbert fought the battle of
Gladesmore, at which time he was Marshall of Scotland, and sat in Parliaments
in England from the eight year of K. Edward the third, until the fourth of
King Richard the second, by the name and title of Gilbert Earl of Anguish.

Et portoit, Gueulles a vne quintfoile and le champe croisele patee d'or.
RObert Vmfreuile (second Brother of the last Gilbert) in the eight year of
King Henry the fifth, was created Earl of Kyme, and was after slain by the Duke
of Orleance at Bangie-bridge in France, the ninth of King Henry the fifth, and
was buried at Calice, and after removed from thence and interred in the
Monastery of Kyme. He married Anne, daughter of Raphe Neuill first Earl of
Westmerland.

This Robert have I made to be Earl of Kyme (upon the credit of Claurenciux
Cook) and yet do I greatly doubt thereof, for that I cannot ever find any of
that Name and Family to sit in Parliament after the last Earl Gilbert (in
the fourth year of King Richard the second) brother of this Robert. This
descent of Vmfreuile is diversely set forth by sundry persons, who have made
many heirs male to the last Gilbert more then I can find any good proof for.
Therefore for the better clearing thereof, take this out of the Kings Records:
Gilbert the last Earl of Anguish, with Mauld Lucy his wife, did entaile diverse
lands to themselves, and the heirs of their two bodies: and for default
thereof, to Robert his brother, and to the heirs male of his body: and for
default thereof, to Thomas Vmfreuile his third Brother, and to the heirs male
of his body: and for default thereof, the remainder to Elizabeth (or Elionor)
his Sister, wife of Gilbert Borrowdon, and the heirs of their two bodies: and
that Elionor the wife of Henry Talboys is daughter and heir of Gilbert
Borrowdon, and Niece and heir of the said last Earl Gilbert, and is forty
years of age.

A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls of Atholl, their Arms, Wives, and Children.
David (sur-named) Strathbogie, Earl of Atholl in King Henry the thirds time,
married Isabell, one of the Daughters and Heirs of Richard of Chillam (base
son of King John) and had issue, two sons, John and David, John was hanged,
and died without issue: David his Brother succeeded him in the Earldom.

Et portoit, pale de six d'or and de sable. David Stratbolgie or Strathbolgie,
second son and heir of David, Earl of Atholl, married Ioane, daughter and
one of the heirs of John Lord Comen of Badzenoth; and of Ioane his Wife,
second sister and one of the heirs of Aymer de Valence Earl of Penbroke, with
whom he had in marriage the Barony and Castle of Mitford in Northumberland, and
sat in Parliament by the name and title of Earl of Atholl, the 17. year of
King Edward the second, and the fifteenth of King Edward the third, and had
issue, David Earl of Atholl, Elizabeth and Philip, and was slain by Andrew
Murrey, in the year 1335.

Et portoit, pale de six d'or and de sable. David Strathbolgie, after the death
of his Father David, was Earl of Atholl in Scotland, and Baron of Mitford in
England: he sat in Parliament held at Westminster, the 43. of King Edward the
third, by the name and title of Earl of Atholl, and died in the 44. year of
the same Kings reign. After whose death his inheritance was divided between
his two sisters and heirs: Elizabeth the eldest sister was married to Thomas
Percy Earl of Worcester; and Philip the second, was married to Sir John
Halsham Knight, and had issue. After the death of this last David, the title of
Earl of Atholl went to the Family of Stewarts in Scotland.

Et portoit, les armoiries de son pere. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls and Dukes of
Buckingham, their Arms, Wives, and Children.
WAlter Gifford, the second of that name, Earl of Longuile in Normandy, came
into England with William the Conqueror, and was a Witness to King Henry the
first his Charter, for the reformation of the Laws and Customs of England. He
married (...) and had issue Walter the second Earl of Buckingham, and Hugh.
He had also a Sister, named Rhohisia, married to Richard Fitz-Gilbert, Lord of
Clare and Tunbridge, Grandfather of Gilbert sur-named Strongbow, Earl of
Penbroke (by his son Gilbert.)

Et portoit, Gueulles trois Lions passant en pale d'argent. WAlter Gifford, the
second Earl of Buckingham, and of Longuile in Normandy in France, married one
Ermyngard, who with her said husband founded the Abbey of Notley near to the
Town of Buckingham, in King Henry the seconds time. The said Walter dyed
without issue, and was buried in the said Abbey, in the year 1164. leaving al
his entailed Lands to Osbert Gifford his nephew (by his brother Hugh:) and all
his other Lands to William Marshal earl of Penbroke, who had married Isabell
daughter and heir of Richard Strongbow, son of Gilbert Earl of Penbroke,
grandchild to Rhohisia Gifford aforenamed.

Et portoit, les armories de son Pere'. THomas of Woodstocke (sixth son of
King Edw. the third) being Constable of England, was in the first year of K.
Richard the second created Earl of Buckingham, and sat in Parliament the same
year by that name and Title; and in the ninth year of the said Kings reign,
he was created Duke of Gloucester. He married Elianor daughter and co-heyre of
Humfrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford, Essex, and Northampton, and Constable of
England; by whom he had issue Humfrey Earl of Buckingham; and Anne, who was
married to Edmond Earl Stafford. This Thomas was strangled to death under a
Feather-bed at Callis, by Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, and Marshall of
England, 1396.

Et portoit, France seem and D'engleterre escartelle, auborder d'argent.
HVmfrey Plantagenet (son of Thomas of Woodstocke) after the death of his
Father was Earl of Buckingham, and being banished England into Ireland, was
re-called back again by King Henry the fourth, in the first year of his
reign, in which return he dyed of the plague at Chester, (others have at
Couentry) and was buried in the Abbey of Walden in Essex, without issue.

Et portoit les arms de son Pere'. HVmfrey Stafford (son and heir of Edmond
Earl Stafford, by Anne Plantagenet, daughter of Thomas of Woodstocke) was
created the first Duke of Buckingham, in the 22. year of K. Hen. 6. 1443. and
to have the precedent place of all other Dukes in England. He married Anne,
Daughter of Raphe Neuill first Earl of Westmerland, and had issue four sons
and three daughters, viz. Humsrey Earl of Stafford the eldest son slain at
S. Albons the 33. year of K. Hen. 6. (in the life time of his father) John
Stafford the second son was Earl of Wiltshire; Richard the third son dyed
young; and Robert the fourth son was Archbishop of Canterbury. Katherine the
eldest daughter, was married unto John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury; Jane the
second daughter, was married first to William Lord Bardolph, and after to Sir
William Knyuet Knight; and Anne the third daughter was first married to Aubrey
de Vere (son and heir of the Earl of Oxford) and after to Sir Tho: Cobham
Knight. This Humfrey with John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, Thomas Lord
Egremont, and John Viscount Beaumont, was slain at the battle of Northampton,
in the 38. year of K. Hen. 6. 1460. (the king being then taken prisoner) and
his body buried in the Gray-Friars at Northampton.

Escartelle France and d'engleteire, au bordur d'argent (being his mothers
arms) quartered with his own arms, d'or au Cheueron gueulles. HEnry
Stafford (son and heir of Humfrey Earl Stafford, slain at the first
battle of S. Albons, 1455.) after the death of Humfrey Duke of Buckingham his
grandfather, was Duke of Buckingham, Earl Stafford, Hereford, and
Northampton, Lord of Brecknocke, Kimbalton, and Tunbridge, was by King Richard
the third, 1482. made Constable of England. He married Katherine daughter of
Richard Wooduile, Earl Rivers, and sister and heir of Anthony Wooduile Earl
Rivers, by whom he had issue Edward Stafford D^^ke of BucKingham, Henry Earl
of Wiltshire, and Humfrey that dyed young. Elizabeth married to Robert Radcliff
Lord Fitz-Walter. Anne the second daughter was first married to Sir Walter
Herbert, Knight, and after unto George Lord Hastings, and Earl of Huntingdon,
by whom she had issue, Francis Earl of Huntingdon and others. This Henry Duke
of Buckingham was beheaded at Salisbury, the 2. of King Richard the third, for
plotting with Henry Earl of Richmond, against the said King.

Et portoit, les armoiries de son pere. EDward Stafford (son and heir of
Henry aforesaid) being restored, the first of King Henry the seventh, 1486. was
the last Duke of Buckingham; he married Elianor daughter of Henry Percy Earl of
Northumberland, and had issue, Henry Lord Stafford (who married Vrsuld daughter
of Sir Richard Pole, knight, and of Margaret his Wife, daughter of George Duke
of Clarence) and three daughters, viz. Elizabeth married to Thomas Howard Duke
of Norfolk, and Earl Marshall of England. Katherine the second daughter, was
married to Raffe Neuill Earl of Westmerland: and Mary the third daughter, was
married to George Neuill Baron of Abergauenny. This Edward, for consulting with
a Monk (or Wizard) how he might obtain the Crown; was araigned at
Westminster Hall, before the Duke of Norfolk, then high Steward of England,
and found guilty of high treason, and afterward beheaded at the Tower Hill by
London, the 13. of King Henry the 8. 1521.

Et portoit, les armoiries de son bisayeul. SIR George Villers Kinght, (a
younger son of Sir George Villers of Leicestershire, knight) was created Baron
of Whaddon, and Viscount Villers at Woodstocke, the 27. of August, 1616. and
the 16. of January after, he was created at White Hall, Earl of Buckingham:
lastly, he was made Marquess of Buckingham, at White Hall the first of
January, 1617. by the delivery of a letters Patents: he was also knight of the
honorable Order of the Garter, Master of the Horse, and one of his Majesty's
most honorable privy Council, and in commission for the Office of Earl
Marshall of England, 1618.

Et portoit, d'argent au Croix de gueulles, charge de cinq coquilles d'or.
MAry, Daughter of Anthony Beaumont, second Son of William Beaumont of Cole
Ouerton in Leicestershire, was by the great and extraordinary favor and bounty
of James King of Great Britain, made Countess of Buckingham, by the delivery
of a Letters Patent, bearing date the first of July, 1618. And had given her
for the maintenance of the said dignity, an yearly fee or rent of twenty
pounds, issuing out of the said County during her life. She married three
Husbands; the first was Sir George Villers of Brookesby in Leicestershire,
Knight; by whom she had issue Sir John Villers Knight, Sir George Villers
Marquess of Buckingham; Christopher Villers, and Susan wife to Sir William
Feilding of Newenham, in the County of Warwick Knight. Her second Husband was
William Reyner Gentleman, by whom she had no issue. Her third and last Husband,
now living, is Sir Thomas Compton Knight, second son of Henry Lord Compton,
and brother of William Lord Compton, now Earl of Northampton, 1618.

Et portoit, d'azur au Lion rampant, seme' de lices d'or. Place this leaf of
Buckingham betwixt Follio 20 and 21.

A CATALOGVE OF THE Dukes and Earls of Bedford, their Arms, Wives, and
Children.
INgelram de Coucy (son of Ingram by Katherine the daughter of the Duke of
Austria) Seigz de Coucy, D'Oysy et Mountmirall, was created Earl of Bedford
the fortith year of King Edward the third, 1365. and married Isabel the said
Kings daughter, with whom he had in marriage the Manor of Morholm, the moities
of the Manors of Wirisdale and Ashton, with the third part of the Lordship of
Whittington, in the County of Lancaster, and had issue two daughters his
heirs, Blanch and Phillip; and as Clarenceus Cook has, Blanch married Harman
Earl of Cely; and had issue Barbara wife to Sigismond the Emperor. Phillip the
second daughter was married to Robert Vere, Duke of Ireland, and Marquis of
Dublyn. M. Glouer Somerset says, he had a third daughter named Mary, married
to Henry of Bar, and had issue Robert de Bar; and Joan married unto Lewis
of Luxemburg, Earl of S. Paul. And M. Aiscu in his Chronicle, page 84. has,
that Mary the daughter of this Ingelram de Coucy, was married to Alexander King
of Scots for his second wife:(and thus do Writers vary.)He died at Bars in
(...), 1397.

Et portoit, burelle de six vair and de Gueulles. This Ingelram de Coucy had a
base daughter named Mauld, married unto the Lord Strange, by whom she had issue
Ancarat, wife to Sir Henry Husee, knight.

John Plantagenet (third son of King Henry the fourth) in the second year of
King Henry the fifth, was created Duke of Bedford, Earl of Richmond, and Lord
of Kendall, and in the fifth year of the same Kings reign, he was made
Protector of the Realm of England, and head of the public Weal. Also in the
fifth of King Henry the sixth, he was made Regent of France, and was styled, John
Regent of France, Duke of Bedford, Aniou, and Alanson, Earl of Main,
Harecourt, Drux, Richmond, and Carlell, and Viscount Beaumond. He Knighted
King Henry the sixth, in the year 1425. and married to his first wife Anne
daughter of John Duke of Burgundy, but by her had no issue; and to his second
wife he married Iaquelline, daughter of Peter Earl of S. Paul, and by her had
no issue: (she was after married to Richard Woodiule Earl Rivers, and had
issue Elizabeth wife to King Edward the fourth.) This John as Constable of
England, determined the controversy between Reginald Lord Gray of Ruthen, and
Sir Edward Hastings Knight, for the bearing of the Arms of Hastings. And at
the winning of Vernoyle took the Duke of Alanson prisoner, and with the loss
of 2100. of his common soldiers, slew of their Enemies five Earls, two
Viscounts, one and twenty Barons, seven thousand French, and two thousand five
hundred Scots: and after dyed at Paris, the fourteenth of September, and was
buried at Roane in our Lady Church, An. 1435. under a sumptuous Monument;
which when Lewis the eleventh, King of France was counseled to deface, he
answered saying: What honor shall it be to Us, or to you, to break this rich
Monument, and to pull out of the ground the dead bones of him whom in his life
time, neither my Father, nor your Progenitors, with all their puissance, were
once able to make fly one foot backwards? Wherefore let his body now lie in
rest, which when he was alive, would have disquieted the proudest of us all.
And for the Tomb I assure you it is not so decent nor convenient as his honor
and Acts deserved.

Et portoit, France seem and D'engletterre escartelle, a lambell per pale ermyn
and azur, aule second 9. de Luces d'or. GEorge Neuill (son of John Neuill
Marquess Mountague) was created Duke of Bedford, and his Father Marquess
Mountague in the tenth year of King Edward the fourth: and in the seventeenth
year of the said kings reign, both the said George and John his Father, were
by Act of Parliament deposed from all their honorable Titles, the words
whereof follows.

The King by advice and assent of his Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and by the
Commons of this present Parliament assembled, and by authority of the same
ordained, establishes and enacteth, That from henceforth, the erection and
making of Duke, and all the Names of Dignity, given to the said George, or to
the said John Neuill his Father, be from henceforth void, and of no effect.
And that the said George and his heirs from henceforth, be no Dukes, nor
Marquess, Earl, nor Baron, nor be reputed nor taken for no erection or
Creation before made: but of that name of Duke and Marquess, Earl and Baron,
in him and his heirs cease, and be void and of none effect, the said
Erection or Creation nothwithstanding.

This George dyed without issue, and was buried at Shrief Huton the fourth of
May, 1483. twelve years after his Father, leaving his five Sisters his heirs,
viz. Anne married unto Sir William Stoner Knight; Elizabeth wife to the Lord
Scrope of Vpsall; Margaret married to Sir John Mortimer, and after to Robert
Horn; Luce wife to Sir William Fitz-Williams Earl of Southampton, and after
wife to Sir Anthony Brown Knight; and Isabell the fifth Sister, was married to
Sir William Hudleston Knight; all which five Sisters had issue.

Gueulles, au Saulttur d'argent aulambell gobonne d'argent and d'azur.

I Asper of Hatfield (son of Owen Tuder, by (...) the Widow of King Henry
the fifth, and brother to King Henry the sixth by his mother) was created Earl
of Penbroke in the 3. year of King Henry the sixth: and in the fifth year of
King Edward the fourth, he was attainted by Parliament, and his Earldom of
Penbroke given unto William Lord Herbert, slain after at the battle of Banbury
the ninth of King Edw. the fourth. This Jasper, with his Nephew Henry Earl of
Richmond returning out of Britain into England, in the last year of the
reign of King Richard the third, who being slain at the battle of Bosworth,
1485. Henry Earl of Richmond, was crowned King by the name of King Henry the
seventh: who did not only restore this Jasper his Uncle to the Earldom of
Penbroke, but also created him Duke of Bedford in the first year of his
reign. He died in the year of our Lord 1495. and was buried in the Abbey of
Kensham, without any lawful issue. He had a base daughter named Ellen, married
to William Gardner of London.

Et portoit eschartelle France and D'engletterre au bordur d'azur seem Martlets
d'or. SIr John Russell, Knight of the Garter, Controller of the household to
King Henry the eight, and one of his privy Council, was created Lord Russell
in the thirty year of the said Kings reign, 1538. and in the third year of
K. Edward the sixth, he was created Earl of Bedford. This Sir John Russel was
before made Lord Admiral, and Lord privy Seal by King Henry the eight. He
married Anne daughter and soleheire of Sir Guy Sapcotes Knight; by whom he had
issue Fraces Lord Russell, after Earl of Bedford. He died at his house by Iuy
bridge in the Strand near London, and was buried in the parish. Church of
Cheyneys, in the year 1555.

Et portoit, d'argent au Lion rampant de Gueulles arm and lampasse d'azur, au
la chef sable charge de trors coquilles d'argent. FRances Lord Russell, and
Earl of Bedford (son and heir of John Earl of Bedford) was Knight of the
Garter, and one of the privy Counsel to Queen Elizabeth. He married two
wives; the first was Magaret daughter of Sir John S. John, and sister of Oliver
Lord S. John of Bletso, by whom he had issue four sons, and three
daughters, that is to say, Edward Lord Russell that dyed without issue; John
Lord Russell, second son, who married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Anthony
Cook Knight, and Widow of Sir Thomas Hoby Knight, by whom he had issue two
daughters, Elizabeth that dyed without issue; and Anne married to Henry Lord
Herbert, son and heir of Edward Earl of Worcester. Frances Russell the third
son, after the death of John his Brother, was Lord Russell, and married
Julian daughter of Sir John Forster Knight, Lord Warden of the middle Marchesse
against Scotland, and was slain by the Scotts at a day of truce (in the life
time of Frances his Father) having issue Edward after Earl of Bedford. Sir
William Russel, knight, fourth son was created Lord Russell of Thornhaugh, in
the Tower of London by King James, in An. 1603. and had to wife Elizabeth,
daughter and heir of Long of Chengie in the County of Cambridge Esquire.
Anne the eldest daughter, was wife to Ambrose Dudley Earl of Warwick:
Margaret the second daughter, was married to George Clifford Earl of
Comberland, and had issue Lady Anne Countess of Dorset: Elizabeth the third
Daughter, was married to William Bourcher Earl of Bath, and has issue Edward,
now Lord Fitz-Warren. This Frances Earl of Bedford, married for his second
wife, Bridget daughter of John Lord Hussee, the Widow of Henry Manners, Earl
of Rutland, but by her had no issue. He died the twenty eight of July, in the
27. year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and was buried at Cheyneys by his
Father, in the year of our Lord, 1584.

Et portoit, les arms de son Pere'. EDward Lord Russell (Granchilde to Frances
Earl of Bedford by his son Frances slain by the Scots) succeeded his
Grandfather, and is now Earl of Bedford, 1618. and married Luce daughter of
John Lord Harington of Exton, and Sister and co-heire of John Lord Harington of
Exton, by whom he has (...) issue.

Et portoit, d'argent au Lion rampant d'Gueulles, arm and lampasse d'azur, au
la chef sable charge de trois coquilles d'argent. A Catalogue of the Dukes and
Earls of Britame and Richmond, their Arms, Wives, and Children.
ALan (sur-named Fergant, or the Red) Earl of Britain and Richmond, (son of
Hoel, second son of Alan Caignard, by Hawis his Wife, daughter and heir of
Alan Duke of Britain, and great Aunt to William Conqueror) to whom the said
Conqueror in the fourth year of his Reign (at the siedge of York) did give
unto him and his heirs, all the Lands and Honors, late belonging unto Earl
Edwin in Yorkshire. This Alan Fergant married first, Constance, daughter of
William Conqueror, who died without issue. And after he married Ermingard,
daughter of Foulk Rechin Earl of Anion, and had issue, Conan, sur-named le
Gross; unto whom also was given the Earldom of Britain; but the Earldom
of Richmond, the said William Conqueror gave to his Cousin Alan, sur-named
Niger, or the Black, (Son of Eudo, the son of Geffrey, first Duke of
Britain of that name, by Hawis his wife, daughter of Richard the first Duke of
Normandy.) This Alan Fergant died in the year of our Lord, 1093. and was
buried in the Monastery of Rhedon, in the seventh year of King William Rufus.

Et porteit, eschiquettee d'or and d'azur, a canton ermyn. STephen Derien Earl
of Ponthiur, Lord of Goelo and Treguer, was after his Brother Alan the Black,
the third Earl of Richmond, unto whom King Henry the first did give Waltham
with the Soke in the County of Lincoln. He married Hawis, Countess of
Guingamp, and had issue, Alan sur-named the Sauag; Henry, Earl of Ponthieur;
Geffrey, sur-named Botterell, and others. Henry, Earl of Ponthieur had issue,
Alan, to whom King John did confirm Waltham with the Soke in these words. I
John, King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Normandy and Aquitaine, and
Earl of Aniou, etc. Know you, that I have given and granted unto Alan, son
of Henry of Britain, son of Earl Stephen, Waltham with the Soke, etc.
Witness, William of London, Henry of Winchester, Bishops; and Geffrey
Fitz-Piers Earl of Essex, and others, of which Henry, is descended Lords
Fitz-Alans of Bidall. This Stephen Derien (as Somerset Glouer has) died in the
year, 1104 and was buried at Begar, and his heart was buried in the Monastery
of S. Mary's at York, as he himself desired.

ALan (sur-named the Savage, Lord of Auangour, son of Stephen Derien, was
after the death of his father, the 4. Earl of Richmond; and married Bertha,
eldest daughter and co-heire of Conan le Gross, in whose right he was the
third Earl of Britain, and had issue, Conan le Petit. This Alan was faithful
to King Stephen, in his wars with Mauld the Empress; and besiedged the City
of Lincoln in her behalf, and Henry Duke of Normandy her son: He dyed in
the year, 1166. and was buried in Britain, in the thirteenth year of King
Henry the second.

COnanle Petit (son of Alan the Savage) was the fourth Earl of Britain, and
the fifth Earl of Richmond: He married Margaret, daughter of Henry Earl of
Huntington, and sister of William, King of Scots, by whom he had issue, one
only daughter named Constance, his heir, who was first married to Geffrey
Plantagenet, third son to King Henry the second; afterward she married
Randolph Earl of Chester (from whom she was divorced:) her third husband, was
Guydo, Viscount of Torraine, by whom she had issue, two daughters; Alice the
eldest, was married unto Peter de Dreux, Duke of Britain; and Katherine the
second daughter, was married to Andrew de Vetre. All which three husbands, the
said Constance honored with the Title of Earl of Britain and Richmond. This
Conan, founded the Monastery of Richmond, and was there buried, in Anno, 1170.

Et portoit, les armoiries de Britain, ermin. GEffrey Plantagenet, (third Son
of King Henry the second) in the 17. year of his fathers reign, married
Constance, daughter and sole heir of Conan le Petit; in whose right, he was
both Earl of Britain and Richmond, and had issue, Arthur, and Elianor, whom
King John kept in prison in the Castle of Bristow, where she dyed a Virgin, in
Anno, 1241. and was buried in the Monastery of Ambresbury; unto which
Monastery, she gave the Manor of Mekesham, with the appurtenances. This
Geffrey dyed, and was buried at Paris in France, the 33. year of King Henry
the second, being but twenty and eight years old.

Et portoit, gueulles trois Leopards d'or. Qui sont composees des arms de
Guyenne and de Normandy ensemble. ARthur Plantagenet, Earl of Britain and
Richmond, (Son of Geffrey aforesaid, by Constance his wife, the heir of
Britain) was proclaimed King of England, and Duke of Normandy, after the death
of King Richard the first, his Uncle; and being aided by King Philip of
France, whose daughter he had married, made wars against King John his
Uncle; and being taken prisoner at the Castle of Mirobel in Normandy, was
carried to Roane Castle, where leaping from the Wall thereof, with intent to
escape, was drowned in the Ditch, without issue, in the year, 1202.

Et portoit, gueulles trois Leopards passant enpale d'or, au lambell de cinq
points d'azur. GVY, or Guydo, Viscount of Thouars (second husband to Constance
the heir of Britain) was also in her right the next Earl of Britain and
Richmond, and by her had issue, two daughters his heirs, Alice and Katherine;
Alice was married to Peter de Dreux; and Katherine was the wife of Andrew de
Vitre in Britain.

Et portoit, d'or cinq fleurs de liz d'azur au quanton de gueulles. RAndoll,
sur-named Blundeuille, the sixth Earl of Chester, (third husband to Constance,
the heir of Britain and Richmond, and daughter and heir of Conan le Petit)
was in right of the said Constance his wife (and permission of king John)
Earl of Richmond, Anno, 1204. and was after divorced from the said Constance
for her incontinency, having no issue by her: he dyed at his Castle of
Wallingford, in the 17. year of king Henry the third.

Et portoit, d'azur, a trois gerbes d'or. PEter Brian Earl of Dreux (after the
divorce, and surrender of Randoll Blundeuile Earl of Chester) was both D. of
Britain and Earl of Richmond, in right of Alice his wife, daughter and
co-heire of Guy, Viscount of Thouars, and Constance his wife, daughter and
heir of Conan le Petit, as by this Charter following it does appear. Petrus
Dux Britanniae and Comes Richmond, habet honorem de Richmond sibi redditum quem
Ranulphus Comes Cestriae and Lincoln prius habuit. Test Rege apud Nantes, 22.
Maij. Anno. 1229. He had issue, John Duke of Britain, and Ioland that was
married unto Hugh de Brun, Earl of the Marches of Picardy.

PEter of Sauoy (Uncle to Queen Elianor, wife to K. Henry the third) came
into England in the year, 1241. At which time, king Henry the third gave him
the Earldom of Richmond, and made him Chief of his privy Counsel, and in
the 29. year of the said Kings Reign, this Peter began to build the house,
now called the Sauoy, in the Strand near London. This Peter surrendered the
Earldom of Richmond, and after dyed in Sauoy, in the year, 1267. He married
Agnes, daughter and heir of Aimon, Prince of Falcianack, and had issue,
Beatrix, wife to Guy, son of Andrew, Dolphin of Vienna.

Et portoit, d'or a l'aigle de sable portant a l'escusson bar de 10. d'or and
sable, a le couronne in band vert. John de Dreux (son of Peter Brien) had the
Dukedom of Britain, and Earldom of Richmond, made over unto him in these
words. De comitatu Richmond recepto in excambium a Petro de Sabaudia and
concessi Iohanni Duci Britanniae. Test Rex, apud Northampt. 5. Maij. pat.
Anno. 50. Hen. 3. So that I hold this John, to be both Duke of Britain, and
Earl of Richmond (although some Writers deny the same:) He married Blanch,
daughter of Theobald, King of Navarre, by whom he had issue, John the second of
that name, Duke of Britain, and Earl of Richmond. He dyed in the year, 1286.

Et portoit, eschiquette d'or and d'azur au quanton de ermyn. John de Dreux
(son of John de Dreux afore-saide) was Duke of Britain and Earl of
Richmond, in the 44. year of king Henry the third, and married Beatrix the
said kings daughter, and had issue, Arthur Duke of Britain, John Earl of
Richmond, Peter and Henry that both dyed young; Alice, Abbess of Fount-Euer^^
Mary married to the Earl of S. Pole, and Blanch the third daughter, was wife
to Philip, son and heir of the Earl of Arthoys. This John dyed at Lions in
France, in the year 1305. with the fall of a wall.

Et portoit, eschequette d'or and d'azur, a bordure gucuiles, charge auleopards
d'or, au quanton ermyn. ARthur Duke of Britain (son and heir of John, the
second Duke of Britain of that name) was after his Fathers death, Duke of
Britain: he married two wives, the first was Beatrix, Viscountes^t of Limogen,
and Lady of Auennos in Hennault, by whom he had issue, John Duke of Britain,
that dyed without issue, and Guy, Earl of Pentebria (who married Jane,
daughter and heir of Henry de Auangour, and had issue, Ioane, wife to Charles
Earl of Bloys, nephew to Philip de Valois, King of France.) The said Arthur
took for his second wife, Yoland, daughter and heir of Almericke Earl
Montford, by whom he had issue, John Breno Earl Mountford, and after Duke of
Britain; Blanch, wife to Robert de Flanders Earl of Marle; Alice, Countess
de Vendosme; and Beatrix married to Guy Earl of Lauall. This Arthur died in
the year, 1312. as Bertram de Argentre affirms.

Et portoit, eschiquette d'or and d'azur, a bordure gueulles charge an leopards
d'or, au quanton ermyns. John de Dreux (second son of the second John Duke of
Britain, and Beatrix his wife, daughter of King Henry the third) and second
Brother to Arthur Duke of Britain aforesaid, sat in Parliament held at
Westminster, by the name and title of John de Britain, Earl of Richmond, the
34. of King Edward the first, and so continued until the ninth of King Edward
the third, and did his homage at New Castle for the said Earldom, 1332. He
built the body of the Church of the Gray-Fryars in Newgate-Market, in the 34.
year of King Edward the first, which cost him three hundred pounds, and gave
many rich Jewels and Ornaments to be used in the same; he dyed without issue,
and was buried in the said Church, the ninth of King Edward the third. M.
Milles, in Somersets Book, says he died in Little-Britaine, and was buried at
Vanys, Anno, 1334.

Et portoit, les armoiries de son friar. Arthur. John de Dreux, son and heir
of Arthur Duke of Britain, after his fathers death, was Duke of Britain, and
after the death of John his Uncle, Earl of Richmond. This John had three
Wives, and dyed in Britain without issue, Anno 1340. leaving John Mountford
his half brother by the father, to succeed him in the Dukedom of Britain, who
had issue, John the Valiant.

Et portoit, ermyn. RObert de Arthoys, a Nobleman borne, of the blood royal
of Erance, descended from another Robert, son of Lewis the eight, and brother
to Saint Lewis King of France: he was Councellor unto Philip de Valois, King of
France, who sentenced the Earldom of Arthoys from the said Robert, unto
Mauld, Countess of Burgundy (the said Roberts Aunt) which sentence so
discontented the said Robert, that in his grief he uttered these words: By
me was Philip made King, and by me he shall be deposed again. For this, was
this Robert proclaimed traitor throughout all France, and was driven to fly
into England, to King Edward the third, who kindly received him, and created
him Earl of Richmond, in the 16. year of his Reign. This Robert was the
first that moved King Edward to make his title and claim to the Crown of
France, in the right of Queen Isabell his Mother: he was Admiral of the
English Fleet, and General of the wars in France; and was after hurt in the
head at the siedge of the City of Vannes in Britain, and being conuayed to
London for the cure of his hurts, shortly after died there, in the year, 1342.
and was most honorably buried in Saint Paul's Church in London; the King being
at his Funeral, did wear blackes.

Et pertoit, seme' de France ou lambell de gueulles, chastelle' d'or. John of
Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, (fourth son of King Edward the third) was by his
Father in the year of our Lord, 1342. made Earl of Richmond; and in the 46.
year of his said Fathers Reign, he surrendered the said Earldom of Richmond
again. He married Blanch, daughter and co-heire of Henry Duke of Lancaster,
and had issue, King Henry the fourth (as in the Title of Lancaster is more at
large.)

Et portoit, escartelle France seme' and D'engleterre a vne lambell d'ermyn.
John Breno, third son of Arthur Duke of Britain, begotten of his second wife
Ioland, Countess of Mountford, Daughter and heir of Almericke Earl
Mountford; whom Phillip de Valoys King of France did confiscate in his
Earldom of Mountford, because he aided King Edward the 3. In consideration
whereof, King Edward the third gave unto this John the Earldom of Richmond in
England. He sat in Parliament held at Westminster in the 34. year of the
said Kings reign, by the name and Title of John Earl of Richmond. He was
bound by Indenture, bearing date 1373. to serve King Edward the third in his
wars in France and Britain, against Phillip of Valoys: in which Indenture,
he is styled John Duke of Britain, Earl Mountford and Richmond. He married
Joan daughter of Charles King of Navarre, after married to King Henry the
fourth of England. This John had issue, John Mountford surnamed the Valiant;
and a daughter named Joan, wife to Rafe Basset of Drayton. This John was taken
prisoner at Nantes by the Earl of Bloys, and dyed after in prison at Paris in
France.

John Mountford (surnamed the Valiant, son and heir of John Breno) after the
death of his Father was Duke of Britain, and Earl of Richmond: which
Earldom he was deposed of by Act of Parliament, the fourth of King Richard
the second. He married Mary daughter of King Edward the third; and had issue,
John Duke of Britain, sur-named the Sage (who had issue Peter and Frances,
both Dukes of Britain, that dyed without issue;) Richard Earl of Estamps, and
Arthur the third of that name, who was also Duke of Britain, and Earl of
Richmond, after his two Nephews, Peter and Frances. This John Mountford slew
the Earl of Bloys.

Et portoit, esche quettee d'or and d'azur, vne border D'engleterre, a' quanton
de Britain. RAphe Neuill, first Earl of Westmerland, was made Earl of
Richmond for term of life by King Henry the fourth, and dyed the fourth of
King Henry the sixth, as in the title of Westmerland is more at large.

Gueulles au saulteur d'argent. John D. of Bedford, third son of King Henry the
fourth, was Regent of France, Duke of Bedford, Aniou, and Alawson, Earl of
Main, Harecourt, Dreux, Richmond, and Carlell, and Viscount Beaumont. He died
the xiii. of Henry the sixth, as in the Title of Bedford is more at large.

EDmond of Hadham (the place of his birth) son of Owen Teuder by Queen
Katherine, and half brother by the mother to King Henry 6. was created Earl
of Richmond at Reading in the 31. year of the said Kings reign,
notwithstanding that Arthur Duke of Britain was then living, and did use that
Title. He married Margaret, daughter and heir of John Beaufort, Duke of
Somerset (Granchilde to John of Gaunt, by his son John) and by her had issue,
Henry Earl of Richmond, after King of England, by the name of King Henry the
seventh. This Margaret in the year 1491. by the commandment and authority of
King Henry the seventh, her son, made the Orders (yet extant) for great
Estates of Ladies and Noblewomen for their precedence, Attires, and wearing of
Barbes at Funerals, over the chin, upon the chin, and under the same; which
Noble and good Orders at this day is greatly profaned and abused, by every
mean and common woman, to the great wrong and dishonor of honorable Estates.
This Edmond dyed in the year 1456. and was buried in the Gray Friars church in
Carmarden in Wales, 35. of Hen. 6. And Margaret his wife died in the year
1509. and was honorably buried in the Abbey of Westminster.

Et portoit, escartelle France and D'engleterre a'vne bordur d'azur, seme'
st^urs de liz, and Marlettes d'or RIchard Duke of Gloucester (brother to King
Edward the fourth) did style himself Earl of Richmond. And Mills in Glouer
Somersets book, page 614. says, That this Richard had the said Earldom of
Richmond given unto him, and the heirs of his body, the twelfth day of August,
in the second year of King Edward the fourth. He bare for his Arms

Escartelle France, and d'engleterre a vne lambel ermyn charge au trois
quantons de gueulles. HEnry Earl of Richmond (son of Edmond of Hadham, and
Margaret his wife, Countess of Richmond) in the 11. year of King Edward the
fourth, fled with his Uncle Jasper Earl of Penbroke into Britain, where
they remained until the third year of the reign of King Richard the third;
and then returning again, landed at Milford Haven in Wales, and fought a
battle with the said King Richard at Bosworth Field, where he slew the said
Richard, and after was crowned King of England, by the name of King Henry the
seventh. He married Elizabeth, daughter and heir of King Edward the fourth,
and had issue, Prince Arthur that dyed without issue, and Henry Duke of York,
who was after King of England, by the name of king Henry the eight.

Et portoit, les armoiries de son pere'. HEnry Fitz-Roy, base son of King
Henry the eight, (begotten of the Lady Talboys, daughter of Sir John Blount,
Knight) was in the 17. year of his Fathers reign, created Duke of Richmond,
etc. He married Mary, daughter of Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, but by her
had no issue. He dyed at S. James house beyond Charing-Crosse, being but 16.
years of age, and was buried at Thetford in Norfolk, the 28. of King Henry
the eight (as Grafton has;) Others have, that he lies buried at Framingham in
Norfolk. He bare for his Arms,

France and D'engleterre' a' bordur escartelle' ermyn and compone d'argent and
d'azur, abatun sinester d'argent, a' vne Eschutcheon de pretense escartelle'
guculles and varrey d'or and vert, sur la tout, au Lion rampant d'argent, au
chief d'azur, vne chastel enter deux testes du cerf d'argent. LEwis Stewart,
Duke of Lenox, and Lord Aubigny, created Earl of Richmond and Baron of
Setterington in England, by Letters pattents under the great Seal of England,
(without any ceremony of creation) in the year, 1614. He was also Lord
Darnley, ^rebant and Methuen, Lord Great Chamberlain and Admiral of Scotland,
Lord Steward of the household to King James, and one of his Majesty's most
honorable privy Counsel, Knight of the Garter, and one of the Commissioners
for the Office of Earl Marshall of England, 1618.

Et portoit, France a' la bo^^ de gueulles, fermaille d'or de huit pieces,
escartelle d'or, a la face eschiquette d'argent and de azur, bordure de
gueulles, sur le tout, d'argent au saulteur de gueulles, enter quatre
quintesuilles de mesme. A Catalogue of the Earls of Bath, their Arms, Wives,
and Children.
PHilibert de Chandew a Britain, borne in France, a kind friend to King Henry
the seventh in the time of his banishment out of England; which to requite,
the said King in the first year of his Reign, from the degree of a Baron,
created him Earl of Bath, and gave him also a hundred marks yearly, issuing
out of the profits of Somersetshire and Dorset.

John Bourchier, Lord Fitz-Warin of Tauestoke in Denonshire^ (son of Foulke
Bourchier, Lord Fitz-Warin of Tauestoke) was created Earl of Bath at
White Hall the ninth of July, in the 28. year of King Henry the eight. He
married Cecily, daughter of Giles Lord Daubeny, and sister and heir of Henry
Lord Daubeny, Earl of Bridgwater, and had issue, John Bourchier, second Earl
of Bath, and two daughters; Elizabeth the eldest, was married unto Sir John
Chichester of Devonshire, knight: Dorothy the second daughter, was married to
Sir John Fulford, knight. This John the second Earl of Bath, dyed in the 31.
year of King Henry the eight.

Et portoit, d'argent a la Croix eugreslee de gueulles accompaignee de quatre
bouces de sable, a lambel d'azur chargee de neaf fleurs de liz d'or. John
Bourchier, Lord Fitz-Warin, the 2. of that name, and 3. Earl of Bath, married
to his first Wife, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Walter Hungerford, knight, and
had issue, Elizabeth. His second wife was Elianor, daughter of George Manors,
Lord Ros, by whom he had issue, John Bourchier, Lord Fitz-Warin that died
before his father, sir George Bourchier, knight, and Henry; he had also two
daughters, Mary the eldest, was married unto Hugh Wyot of Exeter; Cecily the
second daughter, was married to Thomas Peyton, Customer of Plymouth. This John
married to his third wife, Margaret, daughter and heir of John Donington,
Esquire, and had issue, Susan and Bridget; Bridget was married to (...) Price
of Montgomerishire in Wales. This Earl dyed in the third year of Queen
Elizabeth.

Et portoit, les a^moi^ies de son pere. WIlliam Bourchier (son and heir of
John Bourchier, Lord Fitz-Warin that died before his Father) grandchilde to
John Bourchier second Earl of Bath, was the third Earl of Bath, of that
sur-name, and Lord Lieutenant of Devonshire and Cornwall, married Elizabeth,
daughter of Francis Russell Earl of Bedford, and had issue, Richard, how Lord
Fitz-Warin, and Frances a daughter, 1618.

Quiporta, d'argent a la croix engreslee de gueulles enter quatre Bouces de
sable, a lambell d'azur chargee de neuf fleurs de liz d'or.

A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls of Bridg-Water, their Arms, Wives, and Children.
HEnry Lord Daubeny (son of Giles Lord Daubeny, Chamberlain to king Henry
the seventh) on the 21. day of July, in the 30. year of king Henry the eight,
at his Manor of Ocking, was created Earl of Bridg-Water in Somersetshire;
and married Katherine, daughter of Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, and the
widow of Sir Rice ap Thomas, Knight of the Garter, and dyed without issue,
leaving Cecily his sister and heir married unto John Bourchier, Lord
Fitz-Warin, and first Earl of Bath.

Et portoit, gueulles cinq Lozenges en face d'argent. John Egerton, Knight of
the Bath, at the Coronation of king James, second son and heir Male of
Thomas Egerton, Baron of Ellesmore, Viscount Brackley, and Lord Chancellor of
England, was by Letters Patents, bearing date, 1618. made Earl of Bridg-water.
He married Lady Frances, daughter and co-heire of Ferdinando, late Earl of
Derby, and has issue, James, Viscount Brackely, and nine daughters, viz.
Frances, Arbella, Elizabeth, Cecily, Mary, Penelope, Katherine, Magdalen, and
Anne.

A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls of Boughan, their Arms, Wives, and Children.
HEnry Lord Beaumont of Fokingham, came into England with Queen Isabell, wife
to king Edward the second, and married Alice, daughter and one of the heirs of
Alexander Boughan, Earl of Boughan in Scotland, (which Alexander was son of
Alexander Comen, Earl Boughan by Elizabeth his wife, third daughter and one of
the heirs of Roger Quincy Earl of Winchester) and had issue, John L.
Bello-Monte, who married Elianor, daughter to Henry Earl of Lancaster, and had
issue, Henry Lord Beaumont. This Henry Lord Beaumont of Fokingham, sat in
Parliament held at Westminster the ninth of King Edward the third, by the name
and title of Henry de Bello-Monte Earl of Boughan, and so continued unto the
thirteenth of the same kings Reign.

Et portoit, d'azur flurette au lion rampanr d'or a vne baston gobonne d'argent
and de gueulles. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls Palatine of Chester, with their
Arms, Wives, and Children.
HVgh, sur-named Lupas, a Norman borne, (son of Richard, Viscount of Aurenges
in Normandy, by Margaret his wife, half sister by the Mother to William
Conqueror) came into England with William the first, who gave unto him and his
heirs, the Earldome of Chester, to hold as freely of him by the sword, as he
the said William held England by the Crown. This Earl Hugh in the 12. year
of king William Ruphus, conquered Anglesey in Wales, he married Ermentrude,
daughter of (...) and had issue, Richard the second Earl of Chester, Robert,
Abbot of S. Edmonsbury, and Otwell that was Tutor to the Children of king Henry
the first: he dyed, and was buried by Ermentrude his Countess, in the Abbey of
S. Werburge in Chester, which was of his own foundation, 1103.

Et portoit, d'azut a un test de Lou erased d'argent. RIchard, son of Hugh
Lupus, after the death of his Father, was the second Earl of Chester, after
the Norman Conquest, who in the 19. year of King Henry the first, was married
in France, to Lucy, daughter of Stephen, Earl of Bloys and Champaine, by Adela
his wife, daughter of William Conqueror; and in the 20. year of King Henry the
first, he with his wife, the Kings son, and daughter, and Otwell his
Brother, and others, to the number of 160. persons were drowned, coming out of
Normandy into England, without issue; leaving Randoll Meschines his
cousin-germane by Margaret his Fathers sister, to succeed him in the Earldom
of Chester.

Et portoit, d'gueulles crusuly d'or, a'un test de Lou craze d'argent.
RAndolphe, sur-named Meschines, son of Randolphe Meschines Earl of Carlell,
by Margaret, the sister of Hugh Lupus the first Earl of Chester, was the third
Earl Palatine of Chester after the Conquest. He married Lucy, daughter of
Algar the Saxon, Earl of Leicester, and sister to Edwin Earl of Mercia, and
Mocar, Earl of Northnmberland, who before was the Wife of Roger Romara, and
Mother of William Romara Earl of Lincoln. This Randolphe surrendered Carlell,
his Fathers Earldom, to King Henry the first; and dyed in the year, 1129.
and was buried at Chester, in the 30. year of the said Kings Reign; leaving
issue, Randolphe sur-named Gernonijs, the fourth Earl of Chester; and William,
Earl of Cambridge; and a daughter named Adeliza, married to Richard
Fitz-Gilbert, Lord of Tunbridge, Auncestor to the Earls of Clare, Gloucester,
and Penbroke, (as William Gemiticensis affirms.)

Et portoit, d'or a'vn Lion rampant de gueulles la cow estant. RAndolphe,
sur-named Gernonijs, son of Randolphe Meschines, was after his father, the
fourth Earl Palatine of Chester after the Conquest: he, with his Brother
William, Earl of Cambridge, was Witness to the Charter of Alexander Bishop of
Lincoln, of his gift of the Island of Hafreholme, to the religious Nuns of S.
Mary's, of the order of Sister-sences, 1139. the fourth of King Stephen. And in
the year, 1141. this Randoll, and Robert Earl of Gloucester, took the said
King prisoner at Lincoln. He married Mauld, daughter of Robert Earl of
Gloucester, base son of King Henry the first; by whom he had issue, Hugh the
fifth Earl Palatine of Chester, and Richard; and died poisoned by the practice
of his Wife and William Peuerell Lord of Nottingham, in the year, 1156.

Et portoit, de gueulles au Lion rampant d'argent a la cow estant. HVgh,
sur-named Kiuilioc, son of Randolphe Gernons, was the fifth Earl Palatine of
Chester; he married Bertrade, daughter of Simon Earl Mountford and Eureux in
Normandy, and had issue, Randolphe Blundeuile, the fixed Earl Palatine of
Chester, and Earl of Lincoln; and four daughters, Mauld the eldest was
married to David Earl of Anguish, Gallaway, and Huntington: Mabell the second
daughter, was married to William de Albenieo Earl of Arundell: Agnes the 3.
daughter, was married to William Ferrers, Earl of Derby and Lord of Chartley:
and Hawis the fourth daughter, was wife to Robert Quincy Earl of Winchester,
and had issue, Margaret, married to John Lacie Earl of Lincoln; and Mabell,
wife to Hugh Lord Audley. This Hugh died the 27. of King Henry the second, 1180.

Et portoit, d'azur a six garbes d'or. RAndolphe, sur-named Blundeuile (son
and heir of Hugh Kiuilioc) was the 6. Earl Palatine of Chester, as also Earl
of Lincoln, whom K. Hen. the 2. made knight, in the 33. year of his reign,
and gave him in marriage, Constance the only daughter and heir of Conan, Duke
of Little Britain, and Earl of Richmond in England (the widow of Geffrey his
son) with the Duchy of Britain, and Earldome of Richmond: and in the second
year of K. John, this Randolph was divorced from the said Constance, and after
married Clemence, daughter of William de Fengeres, and sister of Geffrey. He
had also a third wife, which was Margaret, daughter of Humfrey de Bohun Earl
of Hereford, and Constable of England, but had no issue by any of them. This
Randolph was restored to the Earldome of Lincoln, in the 3. year of K. Hen.
3. as Cousin and next Heir of William Romara Earl of Lincoln: and in the 9.
year of the said kings reign, he was a Witness to the kings charter, of
lands that he gave to the Abbey of Peterborow, by the name of Randolphe Earl
of Chester and Lincoln; and after his return out of the Holy Land, he died at
his Castle of Wallingford, in the 17. year of K. Hen. the 3. and was buried at
Chester; leaving his four sisters his heirs, before mentioned. This Randolph
was of great fame and esteem in the times of King Henry the second, King
Richard the first, King John, and King Henry the third: In which time he built
the Castles of Beeston and Chartley, and the Monastery of de la Croix.

Et portoit, d'azur a trois garbes d'or. John (by the place of his birth)
sur-named the Scot, was Earl of Huntingdon and Cambridge, by his Father David*
Earl of Anguish and Huntingdon aforesaid, (which Danid, was brother to
William, king of Scots) and by Mauld his Mother, eldest sister and co-heire of
Randolphe Blundeuile Earl of Chester, he was also the seventh Earl Palatine
of Chester. Also in the 21. year of king Henry the third, he was restored to
the Earldom of Northampton, as cousin and heir of Simon Seintlize Earl of
Northampton; and in the 22. of the said Kings reign, he died at Darnall, and
was buried at Chester, without issue, having married Helyn, the daughter of
Llewellyn ap Iorworth Prince of North Wales. Which Earldome of Chester, King
Henry the 3. 1238. assumed into his own hands, and gave other lands to the
said four Sisters of John (surnamed the Scot) before named; the issue of whom,
after claymed the kingdom of Scotland, in King Edward the firsts time, since
which time, the Princiality of Chester, has been united to the Principality
of Wales, by Act of Parliament held at Westminster, the 21. of King Richard
the second; at which time (as Somerset Herald has) the King created William
Brugs, Chester Herald by his Letters Patents, sealed with his Seal of the said
Principality.

Et portoit, d'or a trois pens d'gueulles. EDmond (sur-named Crowch-backe)
second son of king Henry the third, was by his Father created Earl of
Chester; which Title and Earldom, he surrendered to his Brother Prince
Edward, and was after made Earl of Lancaster; and after the attaindore of
Simon Mountford, and Robert Earl Ferrars, he was also made Earl of Leicester
and Derby, as in the Title of Lancaster is more at large.

Et portoit, les arms D'engleterre, au lambell de France. EDward, first son
of King Edward the first, was Prince of Wales, Earl of Cornwall and Chester,
and after King of England, by the name of King Edward the second. This Prince
Edward, in Anno, 1298. upon complaint made by Doctor Langton, then Bishop of
Chester, was committed to prison; and Pierce of Gaueston banished England, and
not to return again upon pain of death.

Et portoit, D'engleterre au lambell d'argent. EDward, first son and heir of
king Edward (...), was Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and (...) of Chester
and Flint, and after, king of England, by the name of king Edward the third.

Et portoit, D'engleterre au lambell d'argent. EDward, sur-named the black
Prince, son and heir of king Edward the third, was Duke of Cornwall, and
Aquitaine, and Earl of Chester and Flint. This Edward died before his Father,
1376. and was buried at Canterbury.

Et portoit, escartelle France seem and D'engleterre, au lambell d'argent.
RIchard of Bordeaux, son and heir of Edward the black Prince, was Prince of
Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, and after, king of England, by
the name of king Richard the second.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. HEnry of Monmouth, son and heir of king
Henry the fourth, was Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester,
and after, king of England, by the name of king Henry the fifth, as more at
large is set down in the Title of Cornwall. This Henry was dismissed of being
President of the kings privy Counsel, for striking the then Lord chief
Justice.

Et portoit, escartelle, France seem and D'engleterre, au lambell d'argent.
HEnry Plantagenet, son and heir of king Henry the fifth was Prince of Wales,
Duke of Cornwall, and (...) ^^^ster, and after king of England, by the name of
(...) the sixth.

Et portoit, France and D'engleterre escartelle, au lambell d'argent. EDward
Plantagenet, son and heir of king Henry the 6. was Prince of Wales, Duke of
Cornwall, and Earl of Chester. This young Prince was murdered at Tewkesbury,
1471. and there buried, as in the title of Cornwall is more at large.

Et portoit, France and D'engleterre escartelle, au lambell d'argent. EDward,
son and heir of king Edward the fourth, was borne Duke of Cornwall; and
after, in the year, 1470. was by Parliament created Prince of Wales, and Earl
of Chester; and was after king of England, by the name of king Edward the fifth,
and was murdered in the Tower of London.

Et portoit, France and D'engleterre escartelle, au lambell d'argent. EDward,
son and heir of king Richard the third, was also Duke of Cornwall; and in
the first year of his fathers Reign, he was created Prince of Wales, and
Earl of Chester; and after dyed without issue.

ARthur, son and heir of king Henry the seventh, was Duke of Cornwall; and
in the fifte year of his Fathers reign, he was created Prince of Wales, and
Earl of Chester, and dyed without issue, being but 14. years of age.

Et portoit, escartelle and D'engleterre, au lambell d'argent. HEnry, second
son to King Henry the seventh, was Duke of York, and after the death of
Arthur his brother, was created Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester, in the
19. year of his Fathers reign; and was after king of England, by the name of
king Henry the eight.

Et portoit, France and D'engleterre, escartelle au lambel d'argent EDward,
son and heir of king Henry the eight, was D. of Cornwall, and after created
Prince of Wales, and Earl of Chester; he was after King of England, by the
name of king Edward the sixth.

Et portoit, France and D'engleterre escartelle, au lambel d'argent. HEnry
Frederick, son and heir of James, King of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland; the fourth of June, 1610. was created Prince of Wales, Duke of
Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, and died without issue, 1612.

Et portoit, les arms d'engleterre an lambell d'argent. CHarles, second son
of James, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, being Duke of Albany,
Marquis of Ormount, Earl Ros, and Lord of Ardmanoch, was Created Duke of York
at White Hall, the sixth of January, 1604. and afterward at the same place, the
4. of November 1616. he was created Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and
Earl of Chester.

A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls and Dukes of Cornwall, their Arms, Wives, and
Children.
RObert Earl Mortaigne, son of Harlowyn de Comitis Villa, and Herlot his
wife, Mother of William Conqueror, who coming into England with the said
Conqueror, had given him the Earldom of Cornwall, and made Earl thereof. He
married Mauld, daughter of Roger Montgomery, Earl of Shrewsbury and Arundell;
by whom he had issue, William Earl Mortaigne and Cornwall, and Mauld wife to
the Earl of Tolouse, who had issue a daughter named Helen, married to William
Duke of Aquitame. This Robert was slain in Northumberland, in the year, 1087.

WIlliam Earl Mortaigne in Normandy, son of Robert aforesaid, was after his
Father the second Earl of Cornwall, who with Robert de Bellismo, William
Estoteuile, and William Crispin, did aid Robert Curthose Duke of Normandy,
against king Hen. 1. his brother, at the battle of Trenchbray in Normandy;
where they were taken prisoners in the eight year of the said kings reign:
the said William being before disinherited, and his Earldome given unto
Stephen, son of the Earl of Champaigne, (who was after King of England) and
were sent over sea into England, to be kept in perpetual prison; Robert Duke of
Normandy being sent to the castle of Cardiffe in Wales, had his eyes put out;
and this William became a Monk at Bermondsey in Southwarke, and there dyed
without issue. His Arms, as Glouer Sowerset has, is, d'hermines au chief
endented de gueulles.

REginald, base son of king Henry the first, begotten of his Concubine, the
daughter and co-heire of Robert Corbet, Lord of Alencester in the County of
Warwick, was made the third Earl of Cornwall, in the fifth year of king
Stephen. He married Beatrice, and had issue, 4. daughters his heirs: Hawis the
eldest, was married to Richard de Riueris, the third Earl of Devonshire, and
Lord of the Isle of Wight; Matild married Robert Earl of Mellent; Vrsul^ the
third daughter, was wife to Walter Dunstanuile, Baron of Castlecombe; and Sarah
the fourth daughter, was married to the Viscount of Lymocense. He had also
issue by his Concubine Beatrix de Vannes, a son sur-named, Henry filius
Comitis, who dyed in Gasconie, without issue. This Reginald died at Cicester,
in the year, 1176. as Robert Montencis has; and was buried at Redding.

Et portoit, gueulles a deux lions passant gardant d'or, a baston sinester
d'azur. RIchard Plantagenet, (sur-named Cuer-de-Lyon) the third son of king
Henry the second, was Earl of Poictiers, and the fourth Earl of Cornwall, as
does appear by the Corporation of the Town of Helleston in Cornwall. He was
after the death of Henry his brother, Duke of Normandy and Aquitaine, and writ
himself king of Jerusalem. He conquered Cipers, and died of a shot out of a
Crosse-bow, at the fiedge of Limosin in Britain, in the year, 1199. He
married Berengaria, daughter of Sanchius, King of Navarre, but by her had no
issue: he had a base son, named Philip. I have his Seal of Arms to a
Charter, wherein is a Lion rampant only.

John, (sur-named Without Land) fourth son of king Henry the second; first
married Alice, daughter and one of the heirs of Hubert, Earl of Moriton, in
Anno, 1172. In whose right, his father made him Earl of Moriton, and after,
Lord of Ireland: this Alice died without issue; after whose death, he married
to his second wife, Isabell, third daughter and one of the heirs of William
Earl of Gloucester, from whom he was divorced, without issue. He was also Earl
of Gloucester (and after king of England) and by king Richard the first his
brother, Earl of Cornwall, Lancaster, and Somerset, Lord of the honors of
Wallingford, Tikell, Marlesborough, and Ludgarshall. Lastly, this John married
to his third wife, Isabell, daughter of Aimer, Earl of Engolesmi, by whom he
had issue, king Henry the third, and Richard, Earl of Cornwall, etc.

Et portoit, gueulles a trois leopards d'or a baston d'azur. RIchard, second
son of King John, in the eleventh year of King Henry the third, his brother,
was created Earl of Poictou and Cornwall; and in the twelfth year of the said
Kings reign, the king gave him all the Lands in England, which were Reginald
Dampmartins Earl of Bologines. And in the year, 1257. he was by the Princes
of Germany, chosen king of the Romans, and crowned at Aquisgrane. He did
write himself, Richard, King of the Romans, and always Augustus, and
married to his first wife, Isabell, sister and one of the heirs of William
Marshall, the younger Earl of Penbroke, and had issue, John that dyed young,
Henry slain by Guy and Simon, sons of Simon Mountfort Earl of Leicester, in
the Church of S. Siluester in Viterbium in Italy, 1272. in revenge of their
Fathers death, that was slain in the Barons wars in England; and Richard that
died without issue. His second wife was Sanchia, daughter and one of the heirs
of Reymond Berengar Earl of Province, and sister to Queen Elianor, by whom he
had issue, Edmond Earl of Cornwall, and Richard that dyed at the siedge of
Barwicke, with an Iron shot in his head, 1296. He had also Richard a base
son, who was the Father of Sir Geffrey Cornwall, knight, of whom is descended
the Family of Cornwalles of Burford. This Richard dyed at his Castle of
Barkhamsted near London, 1272. and was buried in the Abbey of Hales in
Glocestershire, which was of his foundation.

Et portoit, d'argent a un lion rampant de gueulles, Corone d'or, au bordure
sable besantee. EDmond Plantagenet Earl of Cornwall, (son and heir of
Richard, King of Almaine, and Earl of Cornwall) with Gilbert de Clare Earl of
Gloucester, had the government of England, in the absence of king Edward the
first beyond the Seas. He married Margaret, daughter of Richard de Clare, Earl
of Gloucester and Hartford, and dyed without any lawful issue, at Ashbridge in
Buckinghamshire, the 29. of king Edward the first; where he had built an Abbey
of Bonhommes Order, and was buried by his Father, in the Abbey of Hales, 1300.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. EDward, first son of king Edward the
first: In the 27. year of his Fathers reign, 1298. Doctor Langton then Bishop
of Chester, complained grievously to the King upon this Prince Edward, who (by
the lewd advice of Pierce Gaueston, his graceless companion) brake forcibly
into his Park, and made havoc of his game; for which, this Prince was
committed to prison, and Gaueston was banished the land, and commanded not to
return again upon pain of death. This Prince in the thirteenth year of his
Fathers Reign, 1301. came to Chester, and received homage of the freeholders
of Wales; in which year he was created Earl of Cornwall, and after King of
England, by the name of king Edward the second.

Et portoit, les arms D'engleterre, au lambell d'argent. PIerce Gaueston (a
Gascoigne borne) was made Baron of Wallingford, and after, in the first year
of king Edward the second, was created Earl of Cornwall, and Lord of the Isle
of Man; and in the third year of the said Kings Reign, he married Isabell,
second sister and co-heire of Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester and Hartford;
and in the sixth year of the said Kings reign, (after he had bin banished
England twice) he was taken by Guy Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, and beheaded at
a place near unto Warwick, called Gauershi^^ (or Blacklow) and was after
buried in the Friars at Langley, without issue.

Et portoit, Sinope six aigles d'or, membrez and becquez d'gueulles. John of
Eltham (so named of the place where he was borne) second son of King Edward
the second, and brother to King Edward the third, in the second year of his
said Brothers reign, was made Earl of Cornwall; and in the ninth year of the
said Kings reign, he died at S. John's Town in Scotland, without issue; and
was buried in the Abbey of Westminster, 1334. After whose death, king Edward
the third in the 12. year of his reign, made the Earldom of Cornwall a
Dukedom, and gave it to his Son Edward the black Prince, with the Earldom
of Chester: since which time, the Kings eldest sons have been Dukes of
Cornwall.

Et portoir, d'argent a lion rampant de gueulles corone d'or, au bordure sable
bezantee. EDward, sur-named the Black Prince, son and heir of King Edward
the third; in the eleventh year of his Fathers reign, was created the first
Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, and in the 17. year of the said Kings
reign, he was created Prince of Wales; and in the 36. year, he had given him
the Principality of Aquitaine: and in the 42. year of of king Edward the
third, he sat in Parliament by the name and title of Edward Prince of Wales
and Aquitaine; he took John the French King prisoner, at the battle of
Poictiers, in the year, 1356. He married Ioane the repudiat wife of William
Mountague Earl of Salisbury, and daughter of Edmond of Woodstock Earl of
Kent; by whom he had issue, Edward that dyed young, and Richard, sur-named of
Bordeaux, who was after king of England, by the name of king Richard the
second. This noble Prince Edward died at Canterbury, the 8. of June, 1376. and
was buried in Christ-Church there.

Et portoit, France seem and D'engleterre, escartelle, au lambell d'argent.
RIchard sur-named of Bordeaux, son and heir of Edward the black Prince, was
after the death of his Father, Duke of Cornwall and Earl of Chester; and after
created Prince of Wales, at Hauering at Bower, in the ^0. of King Edward the
third his grandfather. He married Anne, daughter of Wesela^us king of Bohemia,
who died, and was buried at Westminster, in the 17. year of his reign,
without issue. And to his second wife, he married Isabell, daughter of Charles
the French King, being very young, but by her had no issue: he was after King
of England, by the name of king Richard the second, and was deposed from the
kingdom, and she sent into France again, the first of king Henry the fourth,
and married unto Charles, son of Lewis, Duke of Orleance.

Et portoit, lez arms de son pere. HEnry, sur-named of Monmouth, the place of
his birth, son and heir of king Henry the fourth, was in the first year of
his Fathers reign, created Prince of Wales, he being Duke of Cornwall before;
for the eldest son and heir apparent of the king of England, is Duke of
Cornwall by birth, but he is Prince of Wales by special creation, inuesture,
and donation of the lands thereunto belonging, and not by birth. He was after
king of England, by the name of king Henry the fifth.

Et portoit, France seem and D'engleterre escartelle, au lambell d'argent.
HEnry Plantagenet, son and heir of king Henry the fifth, was borne Duke of
Cornwall; and being not full (...) months of age, was proclaimed king of
England, in the year, 1422. by the name of king Henry the sixth; and on the 6.
of November, 1429. (being the eight year of his reign) he was crowned king of
England at Westminster; and in the year, 1431. he was crowned king of France
in Paris, in our Lady Church there; and after was murdered in the Tower of
London, 1470. by Richard Duke of Gloucester (as the report then commonly went.)
The body of this king was conveyed from the Tower, to the Church of S. Paul in
London, and there laid on a Beer, barefaced, which did bleed in the sight of
all the beholders. From thence, by boat it was carried unto the Monastery at
Chertsey, fifteen miles from London, and there was first buried, and after
removed to Windsore, and there in a new Vault entoombed.

Et portoit, France and D'engleterre escartelle, au lambell d'argent. EDward,
son and heir of king Henry the sixth (being borne Duke of Cornwall) in the
32. year of his Fathers reign, was created Prince of Wales, and Earl of
Chester, by Act of Parliament. This young Prince, at the battle of
Tewkesbury, 1470. was taken prisoner by Sir Richard Crofts, and after murdered
by the Dukes of Clarence and Gloucester, and by Thomas Marquess Dorset, and the
Lord Hastings. This Prince married Anne, second daughter and co-heire of
Richard Neuill, Earl of Warwick and Salisbury, but had no issue by her; she
was after married to Richard Duke of Gloucester, after king of England.

Et portoit, France and D'engleterre, escartelle, au lambell d'argent. EDward,
eldest son to king Edward the fourth, borne in the Sanctuary at Westminster,
the 49. year of king Henry the sixth, was created Prince of Wales, by authority
of Parliament, and Earl of Chester, in the eleventh year of his Fathers
reign, (being before Duke of Cornwall) who with his young brother the Duke of
York, was murdered in the Tower of London, by the wicked practice of Richard
Duke of Gloucester, his Uncle; who after usurped the Crown of England.

Et portoit, France and D'engleterre, escartelle, au lambell d'argent. Edward,
the only son of king Richard the third, was Duke of Cornwall; and in the
first year of his Fathers reign, he was created Prince of Wales, and Earl of
Chester, and died (being but ten years of age) without issue.

Et portoit, escartelle France and D'engleterre, an lambell d'argent. ARthur
Duke of Cornwall, son and heir of king Henry the seventh; in the fifth year
of his Fathers reign, was created Prince of Wales, and Earl of Chester; and
married Katherine, daughter of Ferdinando Duke of Austria, and king of Spain,
when he was but fourteen years of age, and dyed in the next year after, 1501.
without issue, at Ludlow, and lies buried at Worcester.

France and D'engleterre, escartelle, au lambell d'argent. HEnry Duke of York,
(second son of king Henry the seventh) after the death of Arthur, his
brother, was D. of Cornwall; and in the nineteenth year of his Fathers reign,
was created Prince of Wales, and Earl of Chester; and after, he was king of
England, by the name of king Henry the eight.

Et portoit, les arms de son friar. HEnry Stewart, son and heir of James,
king of great Britain, France, and Ireland, was created Prince of Wales, Duke
of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, the fourth of June, 1610. and died after at
S. James, near Charing-Crosse, without issue; and was buried in the Abbey at
Westminster, the seventh of December, 1612.

A Catalogue of the Earls of Carlisle, their Arms, Wives, and Children.
RAndolphe Meschines, son of Randolphe, Viscount of Baieulx, and Alice his
wife, base daughter of Richard the third, Duke of Normandy, came into England
with William the Conqueror, who gave him the Earldom of Carlisle. He married
Margaret, sister of Hugh Lupus, the first Earl of Chester after the Conquest,
and Aunt and heir of Richard the second Earl of Chester; by whom he had
issue, Randolphe the third Earl of Chester, William Meschines Lord of
Egremont, and Geffrey Lord of Gillesland, and died, Anno,

Et portoit, d'or au lion rampant de gueulles la cow estant. Andrew de Harcla
of Westmerland, knight, for his good service in vanquishing and taking
prisoner, Thomas Earl of Lancaster, and other his abetters, the kings enemies
and disloyal subjects; was by king Edward the second, in the 14. year of his
reign, girt with a sword, and had given him the Title and Earldom of
Carlisle, (for this was the usual making of Earls in those days.) But
afterward, this Andrew proved ungrateful to his King and Country, in his
wars in Scotland, receiving secretly from the Scots, a great sum of money for
a bribe, to betray his Master; for which his offense, he being apprehended and
taken, was degraded first of his knighthood, and after, of all honorable
Titles, by cutting off his Spurs from his heels, then by disgirding of him,
and breaking his sword over his head; and lastly, by tearing his Coat of Arms
off his body, by a Herald. This done, he was drawn and hanged, beheaded, and
quartered, the last day of October, 1322.

Et portoit, les armoiries de seint George, au primier quanton a marlette de
sable. John Plantagenet, third son of king Henry the fourth, was in the
second year of king Henry the fifth, his brother, created the first Duke of
Bedford, Earl of Richmond, and Lord of Kendall; and in the fifth year of the
said kings reign, he was made Protector of the Realm of England (as in the
Title of Bedford is more at large) and Earl of Carlisle: (which diverse late
Writers deny,) for thus do I find him written in his own Deeds and Charters.
John, Regent of the Realm of France, Duke of Bedford, Aniou, and Alanson,
Earl of Main, Harecourt, Drux, Richmond, and Carlisle, and Viscount Beaumont.
He married (in the year, 1433.) Iaquelline, daughter of Peter of Lucemburge,
Earl of S. Paul, but by her had no issue. He dyed in France, the tenth of
September, 1435. and was buried in the Cathedral Church in the City of Roane
in Normandy, in a very stately Toombe.

Et portoit, seem de France and D'engleterre, a un lambell de cinq, ermyn and
d'azur, neuf fleurs de liz d'or. RIchard, fourth son of Richard Duke of
York, (and brother of king Edward the fourth) was in the first year of the
said kings reign, 1460. created Duke of Gloucester, and Earl of Carlisle, and
after was made Constable and Lord Admiral of England. And lastly, when he had
caused his two Nephews, king Edward the fifth, and Richard Duke of York, his
brother, to be murdered in the Tower of London: He usurped the Crown, and was
king of England, by the name of king Richard the third.

Et portoit, France escartelle D'engleterre, d'lambell ermyn charge a trois
cantons de gueulles. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls of Cumberland, their Arms,
Wives, and Children.
HEnry Clifford, Lord Clifford, Skipton, Westmerland, and Vescie, was by king
Henry the eight, created Earl of Cumberland, at Bridewell, the eighteenth of
June, 1525. the 17. year of the said kings reign; and married Margaret,
daughter of Henry Lord Percy, fifth Earl of Northumberland, by whom he had
issue, Henry Earl of Cumberland, and Sir Ingram Clifford, knight; and four
daughters, Katherine the eldest, was married to John Lord Scroope of Bolton;
Matilda was wife to John Coigniers of Hornby; and Elizabeth was married to Sir
Christopher Medcalfe, knight; and Jane was married to Sir John Hudleston,
knight. This Henry dyed the 22. of April, in the 34. year of king Henry the
eight.

Et portoit, eschequette d'or and d'azur a la face de gueulles. HEnry Lord
Clifford, son and heir of Henry aforesaid, after the death of his Father,
was the second Earl of Cumberland, Lord Clifford, Skipton, Westmerland, and
Vescy, and married to his first wife, Elianor, daughter and co-here of Charles
Brandon Duke of Suffolk, by his wife Mary, Queen of France, (second daughter
to king Henry the seventh) by whom he had issue, Margaret, married to Henry
Stanley Earl of Derby, by whom he had issue, Ferdinando Earl of Derby, that
dyed without issue Male, and William now Earl of Derbie, 1618. This Henry
married to his second wife, Anne, daughter of William Lord Dacres of Gillesland,
and by her had issue, George Lord Clifford, the third Earl of Cumberland, and
Francis the fourth Earl of Cumberland; and three daughters, Frances the eldest
daughter, was married to Philip Lord Wharton, Elianor and Mary dyed both young.
This Henry dyed in Anno, 1569. the 12. of Queen Elizabeth.

Les arms de son pere. GEorge Lord Clifford, after the death of Henry his
father, was the third Earl of Cumberland, Lord Clifford, Skipton Westmerland,
and Vescy, and Sheriff of Westmerland by inheritance: a most Noble and
Martial man, both by Sea and Land, and honored with the honorable Order of
the Garter, 1592. He married Margaret, daughter of Francis Lord Russell, and
Earl of Bedford, the 25. of June, 1577. and had issue, Francis Lord Clifford,
and Robert that died young; and a daughter named Anne, married to Richard
Sackuile, Baron of Buckhurst, and Earl of Dorset. This George dyed in the
Strand at Landon, in the year, 1605. without issue Male.

Et portoit, eschiquettee d'or and d'azur, a la face de gueulles. FRancis
Clifford, brother of George aforesaid, succeeded and was the fourth Earl of
Cumberland, Lord Clifford, Skipton, Westmerland, and Vescy, now living, 1618.
he married Grizell, daughter of Hughes of Vxbridge, Esquire, and widow of Henry
Neuill, Father of Edward Neuill, now Baron of Abergauenny, 1618. and has
issue, Henry Lord Clifford, Margaret and Frances.

Et portoit, les arms de sonpere. A Catalogue of the Earls of Cambridge,
their Arms, Wives, and Children.
WIlliam Meschines, son of Randolphe Earl of Chester, and second brother of
Randolphe Gernonijs Earl of Chester, was the first Earl of Cambridge, and by
that name and title, I find him a Witness to the Charter and gift of
Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, of the Island of Hafreholme, which the said
Alexander gave to the religious and holy Nuns of the order of Sister-sences,
bearing date, the fourth of king Stephen, 1139. Whom he married, or what issue
he had, I find not.

WIlliam Marquess of Iuliers, (or Iuliac) unto whom king Edward the third, on
the seuen^ day of ^ay, in the 14. year of his reign, did give the Earl (...)
bridge, with the Town and Castle, and twenty pounds by year in fee, to him
and the heirs of his body begotten: and invested him into the said Earldom,
at Westminster, by the girding of him with a sword, and besides, gave him by
letters patents, a thousand pounds of yearly rent. He married Mary, sister and
heir of Edward Duke of Gelderland, Nephew to king Edward the third, and had
isssue. Mary, married unto John, son and heir of John Duke of Cleeue.

Et portoit, d'or, au lion rampant de sable. John of Henault (Uncle to Queen
Philip, wife to king Edward the third) a younger son of the Earl of Henault,
was in the sixteenth year of the said kings reign, 1342. created Earl of
Cambridge, which honor and Earldom soon after he lost, by reuolting to the
French king.

Et portoit, d'or, au lion rampant de sable, arm and lampasse de gue^lles;
escartelle d'or au lion rampant de gueulles. EDmond of Langley (so called of
the kings Manor house of Langley, where he was borne) fifth son of king
Edward the third, was created Earl of Cambridge, in the 36. year of his
Fathers reign; he was also Lord of Tyndall, and after Duke of York, and
married Isabell, daughter and one of the heirs of Peter king of Castile and
Lions, and had issue, as in the Title of York. He dyed in the third year of
king Henry the fourth, 1401. and was buried at Langley by Isabell his wife.

Et portoit, France seem and D;engleterre au lambell d'argent neuf ^orteaux.
RIchard of Conesburgh, second son of Edmond of Langley, aforesaid, was
created Earl of Cambridge, at a Parliament held the second year of king Henry
the fifth; and in the year after, by the procurement of the Dolphine of France,
he with Henry Lord Scroope of Masham, then Lord Treasurer of England, and Sir
Thomas Gray of Northumberland, knight, did conspire the kings death at
Southampton, as the said king was shipping his men for France; for which their
treason, they were beheaded there. He married Anne, sister and heir of Edmond
Mortimer, Earl of March and Vlster; and had issue, Richard Earl of Cambridge,
and Duke of York, and Isabell, married to Henry Lord Bourchier and Earl of
Essex.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere' RIchard Plantagenet, son of Richard of
Conesbourgh, in the fourth year of king Henry the sixth, was created D. of
York, Earl of Cambridge and Rutland, and Lord of Tyndall; he was also Earl
of March and Vlster, Lord of Wigmore and Clare by his Mother. He married
Secily, daughter of ^alphe Neuill. first Earl of Westmerland, and had issue,
Edward, who was after king, by the name of king Edward the fourth, Edmond Earl
of Rutland, and Richard D. of Gloucester, and after king of England, by the name
of K. Richard the 3. and diverse daughters, as in the title of York. This
Richard with his Son Edmond, was slain at the battle of Wakefield, 1460.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls of Deuon, and
Marquesses of Exeter, their Arms, Wives, and Children.
RIchard de Riparijs, (son of Baldwine Rivers) to whom (M Camden says) king
Henry the first gave the Town of Tiuerton, and the honor of plimpton, and
created him Earl of Devonshire; and granted to him the third penny of the
yearly reuennew of the same County, being ten Marks. Lastly, the said king
gave him the Isle of Wight, whereby ever after he was called Earl of
Devonshire, and Lord of the Isle. He married and had issue, Baldwine de Rivers,
Earl of Deuon.

BAldwine de Rivers, son of Richard aforesaid, was the second Earl of
Devonshire, and builded three Monasteries, viz. Christ-Church, Quarara in the
Isle of Wight, and Lira in Normandy; he fortefied the City of Exeter, against
king Stephen, and was banished England, with his wife and children; and had the
Isle of Wight taken from him, in the year, 1136. He married Adelizia, daughter
of (...) by whom he had issue, Richard, Henry that dyed young, and William,
sur-named Vernon, (the place where he went to school, or was brought up in.)
This Baldwine dyed in the year, 1155. and was buried in the Abbey of Quarara.

RIchard de Rivers, eldest son of Baldwine aforenamed, was the third Earl of
Devonshire, and did give lands to the Abbey of Quarara (in the 13. year of
king Henry the second) to pray for the souls of Baldwine his father, and
Adelizia his mother, Countess of Deuon. He married Hawis, daughter and one of
the heirs of Reginald Earl of Cornwall (base son of king Henry the first)
and had issue, Baldwine and Richard, both Earls of Devonshire, who dyed
without issue. This Richard dyed in the City of Cenomania in Franc, in the
year, 1161.

BAldwine de Rivers, son and heir of Richard aforesaid, was after his
father, the fourth Earl of Deuon, and married Alice, daughter of Raphe de Dol
in Berry, (as Milles has, page 457.) he was Earl but a while, and dyed
without issue; leaving Richard his brother to succeed him in his Earldom and
lands.

RIchard de Rivers (second son of Richard, the third Earl of Deuon, and
brother and heir of Baldwine, the fourth Earl of Devonshire) was the fifth
Earl of Devonshire, and married Margaret, daughter and one of the heirs of
John Lord Biset, and gave lands to the Abbey of Bruer, to pray for the soul of
Earl Richard his Father, his own health, and Margaret the Countess his wife,
he died without issue, and was buried at Montbroge in Normandy, the thirtieth
of King Henry the second. Etportoit, d'or, au lion rampant d'azur. This is the
first man that bare this Arms, that ever I could find: and for the Griffyn
which has been usually set down for their Arms, it is but a device, and no
Arms.

WIlliam, sur-named de Vernon, of the Town of Vernona in Normandy, where he
was borne, as some have (but the book of Forde Abbey has, where he went to
school) after the death of Baldwine and Richard, his two Nephews, without
issue, was the sixth Earl of Devonshire, and Lord of the Isle of Wight. He
married Mabell, daughter to Robert Earl of Mellent, with whom her Father did
give in marriage all his lands of Kiderminster, Moreis, and Redeliston, which
were before the lands of her Mother Mauld, one of the daughters and heirs of
Reginald Earl of Cornwall, (base son of K. Henry the first;) by whom, this
William had issue, Baldwine, who married Margaret, daughter of Waryn
Fitzgerald, Chamberlain to king John; and dyed before his Father, leaving
issue, Baldwine his son and heir. This William had issue also, two
daughters; the eldest was Jane, married unto William Bruer, the younger Lord of
Torbay, who dyed without issue: Mary the second daughter, was first married to
Sir Robert Courtney, knight, son of Reginald, and after, to Peter de Prouz,
and had issue. This William de Vernon, by his Deed or Charter, bearing date the
fourth of September, 1206. did give lands to the Abbey of Quarara, to pray for
the souls of king Henry, and Baldwine his father, and A lelicia the Countess
his Mother, and Earl Richard his brother, and for the health of Mabell the
Countess, his wife, and Baldwine his son; and after dyed, in the year of
our Lord, 1216. the first of king Henry the third.

Et portoit, d'or au lion rampant d'azur, arm and lampasse de gueulles.
BAldwine de Rivers, the fourth of that christen name (Son of Baldwine the
third, which dyed before his father) was after the death of William de Vernon,
his grandfather, the seventh Earl of Devonshire, and Lord of the Isle of
Wight. He married Amicia, daughter of Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Gloucester and
Hertford, by whom he had issue, Baldwine the fifth, and eight Earl of
Devonshire of that sur-name, and Isabell de Fortibus, Countess of Albemarle,
the wife of William de Fortibus Earl of Albemarle. This Baldwine in the 25.
year of the reign of king Henry the third, was created Earl of the Isle of
Wight, at the suit and petition of Richard Earl of Cornwall, the kings
brother, (whose Ward this Baldwine had been:) and in the 29. year of the said
kings reign, the said Baldwine dyed in his youthful years. After whose
death, his Countess Amicia gave lands to the abbey of Bruarne, to pray for the
souls of Gilbert de Clare, late Earl of Gloucester, her Father, and for
Isabell the Countess her Mother, and Baldwine late Earl of Devonshire, her
husband, and for the health of her own soul, and Baldwine her son. She dyed
in the year, 1283.

Et portoit, d'or au lion rampant d'azur. BAldwine de Rivers the fifth of that
name, and eight Earl of Devonshire, of that sur-name, and Lord of the Isle of
Wight. He married Auice, daughter of (...) a Sauoyan borne, and near
kineswoman of Queen Elianor, and had issue, a son named John, that dyed young
in France without issue. This Baldwine the fifth, dyed in the 46. year of K.
Henry the third; leaving Isabell de Fortibus Countess of Albemarle, his sister
and heir.

Et portoit, les arms, de son Pere'. HVgh Courtney, knight, (the second of
that name) cousin and heir of Isabell de Fortibus, Countess of Albemarle,
that is to say, son of Hugh, grandchild of Mary de Rivers, sister of
Baldwyne the third (that dyed before his Father) grandfather of Isabell de
Fortibus, Countess of Albemarle; was by Letters Patents made the ninth Earl
of Devonshire, the ninth of king Edward the third; and married Agnes, sister of
Sir John S. John, knight, by whom he had issue, four sons and three
daughters, viz. Hugh Courtney, the tenth Earl of Devonshire; Thomas the second
Son, married Mur^ell, daughter of John de Mules: John the third son was Abbot
of Tauestoke; and Robert was the fourth Son: Elianor the eldest daughter, was
wife to John Gray; Elizabeth the second daughter, was married to Bartholmew de
Lasle, of the Isle of Wight; and Egelyne the third daughter, was wife to Robert
Lord Scales. This Hugh dyed in the fourteenth year of king Edward the third,
1340. and was buried at Cowike.

Et portoit, d'or, trois torreaux, au lambell d'azur. HVgh Courtney, the third
of that christen name, (son of Hugh the second) after the death of his
father, was the tenth Earl of Devonshire, and married Margaret, daughter of
Humfrey de Bohun, the eight Earl of Hereford and Essex, and Constable of
England, by his wife Elizabeth, daughter of K. Edward the first, and had issue
Hugh Courtney that dyed without issue, Edward that was after Earl of
Devonshire, Sir Thomas Courtney, knight, Philip Courtney of Powderham, William
Courtney, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Humfrey and Peter that dyed young: He
had issue also, three daughters, Katherine the eldest, was married to William
Lord Harington; Elizabeth, to William Lord Moune of Dunster Castle; and
Margaret, wife to John Lord Cobham, etc. This Earl Hugh dyed at Tiuerton, in
the last year of king Edward the third, 1376. and was buried at Exeter.

Et portoit, d'or, trois torteaux, au lambell d'azur. EDward Courtney, son of
Hugh Earl of Deuon aforesaid, was the eleventh Earl of Devonshire, and
married Emeline, daughter of Sir John Dauney, knight, and had issue, Edward
Courtney, the twelfth Earl of Devonshire, and Sir Hugh Courtney of Haccombe,
knight; and dyed in the 16. year of the reign of king Richard the second,
1392.

EDward Courtney, sur-named the blind, suc^eeded Edward his father, and was
the 12 Earl of (...), and sat in Parliament, the sixth of king Henry the fifth:
he married Elianor, daughter of Roger Mortimer, Earl of March and V^ster, and
had issue, Hugh, the thirteenth Earl of Devonshire. This Hugh (sur-named the
blind) by his Deed, bearing date the second of king Henry the fifth, did give
to Sir Hugh Courtney, knight, his brother, the Manors of Gotheringdon,
Stancombe-Dauney, and Southalington in the County of Deuon, and dyed in the
seventh year of the said kings reign, 1418.

Et portoit, les armoiries de son pere. HVgh Courtney (son and heir of
Edward, sur-named the blind) after the death of his Father, was the thirteenth
Earl of Devonshire, and sat in Parliament by that Title, the same year his
Father dyed. He married Anne, daughter of Richard Lord Talbot, and had issue,
Thomas Earl of Devonshire, and dyed in the tenth year of the reign of king
Henry the fifth, 1421.

Et portoit, d'or a trois torteaux, au lambell d'azut. THomas Courtney, son
of Earl Hugh aforesaid, succeeded his Father, and was the fourteenth Earl of
Devonshire, and Lord of Ochampton: he married Margaret, daughter of John
Beaufort, Earl of Somerset, and Marquess Dorset, by whom he had issue, three
sons and two daughters: Thomas the eldest son, being in the battle (...)
with king Henry the sixth, against king Edward the fourth, was there taken
prisoner, and had his head smitten off. Henry the second son, was likewise
beheaded at Salisbury, the eight of king Edward the fourth; and John the third
son, was slain at Tewkesbury, in the tenth year of king Edward the fourth,
Ioane the eldest daughter, was married to Sir Roger Clifford, knight; and
Elizabeth the second daughter, was wife to Sir Hugh Conwey, knight. This
Thomas, being at the battle of Touton, 1460. was taken prisoner, and beheaded
at York.

HVmfrey Lord Stafford of Southwike, son of William Stafford of Hook,
Esquire; in the ninth year of king Edward the fourth, was created Earl of
Devonshire, 1460. and married Isabell, daughter of Sir John Barry, knight, but
had no issue by her. This Humfrey became ungrateful to king Edward, and fell
from him, and after was taken by some of K. Edwards friends, and carried to
Bridgwater in Devonshire, and there had his head smitten off, in the year,
1460. having been an Earl but three Months and odd days.

Et portoit, d'or au Cheuron de gueulles a la bordure engreslee de sable.
EDward Courtney of Haccombe, son of Sir Hugh Courtney of Bokonoke, knight,
grandfather to Edward Courtney the eleventh Earl of Devonshire, was after the
death of Humfrey Stafford, restored in blood, and made the sixteenth Earl of
Devonshire, in the first year of king Henry the seventh: he married Elizabeth,
daughter of Sir Philip Courtney of Molland, knight, and had issue, William
Courtney Earl of Devonshire. This Edward had four sisters, whose issue came
after to be his heirs. The first was Elizabeth, married to John Tretherfe, of
whom Viuian is descended: the second was Mauld, wife to John Arundell of
Taluerne: Isabell the third sister, was married to William Moune: and Florence
the fourth sister, was married to John Trelauny, and thus are they set down in
the said Edwards Will. He dyed in the first year of king Henry the eight, 1509.

Et portoit. WIlliam Courtney, son of Edward, was after his Fathers death,
the seventeenth Earl of Devonshire, and Lord of Okhamton, and married
Katherine, daughter of king Edward the fourth; and had issue, Henry Courtney
Earl of Devonshire, and Marquess of Exeter; and dyed at Greenewich, the ninth
of June, in the third year of the reign of K. Henry the eight, 1511. and was
buried in the Blacke-Fryars in London.

Et portoit, d'or trois torteaux, au lambell de azur. HEnry Courtney, son of
William aforesaid, by Katherine his wife, daughter of king Edward the fourth,
was after his Father, the eighteenth Earl of Deuon, and Lord of Ochampton. He
was after created Marquess of Exeter, at Bridwell, the eighteen of June,
1525. and married to his first wife, Elizabeth, daughter and heir of Sir John
Gray, Viscount Lisle, by whom he had no issue: after, he married Gertrude,
daughter of William Blount, Baron Mountioy (begotten of Elizabeth, the daughter
and one of the heirs of Sir William Say, knight) by whom he had issue, Edward
Courtney, the last Earl of Devonshire of this progeny. This Henry Marquess of
Exeter, Henry Poole Lord Mountague, and Sir Nicholas Carew of Beddington in the
County of Surrey, knight, were attainted and executed for high treason, 1538.
at the Tower Hill, for being privy with Cardinal Poole (brother to the Lord
Mountague) to procure foreign power (in the Popes aid) to invade this Realm.
Soon after, this Gertrude Marquesses of Exeter, Margaret Countess of
Salisbury, with others, were likewise attainted for the same treason, but
Gertrude was not executed, but died, and was buried in a fair Toombe in
Wimborne Minister, in the year, 1557.

Et portoit, escartelle France and D'engleterre, au bordure escartelle de
mesme: escartelle Courtney, qui est, d'or a trois Torteaux. Le tiers, de mesme,
le quart, Rivers, qui est d'or au lion rampant d'azur, arm and lampasse de
gueulles. EDward Courtney, son and heir of Henry Marquess of Exeter, and
Earl of Devonshire, being long prisoner in the Tower of London, was by Queen
Mary, in the first year of her reign, 1553. restored in blood, and made Earl
of Devonshire, at her Manor of Richmond; and three years after, he dyed at
Padua in Italy, the fourth day of October, 1556. without issue, (some have, he
was poisoned:) He was the last Earl of that Name and Family of Courtneys.

Et portoit, les Armoities de son Pere. CHarles Blount, Baron Montioy, (second
son of James Blount, Lord Mountioy, and brother and heir of William Baron of
Mountioy) Lord Deputy and Lieutenant of Ireland; who expulsed the Spaniards
there, and compelled the Rebels to submission, was by King James in the first
year of his reign, 1603. created Earl of Devonshire, the 21. of July, at
Hampton Court. He dyed without any lawful issue, in the Dutchy-house in the
Strand, and was buried at Westminster with great pomp, in the Abbey, in the
year, 1606.

Et portroit, burelle vndee de six d'or and de fable. WIlliam Cauendish,
knight, was created Baron of Hardwike, on Satterday, the fourth of May, 1605.
and after by King James, in August, 1618. he was made Earl of Devonshire. He
married two wives, the first was Anne, daughter and heir of Henry Kighley of
Kighley in Lancashire, Esquire, and had issue, William Lord Cauendish of
Hardwike, who married Christian, daughter of Edward Bruise, Baron of Kynlosse,
and Master of the Rolls; Frances, wife to Sir Henry Maynard, knight, Mary and
Elizabeth. This Williams second wife, was Elizabeth, daughter of Edward
Boughton of Causton, and widow of Sir Richard Wortley, knight, by whom he had
issue, Sir John Cauendish, knight of the Bath, who dyed without issue.

Et portoit de sable au trois testes du cerf d'argent, les corns d'or. A
CATALOGVE OF THE Earls Ferrars, and Derby, their Arms, Wives, and Children.
HEnry Earl Ferrars, a Norman borne, son of Wakeline, came into England with
William the Conqueror, who gave him the Castles of Tutbury and Oucume, with
diverse other great Seigneuries in England and Normandy. He married one Berta,
and had issue, Eugenulphus, William, and Robert; and two daughters, Gundred,
and Emelyn. He founded the Abbey of Tutbury, in the year, 1080. Unto which
Foundation, were Witnesses Eugenulphus, William, and Robert his sons. And for
proof that this Henry was an Earl. (which some great and late Writers deny)
I have here set down the said Henry's Epitath, which I find printed in the
year, 1577. and dedicated to the late Earl of Essex, and said to be found in
the Abbey of Tutbury.

Hic iacet Henricus de Ferrarijs comes, huius Ecclesiae fundator Imago, nomine
cuius Anno milleno domini quater atque viceno Tutburiaque nono domus est
fundata patrono. It is said that he bare for his Arms, argent. 6. horse-shooes
sable. RObert de Ferrars, after the death of Henry his Father, and Eugenulphus
and William his two Brothers, without issue, was the second Earl Ferrars, and
by that name was Witness to king Henry the first his Charter, of lands which
he gave to the Abbey of Tutesbury. Also in the 31. year of the said kings
Reign, he began the Foundation of the Abbey of Muriuall, and dyed in the 19.
year of king Stephen, and was buried at Muriuall, leaving issue, William Earl
of Tutesbury, slain in his lodging in London, without issue; Robert Earl
Ferrars, and Wakelyn de Ferrars the third son.

Les arms de son pere, d'argent a fix Ferres de cheuall de fable. RObert de
Ferrars, the second of that name, after the death of Robert his Father, and
William his brother, was the third Earl Ferrars, whom diverse late Writers have
greatly mistaken, they affirming him to be the first Robert, Founder of
Muriuall Abbey, and to be Earl of Nottingham; when as in truth, it was this
Roberts Father, that was Founder of Muriuall Abbey, and another Robert Ferrars,
grandchild of this second Robert by his son William, that was made Earl of
Nottingham, as hereafter will appear in his due place.

And where they say they have seen Deeds and Charters, to approve their
affirmation, it is untrue; for those they mean, are imperfect Notes and
Abstracts, taken out of Glouer Somersets Book of Miscellania; which Book I
have, and perusing the same, find them of small credit. This Earl Robert
married, and had issue, William Earl Ferrars, the fourth Earl Ferrars; and
died in the year, 1184. the 31. of king Henry the second: but others have,
that he dyed in the Holy Land, in the year, 1190. the second of king Richard
the first, which is mistaken.

Et portoit, lez armoities de son pere.

Now to the issue, which M. Milles makes this Robert to have, in his Book of
succession of Earls, page 869. viz. William de Ferrars Earl of Derby.
Petronell (or Pernell) wife of Henry Lord Stafford; and Elizabeth married unto
William Marshall Baron of Rye: I confess William only, but no daughters at
all. For by a Record of the 26. of King Henry the 3. it is proved, that Henry
Lord Staffords wifes name was Mabell, daughter of Robert Musegros and Agnes his
wife, daughter of William Earl Ferrars and Derby, great grand-sonne of Robert
Ferrars Earl of Nottingham, which Milles says, died in the holy land, 1190.
And for Elizabe^h the other daughter, to be married to William Marschall, Baron
of Rye and Hengham in Norfolko, which died, 1266. that is most untrue; for that
William he means, had to his wife Alina, daughter and heir of Hubert, Baron
of Rye, and died in the 11. year of king Edward the first, as by an
Inquisition of that date it does appear.

William Earl Ferrars, Lord of Tutbury in Staffordshire, and Oucume in
Rutlandshire, son of the second Robert Earl Ferrars, married Margaret,
daughter and heir of William Peuerill of Nottingham, (whose grandfather
William was the base son of William Conqueror, begotten of the wife of
Randolphe Peuerell of Hatfield Peuerell) and had issue, Robert and William:
Robert the eldest son in the life time of his Father, was made Earl of
Nottingham, and dyed without issue William the second son, after the death of
his Father was Earl Ferrars, and first Earl of Derby. This William Earl
Ferrars the Father, dyed (as Roger Houedon has, Fol. 390. b.) at Achon in the
Holy Land, in the year, 1190. But Milles (in Glouer Somersets Book of
successions of Earls, page 870.) has, that he dyed in the year, 1247. and
Margaret his wife to dye in the same year, the 32. of king Henry the third,
which I doubt of.

Et portoit, d'argent, a six Ferres de cheual de sable. WIlliam de Ferrars, the
second Earl Ferrars of that christen name, was by king John made the first
Earl of Derby of that sur-name. He married Agnes, the third sister and
co-heire of Randolphe Blundeuile, Earl of Chester and Lincoln: in whose right
he was Lord of Chartley, and had issue, William Earl Ferrars and Derby,
Robert, Hugh, and Thomas de Ferrars; and dyed in the year of our Lord, 1242.
and was buried at Muriuall, the 27. of king Henry the third.

Et portoit, vaire d'or and de gueulles, a la bordure de azur seem Ferrars de
cheuall d'argent. VVIilliam de Ferrars, the third of that name, was Earl
Ferrars and Derby, Lord of Tutbury and Chartley. He married two wives, the
first was Sibell, daughter of William Marshall the elder Earl of Pembroke, and
one of the five sisters and heirs of Auncelme Marshall Earl of Pembrooke,
(with who^ he had 1520. pounds Rents of assize per annum) and had issue; five
daughters, who inherited their Mothers inheritance, and were married as
follows. Agnes the eldest, was married to William Lord Vescy of Alnwicke in
Northumberland: Isabell first married unto Gilbert Basset, and after, unto
Reginald de Mohun the younger Earl of Somerset Ioane the third daughter, was
married unto John Mohun, Son of Reginald aforesaid: Mauld the fourth
daughter, was married to Philip de Kyme, Lord of Kyme, and had issue, Sibell
wife to Frank de Bohun, Baron of Midhurst in Sussex: and after, she married
William de Fortz Baron of Clapton; and thirdly, the said Mauld married William
de Vallibus: Anne or Agatha the fifth daughter, was married to Hugh Mortimer of
Chilmersh, son of Ralphe Lord Mortimer of Wigmore. The foresaid William Earl
Ferrars, married to his second wife, Margaret, daughter and one of the heirs
of Roger Quincie Earl of Winchester, and Constable of Scotland, by whom he had
issue, Robert Earl Ferrars and Derby, and William Lord and Baron of Groby, by
the gift of his Mother; and a daughter named Agnes, married to Robert Musegros,
son of Richard Lord of Derhurst. This William dyed of a bruise, taken with a
fall out of his Coach, in the year, 1253. the 38. of king Henry the third.

Et portoit, vaire d'or and de gulles. RObert de Ferrars (son and heir of
William Earl Ferrars and Derby) was also Earl Ferrars and Derby, and combined
with Simon Mountfort Earl of Leicester, and Gilbert de Clare Earl of
Gloucester and others, to raise war against king Henry the third, because he
refused to stand to the Statutes made by Parliament at Oxford, for the
banishment of Strangers, etc. In which civil discord, this Robert, in the
fiftieth year of the said kings reign, was taken prisoner at the Battle of
Chesterfield, and imprisoned in the Castle of Chipenham, near to Windesor;
where he, for the obtaining of his liberty, became bound (before John Chishull
Lord Chancellor of England) and did assure over all his Lands in England
(excepting Chartley, and the Town of Bolbrooke) to diverse Noblemen his
sureties, for the payment of fifty thousand pounds in one day, and at one
entire payment, to Lord Edmond the kings son; which payment being not
performed at the day appointed; the said Lord Edmond, upon the surrender of the
aforesaid Sureties, took possession of all the said Lands, which were then
valued at two thousand pounds per annum: his Sureties were, the Lord Henry, Son
to the king of Romans, William Valence Earl of Pembrooke, John Earl Warren
and Surrey, William Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, Roger Somery, Thomas Clare,
Roger Walleron, Roger Glifford, Hamon Le Strange, Bartholmew Sudley, and Robert
Bruise, Barons. This Earl Robert, married Elianor, daughter of Ralphe Lord
Basset, and had issue, John Lord Ferrars of Chartley; and dyed in the seventh
year of king Edward the first, 1278. After whose death, the Dukes and Earls
of Lancaster had the Titles of Derby, until the first year of king Henry the
seventh, that he bestowed the same upon Thomas Stanley, his Father in law.

Et portoit, les Armoiries de son pere. EDmond Plantagenet, sur-named
Crowch-backe, second Son of king Henry the third, and Brother of king Edward
the first, was Earl of Lancaster, Leicester, and Derby; as more at large does
appear in the Title of Lancaster.

Et portoit, gueulles trois Leopards d'or, au lambell d'azur seem fleurs de liz
d'or. THomas Plantagenet, son and heir of Edmond aforesaid, was after his
Father, Earl of Lancaster, Leicester, and Derby, as in the Title of Lancaster.
He dyed without issue, leaving Henry his brother his heir.

Et portoit, les armoiries de son pere. HEnry of Lancaster, Lord of Monmouth,
Brother to Thomas Plantagenet, (was after his Father and Brother) restored to
be Earl of Lancaster, Leicester, and Derby, with the Office of high Steward of
England, as in the Title of Lancaster is more at large.

Et portoit, D'engleterre, a un band d'azur. HEnry, sur-named Tortcoll (or
Crook-necke) son and heir of Henry Monmouth, was in the life time of his
Father created Earl of Derby, in the eleventh year of king Edward the third,
as in the Title of Earls of Lancaster.

Et portoit, gueulles a trois leopards d'or, au lambell d'azur neuf fleurs de
liz d'or. John sur-named of Gaunt, (the place of his birth) fourth son of
king Edward the third, writ in his Style, John, son of the king of England,
Duke of Aquitaine and Lancaster, Earl of Derby, Lincoln, and Leicester, and
high Steward of England; as in the Earls of Lancaster is more at large.

Et portoit, escartelle seem de France and D'engleterre, a lambell d'hermines.
HEnry of Bullingbrooke, son of John of Gaunt, was created Earl of Derby, in
the ninth year of king Richard the second, his Nephew; and in the twentieth
year of the same Kings reign, he was made Duke of Hereford; and lastly, King
of England, by the name of King Henry the fourth.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. THomas Lord Stanley, and of Man, knight of
the Noble Order of the Garter, and Lord Steward of the house to King Edward the
fourth, was created Earl of Derby, in the first year of king Henry the
seventh, on Simon and Iudes day; and in the same year, he was made also high
Constable of England. He married to his first wife, Elianor, daughter of
Richard Neuill Earl of Salisbury; by whom he had issue, six sons and four
daughters, viz. Thomas and Richard dyed young; George the third son, was Lord
Strange, in right of Ioane his wife, daughter and heir of John Lord Strange of
Knocking, and died before his Father, the third of king Henry the seventh;
William the fourth son dyed young; Edward the fifth son, was Lord Monteagle;
and James the sixth son, was Bishop of Elie: Ioane the eldest daughter dyed
young; Katherine the second daughter, Anne the third daughter dyed young; and
Margaret the fourth daughter, was married to Sir John Osberton, knight. This
Thomas married to his second wife, Margaret, daughter and heir of John Duke of
Somerset, the widow of Edmond Earl of Richmond, and Mother to King Henry the
seventh; by whom he had no issue. He dyed at Lathum in Lancashire, in the
twentieth year of King Henry the seventh, 1104. And Margaret his wife,
Countess of Richmond, dyed in the first year of king Henry the seventh.

Et portoit, d'argent a la band d'azur, chargee de trois testes de cerf d'or.
THomas Lord Stanley, Strange and of Man, grandchild to Thomas aforesaid, by
his son George, was the second Earl of Derbie of that Family, and married
Anne, daughter of Edward Lord Hastings, and sister of George, Earl of
Huntingdon (who was after married to John Radcliff, Lord Fitzwater.) This
Thomas had issue, three sons and one daughter, viz. John Lord Strange, that
dyed before his Father; Edward that was after Earl of Derby, and Henry that
dyed young of the sweat. Margaret the daughter, married Robert Radcliff Earl
of Sussex. This Thomas dyed in the 13. year of king Henry the eight, 1521.

Et portoit, les armoities de son pere. D'argent a la band d'azur, chargee de
trois testes du cerf dor. EDward Lord Stanley of Lathum, Strange of Knocking,
and of Man, Son of Thomas aforesaid, was the 3. Earl of Derby of that Family,
who had three wives: the first was Dorothea, daughter of Thomas Howard, the
second D. of Norfolk, by whom he had issue, three sons and four daughters;
Henry, who after his Father was the fourth Earl of Derby; Sir Edward Stanley
of Einsham in Oxfordshire knight; and Sir Thomas Stanley knight; who married
Margaret, daughter and one of the heirs of George Vernon of Derbyshire,
knight: Anne the eldest daughter, was first married to Charles Lord Sturton,
and after to Sir John Arundell of Cornwall, knight; Elizabeth was wife to Henry
Parker Lord Morley; Jane married to Edward Lord Dudley; and Mary the fourth
daughter, was wife to Edward Lord Stafford. This Edward had to his second wife,
Margaret, daughter of Ellis Barlow of Lancashire, by whom he had issue, George
that dyed young; Katherine, wife to Sir Thomas Kniuet, knight; Margaret,
married to John Iermyn of Rushbrooke in Suffolk. Lastly, the said Edward
married to his third wife, Mary, daughter of George Cotton, but by her had no
issue. He dyed at Lathum, the 24. of October, in the 14. year of the most
happy Queen Elizabeth, and was buried at Burscogh, two miles from Lathum.

Et portoit, les armoiries de son pere. HEnry Lord Stanley of Lathum, Strange
of Knocking, and of Man, son and heir of Edward, was the fourth Earl of
Derby of that sur-name, and knight of the Garter. He married Margaret, daughter
of Henry Clifford Earl of Cumberland, and Elianor his wife, daughter and one
of the co-heires of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, by Mary Q. of France, his
wife; and had issue, Edward that dyed young, FErdinando and William, both
Earls of Derby one after the other. He dyed in the year, 1593 and was buried
at

Et portoit, d'argent a la band d'azur chargee de trois testes de cerf d'or.
FErdinando Lord Stanley, Strange, and of the Isle of Man, Son and Heir of
Henry Earl of Derby, was after his Father, the fifth Earl of Derby, Lord
Strange, and of the Isle of Man; and married Alice, daughter of Sir John
Spencer of Northamptonshire, knight; and had issue, three daughters his heirs
general, Anne married to Gray Bruges Lord Shandos, Frances the second daughter
was married to Sir John Egerton knight, and after Earl of Bridgwater, and
Elizabeth the third daughter, was married to Henry Lord Hastings Earl of
Huntingdon. He dyed in the year of our Lord, 1594 and was buried at

Et portoit, d'es arms de son pere. WIlliam Lord Stanley, Strange, and of the
Isle of Man, second son of Henry Earl of Derby, and Brother and heir Male
of Ferdinando, was the sixth Earl of Derby, and Knight of the Noble Order of
the Garter. He married Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Edward Vere, late Earl of
Oxford, by Anne Cicell his wife, daughter of William Lord Burleigh and Lord
Treasurer of England; and has issue, James Lord Strange, Robert second son,
and Anne married to Sir Henry Portman of Orchard in Somersetshire, Baronet,
1618.

Et Portoit, les arms de son pere. A CATALOGVE OF THE Marquesses and Earls of
Dorfet, their Arms, Wives, and Children.
OSmond Earl of Seez in Normandy, was by William Conqueror made Bishop of
Salisbury, and after, the first Earl of Dorset, (as M. Camden has in his
Britannia, page 217^) But Milles, in Somerset Glouers Book of the successions
of Earls, page 392. has, that the said Osmond was Earl of Somerset; and
therefore to which I shall give credit, I leave to the indifferent Reader.

John, Brother of king Richard the first, was Earl of Morton, Lancaster, and
Cornwall, and Lord of the Manor of Wallingford, Marlesburgh, and Tikell; and
in the right of Haw is his wife, (daughter, and one of the heirs of William
Earl of Gloucester) Earl of Gloucester; and after, by the gift of king Richard
the first, Earl of Somerset and Dorset; and lastly, King of England, by the
name of King John.

Et portoit, D'engleterre a la band d'azur. John sur-named Beaufort, son of
John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, by the Lady Katherine Swynford, his third
wife, was created Earl of Somerset, at a Parliament held the 20. year of king
Richard the second: and in the 21. year of the said kings reign, he was
created Marquess Dorset, and Lord Chamberlain of England, and in the first
year of King Henry the fourth, he was by Parliament deposed from the title of
Marquess Dorset, and remained only Earl of Somerset. This John, with the
rest of the Children which John of Gaunt had, before marriage of the said Lady
Swynford, were made legitimate, by Parliament held at London, in the year,
1397. He married Margaret, daughter of Thomas Holland Earl of Kent, and Duke
of Surrey, (and one of the sisters and heirs of Thomas Holland, Earl of Kent
and Lord Wake) by whom he had issue, John Duke of Somerset, and Edmond, both
Dukes of Somerset, and Thomas a third son: he had also two daughters, Jane,
married to James the first, king of Scots; and Margaret, which was married to
Thomas Courtney Earl of Devonshire. This John, dyed in the 13. year of king
Henry the fourth.

Et portoit, escartelle France seem and D'engleterre a la bordure gobonne
d'argent and d'azur. THomas Beaufort, third son of John of Gaunt, by the Lady
Katherine Swynford, was Earl of Perch, and after created Earl of Dorset, in
the 13. year of king Henry the fourth, 1412. And in the fourth year of king
Henry the fifth, he was created Duke of Exeter, and had the leading of the
Rereward, at the battle of Egincourt, and after dyed without issue, at his
house at Greenwich, in the fifth year of king Henry the sixth, being Governor of
the kings person. He was buried at S. Edmonds-burie in Suffolk.

Et portoit, escartelle France seem and D'engleterre a la bordure gobonne d'ar.
gent and de azur. EDmond Beaufort, second son of Beaufort Earl of Somerset,
and grandchild to John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, was Earl of Moriton in
Normandy, Lord of Chirke and Chirk-land in Wales, by the gift of king Henry the
fifth; and after was created Earl of Dorset, in the 21. of king Henry the sixth,
1442. And in the 23. of the said kings reign, he was created Marquess Dorset:
and lastly, in the 25. of king Henry the sixth, he was created Duke of Somerset.
He was Regent of France, and coming into England, was slain at the first
battle of S. Albons, on the part of king Henry the sixth, against Richard Duke
of York, and was buried in the Abbey at S. Albons. He married Elianor, second
daughter and one of the heirs of Richard Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, by whom
he had issue, Henry Duke of Somerset, and Edmond Duke of Somerset, and John,
slain at the battle of Tewkesbury; and five daughters, Margaret, wife to
Humfrey Earl Stafford; Elizabeth, wife to Sir Henry Fitz-Lewis; Anne, wife to
Sir William Paston knight; Jane, first married to the Lord Hoth of Ireland, and
after to Sir Rich. Fry knight; Elianor, first married to James Butler Earl of
Wiltshire, and after to Sir Robert Spencer, knight.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. HEnry Beaufort, son of Edmond aforesaid,
was Duke of Somerset, Marquess Dorset, and Earl of Moritaine, Lord of Chirke
and Chirkland in the Marchesse of Wales. He left king Henry the sixth, and took
part with Edward of York, who had then obtained the Crown. But afterward he
revolted again to king Henry, and fought the battle of Exham, where he was
taken prisoner, and by Parliament, held the fourth of king Edward the fourth,
was attainted and lost his head; leaving no lawful issue of his body; after
whose death, his brother Edmond took upon him the Title of Duke, Marquess,
and Earl; but he taking part with the Faction of Lancaster, against the house
of York, was also taken prisoner at the battle of Tewkesbury, in the year,
1471. by king Edward the fourth, and two days after was beheaded, leaving no
issue of his body begotten. This Henry Beaufort,
by his Concubine Ioane Hill, had a son named Charles Somerset, whom king
Henry the eight in the 5 year of his reign, created Earl of Worcester and
Lord Herbert of Gower, of whom, Edward now Earl of Worcester, 1618. is
descended.

Et portoit, escartelle France and D'engleterre a la bordure gobonne d'argent
and d'azur. THomas Gray, Knight of the honorable Order of the Garter, (and
half Brother by the Mother to king Edward the fifth) was in the fifteenth year
of king Edward the fourth, created Lord Harington and Bonuile, and in the same
year he was also created Marquess Dorset. He married Cicely, daughter and
heir of William Bonuile Lord Harington, and had issue, seven sons and eight
daughters, viz. Edward and Anthony dyed young; Thomas the third son was
Marquess Dorset after his Father; Richard, John, and Leonard dyed also young
without issue; George the seventh son was a Clarke: Dorothy the eldest
daughter, was first married to Robert Willoughby Lord Brook, and after to
William Blount Lord Mountioy; Cecily married to John Sutton Baron of Dudley;
Elianor wife to John Arundell of Lanheron in Cornwall, Esquire; Elizabeth was
married to Gerald Fitzgerald, Earl of Kildare in Ireland; Mary was married to
Walter Deuereux, Lord Ferrars of Chertley and Viscount Hereford; Margaret
married to Richard Wake of Blisworth, Esquire; Bridget dyed young, and Anne was
a Nun. This Thomas, dyed in the tenth year of king Henry the seventh, Anno,
1494.

Et portoit, burelle de six d'argent and d'azur, trois torteaux en le chef a
vne lambell de hermines. THomas Gray, Marquess Dorset, Lord Harington and
Bonuile, (son and heir of Thomas Gray, Marquess Dorset, and Cicely Bonuile)
married Margaret, the widow of William Medley, and daughter of Sir Robert
Wotton of Bocton in Kent, knight, and had issue, Henry Gray Duke of Suffolk,
and Lord John Gray, who married Mary, sister of Sir Anthony Brown, Viscount
Mountague, and had issue, Sir Henry Gray of Pergo, after made Baron of Groby,
by king James, 1603. Edward Gray the third son, and Thomas the fourth son:
he had three daughters also, which were thus married. Elizabeth was married to
Thomas Lord Audley of Walden, and Chancellor of England; Katherine was wife
to Henry Fitz-Alan, Earl of Arundell; and Anne the third daughter was married
to Henry Willoughby of Wollerton in Nottinghamshire Esquire. This Thomas
Marquess Dorset, dyed in the 22. year of king Henry the eight, Anno, 1530.

Et portoit, burelle de six d'argent and d'azur trois torteaux en le chef a un
lambell de hermines. HEnry Gray, the third Marquess Dorset, Baron of Groby,
Bonuile, Harington, and Astley, (son of the second Thomas Marquess Dorset,
and Margaret Wotton) married Lady Frances, eldest daughter, and one of the
heirs of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, and Mary Queen of France, his
wife, by whom he had issue, Henry Lord Harington that dyed without issue; Jane
married to the Lord Gilford Dudley, who were both beheaded; and Katherine the
second daughter, said to be married to Edward Seymour Earl of Hertford; Mary
the third daughter married Martyne Keys Serieant Porter. This Henry was by king
Edward the sixth created Duke of Suffolk, 1551. and after was beheaded for
treason, at the Tower Hill near London, the first of Queen Mary, 1553.

Et portoit, les armoiries, de son pere. THomas Sackuile, (son and heir of
Richard Sackuile of Buckherst, knight, Chancellor of the Exchequer) who in his
youth was a Scholar in the University of Oxford; and there profited so well,
that he became an excellent Poet, leaving many of his labors both in Latin
and English to the world; After he became a Student in the Temple, where he
proceeded Barrester; from thence he was called by the Queen and State, and
created Baron of Buckherst, the ninth of Queen Elizabeth; and after, the 13.
of March, 1603. by King James was created Earl of Dorset in the Tower of
London. He was also Lord high Treasurer of England, Knight of the Garter, and
Chancellor of the University of Oxford; and married Cecily, daughter of Sir
John Baker knight, of the privy Counsel to Queen Mary, by whom he had issue,
Robert Lord Buckhurst, after Earl of Dorset; Henry the second son: Sir
William Sackuile knight, third son; and Thomas, fourth Son; and three
daughters, Anne married to Sir Henry Glemham of Suffolk knight; Ioane married
to Anthony Brown, Viscount Montague; Mary married to Sir Henry Neuill knight,
son and heir of Edward Baron of Abergauenny. This Thomas dyed suddenly of a
dead Palsy, sitting in Counsel at White Hall, in the year, 1608.

Et portoit, escartelle d'or and de gueulles au baston de vaire. RObert
Sackuile, son and heir of Thomas, was after his Father, Earl of Dorset, and
married Lady Margaret, only daughter of Thomas late Duke of Norfolk, by whom
he had issue, Richard Sackuile the third Earl of Dorset of that Family; and
Edward Sackuile, knight of the Bath at the creation of Prince Charles: he had
issue also, two daughters, Cecily married to Sir Henry Compton, knight of the
Bath; and Anne married to Edward Seymour, son and heir of Edward Seymour,
and grandchild to Edward Earl of Hartford. This Robert, founded at East
Griensted in Sussex, a College for thirty and one poor people, and gave to
their maintenance, 330. pounds yearly to the worlds end; and dyed in the same
year his Father dyed, at Dorset house in Fleetstreete, and was buried by his
Father in Sussex, 1608.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. RIchard Sackuile, Baron of Buckhurst, and
the third Earl of Dorset, and son and heir of Robert Sackuile, the second
Earl of Dorset of that Family, married the Lady Anne Clifford, daughter and
sole heir of George Clifford Earl of Cumberland, by whom he has issue now
living, Lady Margaret Sackuile.

Et portoit, escartelle d'or and de gueulles au baston de vair. A CATALOGVE OF
THE Earls of Essex, their Arms, Wives, and Children.
GEffrey Magna-uilla, son of William, and Grandchilde to Geffrey Magna-uilla,
which came into England with William the Conqueror, was created Earl of Essex,
by King Stephen; unto whose Lettes Patents or Charter, were Witnesses, William
de Ipres, Henry de Essex, John, Son of Robert Fitz-Walter, Robert de
Newborough, and others. After, Mauld the Empress winning him to her Faction,
gave him the Tower of London, the Town of Walden in Essex, with the
Shriffealty of Middlesex, Essex, and Hertfordshire, to hold them as Geffrey his
Grandfather held them; as also all the lands which Eudo (his grandfather by
the Mother) the Sewer to king Henry the first, held in Normandy. He married
Rohesia, daughter of Alberick de Vere, Chiefe-Iustice of England, and had issue
Arnold, banished by king Stephen, Geffrey and William; and was after slain
with the shot of an Arrow, out of the Castle of Burwell, in the 9. year of
King Stephen, 1143. Rose his wife, was after married to Pain Beauchamp, Baron
of Bedford.

Et portoit, escartelle d'or and de gueulles. GEffrey Magnauile, or Mandeuill,
second son of Geffrey aforesaid, after the banishment of Arnold his elder
brother, without issue, and the disinheriting of his Father by K. Stephen, was
restored by king Henry the second, to the Earldom of Essex, with the third
penny of the pleas within that County. In which his Charter, he had confirmed
unto him all honors, privileges, and lands held by Geffrey his great
grandfather, William his grandfather, and Geffrey his Father; as well in
England as in Normandy, commanding, that he and his heirs should have and hold
the said County of Essex, as freely and lawfully, as any Earl in England or
Normandy held his Earldom: Unto which his Charter were Witnesses, Reginald
Earl of Cornwall, Robert Earl of Leicester, Roger Earl of Clare, and others.
He married Eustachia, kineswoman to king Henry the second, but had no issue by
her. He dyed in the year of our Lord, 1165.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. WIlliam Mandeuill, brother of Geffrey
aforesaid, was the third Earl of Essex, (unto whom king Henry the second gave
license by his Charter, to fortefie his Castle of Plessy in Essex.) He married
Auice, daughter and heir of of William le Gross Earl of Albemarle, in whose
right he was also Earl of Albemarle, and Lord of Holdernesse in Yorkshire: and
to his second wife, he married Christian, daughter of Robert Fitz-Walter, Lord
of Woodham Water in Essex, and after dyed at Roane without issue, in the second
year of King Richard the first; leaving Beatrix de Say, his Aunts grandchilde,
his heir, who was married to Geffrey Fitz-Piers of Ludgarshall, the fourth
Earl of Essex.

Et portoit, elcartelle d'or and de gueulles. GEffrey Fitz-Piers of
Ludgarshall-Castle in Wilishire, Chiefe-Iustice of England, married to his
first wife, Beatrix, eldest daughter of William Say, son and heir of Will.
Say, and Beatrix his wife, sister of Geffrey Mandeuile Earl of Essex) In whose
right, the said Geffrey Fitz-Piers (at the Coronation of K. John) was made
earl of Essex (the family of Mandeuils being then spent.) He had issue, 3.
sons and one daughter, viz. Geffrey sur-named Mandeuile, Earl of Essex;
William his brother also Earl of Essex; and Henry that was Deacon of
Wolfren-Hampton; Mauld the daughter, was married to Henry de Bohun Earl of
Hereford: after, this Geffrey married to his second wife, one Auelyne, and by
her had issue, John Fitz-Pters Lord of Berkhamsted, and Chiefe-Iustice of
Ireland, who had to wife, Isabell, daughter and heir of Ralphe Bigot, and
widow of Gilbert Lacie. This Geffrey, dyed in the 14. year of King John, 1212.

Et portoit, gueulles a trois Cheurons componnee d'argent and d'azur. GEffrey
Fitz-Piers, surnamed Mandeuile, eldest son of Geffrey de Ludgarshal, was after
his Father, Earl of Essex, and Lord of Plessy. He married Isabell, third
daughter and heir of William Earl of Gloucester, the repudiat wife of K. John;
for which he was fined to pay the king twenty thousand Marks, and so to have
all the Lands and Fees belonging to her, except the Castle of Bristoll, and the
Chases belonging to the same. He was slain at a Tournament, held near London,
without issue, 1216. and was buried in the Priory of the Trinity in London;
after whose death, the said Isabell took to husband, Hugh de Burgo,
Chiefe-Iustice of England.

Et portoit, escartelle d'or and de gueulles a le escarboucle pomette and
fleurette de sable brochant sur le tout. WIlliam Fitz-Piers, second brother of
Geffrey aforesaid, was after his brothers death the next Earl of Essex, and
took part with Lewis the French kings son, against king Henry the third. He
intayled all his Lands with the Earldom of Essex, upon Mauld his sister and
heir, married to Henry de Bohun, Earl of Hereford, and Lord high Constable of
England. He dyed without issue, in the three and twenty year of king Henry the
third.

Et portoit, les arms de son friar, viz. Escartellee d'or and de gueulles a
l'escarboucle pommette and fleutette d'or brochant fur le tout. HVmfrey de
Bohun, the fifth of that name, son and heir of Henry de Bohun and Mauld his
wife, sister and heir of Geffrey and William Fitz-Piers aforesaid, was Earl
of Hereford and Essex, and Constable of England; and married Mauld, daughter
and heir of Ralphe de Issodon, Earl of Angi in Normandy, and brother of Hugh
le Brun, Earl of the Marches of Aquitaine, as more at large does appear in
the Title of Earls of Hereford.

Et portoit, d'azur a la band d'argent a deux cottizes enter six lions rampant
d'or. HVmfrey de Bohun, the seventh of that name, was after the death of
Humfrey his grandfather, Earl of Hereford, Essex, and Constable of England,
and Lord of Brecknock. He married Mauld, daughter of Ingelram de Fines, and had
issue, Humfrey the eight, and dyed at Plessy in Essex, the 27. of king Edward
the first, 1298.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. HVmfrey de Bohun, the eight of that name,
(son of Humfrey the sixth, which dyed before his Father) was Earl of
Hereford, Essex, and Constable of England. He married Elizabeth, daughter of
king Edward the first, being the widow of John Earl of Holland, and had
issue, John, Humfrey, and William, all three Earls, and Edward and William,
twins, as in the Title of Earls of Hereford. This Humfrey was slain at
Borough-bridge, the 15. of king Edward the second, 1322.

John de Bohun, (son and heir of Humfrey de Bohun the eight) after the death
of his Father, was Earl of Hereford and Essex, etc. He married two wives, as
in the Title of Earls of Hereford, but had no issue. He dyed in the 9. year
of king Edward the third, 1336. and was buried in the Abbey of Stratford near
London.

Et portoit, d'azur a la band d'argent, a deux cottices enter six lions rampan
d'or. HVmfrey de Bohun, the ninth of that name, son of Humfrey the eight, and
brother and heir of John aforesaid, was also Earl of Hereford and Essex,
etc. He ouer-liued his younger brother William, Earl of Northampton, one
year, one month, and five days; and dyed at Plessy in Essex, the 36. of king
Edwird the third, 1361. and is buried in the Augustine-Fryars in London.

Les arms de son friar Ieane. HVmfrey de Bohun, the tenth of that christen
name, son and heir of William de Bohun Earl of Northampton, and Nephew and
heir of John de Bohun the eight, and Humfrey the ninth, his Uncles, was after
their deaths, Earl of Hereford, Essex, and Northampton, and Constable of
England. He married Jane, daughter of Richard Fitz-Alan Earl of Arundell, and
had issue, two daughters his heirs; Elianor the eldest was married unto Thomas
of Woodstocke Duke of Gloucester, with the Earldom of Essex, and Constableship
of England; and Mary the second daughter was married to Henry Plantagenet Earl
of Derby (after king Henry the fourth) with the Earledomes of Hereford and
Northampton, and the Lordship of Brecknock, and the Patronage of Lanthony. This
Humfrey dyed, and was buried at Walden, the 46. year of king Edward the third,
1371.

Et portoit, d'azur a la band d'argent a deuz cottizes enter 6. lions rampant
d'or. HEnry Bourchier (son of William Bourchier, created Earl of Ewe in
Normandy, the fifth of king Henry the fifth, and of Anne his wife, daughter and
heir of Thomas of Woodstocke, Duke of Gloucester, and of Elianor his wife,
eldest daughter and co-heyre of Humfrey de Bohun, the last Earl of Hereford
and Essex of that name) in his Charter, bearing date the eleventh of king Henry
the sixth, writ himself Earl of Ewe and Lord Bourchier; and in the 25 year of
the said Kings Reign, by another Charter he writ himself Earl of Ewe, and
Viscount Bourchier: lastly, in the 27. year of king Henry the sixth, Richard
Duke of York did confirm certain lands unto him in marriage with Isabell his
sister, by the name of Henry Viscount Bourchier; giving her also an anuity of a
hundred pounds per annum. So that it seems, that when Charles the French King
had recovered Normandy, all Titles of honor of Englishmen ceasled, (for of
right, no man can carry a title of dignity of another man's land or
inheritance.) In the 35. year of the said K. Henry the 6. this Henry was
created Viscount Bourchier. And lastly, in the first year of K. Edward the 4.
he was created Earl of Essex, in right of Elianor de Bohun his grandmother,
wife of the foresaid Thomas of Woodstocke. This Henry Bourchier married
Isabell, daughter of Richard Earl of Cambridge, and sister of Richard D. of
York, and had issue, William Bourchier, who married Anne, daughter and one of
the heirs of Rich. Wooduile Earl Rivers, and dyed before his father; Henry
Bourchier 2. Son married Elizabeth, daughter and heir of Thomas L. Scales;
Humfrey Bourchier 3. Son married Ioane, cousin and heir of Ralph L. Cromwell
of Tatershall in Lincolnshire; Thomas Bourchier 4. Son, married Isabell,
daughter and heir of Sir John Barry knight; John Bourchier 5. Son, married
Elizabeth, daughter and heir of Henry L. Ferrars of Groby; Edward 6. Son, was
slain at Wakefield; and Fouke the 7. son died young. This Hen. Earl of Essex,
died in the 23. of K. Edw. the 4. 1482.

Porter, d'argent a la creix engreflee de gueulles, enter quatre busleuz de
sable. HEnry Bourchier, son and heir of William Bourchier, that dyed before
his Father) and grandchild to Henry Earl of Essex next before mentioned, was
after the death of his said Grandfather, Earl of Essex and Viscount
Bourchier. He married Anne, daughter and heir of Sir William Say knight, and
had issue, one only daughter named Anne, married to William Lord Parre of
Kendall, who in her right was Earl of Essex. This Henry brake his neck with
the fall from his horse, the 31. year of King Henry the eight. 1539.

Et portoit, d'argent a la Croix engreslee de gueulles; enter quatre busseux de
sable. THomas Cromwell (sometimes servant to Cardinal Wolsey) was created
Baron Cromwell of Okeham in Rutlandshire, the 28. of King Henry the eight; and
on the 14. day of April, the 31. of King Henry the eight, he was created Earl
of Essex: at which time the king delivered him a Patent for the Lord
Chamberlainship of England. He writ in his style, Earl of Essex, Vicegerent,
great Chamberlain of England, Keeper of the privy Seal, Chancellor of the
Exchequer, and Justice of the Forests and Chases, from the River of Trent
Northward. He married one of the daughters of one Williams of Wales, and had
issue, Gregory Cromwell, who was created Lord Cromwell, the same time his
Father was created Earl of Essex. This Thomas being in the Counsel Chamber
the 9. of July, in the 31. of Henry the eight, was arrested, and the 19. of the
same Month was attainted by Parliament, never coming to answer; and the 27.
of July after was beheaded at the Tower Hill.

Et portoit, d'azur seu vne fees enter, trois lion ceaux rampant d'or, vne Rose
gueulles, enter deux cornish choughes propre. WIlliam Parre, created Baron of
Kendall, the ninth of March, in the 31. year of king Henry the eight; and in
the 25. year of the said kings Reign, he was created Earl of Essex at
Hampton Court, in regard he had married Anne, the daughter and heir of Henry
Bourchier late Earl of Essex, from whom afterward he was divorced for her
incontinency. He was lastly created Marquess of Northampton, in the first
year of king Edward the sixth, and married to his second wife, Elizabeth,
daughter of George Brook Lord Cobham, and after her decease, he took to his
third wife, Ellen, daughter of George Saueburgh a Swedian borne, (which yet
lives, 1618.) He dyed without issue, and was buried at Warwick, in the year,
1571. leaving Anne his sister and heir married to William Herbert Earl of
Pembrooke.

Et portoit, d'argent a deux faces d'azur, a la bordure engreslee de sable.
WAlter Deuereux, Viscount Hereford, and Lord Ferrars of Chertley, (son of
Richard, son of Walter, son of John Deuereux, and Cecily Bourchier, the
sister of Henry Bourchier Earl of Essex, and cousin and heir of Anne
Bourchier, late wife of William Parre, Marquess of Northampton) was created
Earl of Essex by Queen Elizabeth, in the year, 1571. and after made Marshall
of Ireland. He married Lettice, daughter of Sir Francis Knolles, knight of the
Garter, and Treasurer of the said Queens household, and sister of William Lord
Knolles, Baron of Grais, and Viscount Wallingford; by whom he had issue, Robert
Earl of Essex, Sir Walter Deuereux, slain at the siedge of Lisbon, Penelope,
married to Robert Lord Rich, and Dorothy, first married to Sir Thomas Perrot
knight, and after to Henry Percie Earl of Northumberland. This Walter dyed at
Dublyn in Ireland, 1575. and was buried at Carmarden in Wales, where he was
borne.

Et portoit, d'argent a la face de gueulles trois torteaux en le chef. RObert
Deuereux, son of Walter, was Earl of Essex, and Earl Marshall of England,
Viscount Hereford, Baron Ferrars of Chartley, Lord Bourchier and Louaine,
Master of the Horse and Ordenance to Queen Elizabeth, Knight of the Garter,
one of her Majesty's privy Counsel, and Chancellor of the University of
Cambridge; married Frances, daughter and heir of Sir Francis Walsingham,
principal Secretary to Queen Elizabeth, being the widow of Sir Philip Sydney
knight; by whom he had issue Robert, now Earl of Essex. This Robert was
attainted of high treason, and for the same was beheaded within the Tower of
London, the 25. of February, 1601.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. RObert Deuereux, son and heir of Robert,
after the death of his Father, was by king James restored in blood and living,
and is now, 1618. Earl of Essex, Viscount Hereford, etc.

A CATALOGVE OF THE Dukes, Marquesses and Earls of Excester, their Arms,
Wives, and Children.
John Holland knight, (second Son of Thomas Holland Earl of Kent) was created
Earl of Huntingdon, in the eleventh year of king Richard the second; and in
the 21. of the same Kings reign, he was created Duke of Exeter. And because
Aubrey de Vere Earl of Oxford, who held the Office of Lord Chamberlain of
England, had released his right therein, the said King Richard bestowed that
great Office upon this John, and the heirs male of his body begotten, by
Letters Patents, bearing date the 21. of the said Kings reign. He married
Elizabeth, daughter of John of Gaunt. Duke of Lancaster, and Blanch his wife,
and had issue, Richard that dyed young, John Duke of Excester, and Earl of
Huntingdon, Edward that dyed without issue, and Constance a daughter, first
married to Thomas Mowbrey, son and heir of Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk,
banished by King Richard the second, and after to John Lord Gray of Ruthyn.
This John Holland, in the first year of King Henry the fourth, was deposed by
Parliament from being Duke of Excester; and after in the same year, he was
beheaded at Cicester.

Et portoit, D'engleterre a la bordure de France. THomas Beauford, (son of
John of Gaunt, begotten of the lady Katherine Swyneford, his third wife) was
created Earl of Perch in Normandy, and made Lord Chancellor of England, the
12. of king Henry the fourth; and in the foureteenth year of the said kings
Reign, he was created Earl of Dorset; and lastly, in the fourth year of
king Henry the fifth, he was created Duke of Excester, and made Knight of the
Order of the Garter. He had the leading of the Rereward at the battle of
Edgincourt, and the government of King Henry the sixth, at his Coronation
committed unto him, during his minority. He married Margaret, daughter of Sir
Thomas Neuill of Horneby-Castle, but by her had no issue. He dyed at his house
of East- Greenwich in Kent, and was buried at S. Edmondsbury in Suffolk, the
fifth of Henry the sixth, leaving the King his heir.

Et portoit escartelle, France and D'engleterre, au bordure gobonne d'argent
and d'azur. John Holland (son of John aforesaid) was Earl of Huntington, and
of Iuory in Normandy, Lord of Sparre, Lieutenant general of the Dukedom of
Aquitaine, Admiral of England, and Constable of the Tower of London, whom King
Henry the sixth created Duke of Excester, in the year, 1443 at Windsore. He
married two wives, the first was Anne, daughter of Edmond Earl Stafford, by
whom he had issue, Henry Holland Duke of Excester. And to his second wife, he
married Anne, daughter of John Mountacute Earl of Salisbury, and by her had
issue, a daughter named Anne, first married to John Lord Neuill, son and
heir of Ralphe Neuill the second Earl of Westmerland, by whom she had no
issue. Secondly, she married Sir Thomas Neuill knight, (brother of Ralphe
Neuill the second Earl of Westmerland, and Uncle to John her former husband)
by whom she had issue, Ralphe Neuill the third Earl of Westmerland: the said
Anne, the 4. year of Edw. 4. married to her 3. husband, James Earl Douglas.
This John Holland died in the 26. year of K. Henry the 6 and lies buried by
his two Wives, in S. Katherines Church by the Tower of London.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. HEnry Holland, only son of John Holland
Duke of Excester aforesaid, (by his first wife the Lady Anne Stafford) was
after his Fathers death, Duke of Excester, and Earl of Huntington; who in the
first year of king Edward the 4. was disinherited by Act of Parliament, with
Henry Duke of Somerset, and Thomas Earl of Devonshire; and in the 13. year of
the said kings Reign, he was found dead in the Sea, between Dover and Calice.
He married Anne, daughter of Richard Duke of York, and sister to king Edward
the 4. but by her had no issue. She was after married to Sir Thomas sainto
Leodegario (or S. Leoger) knight, and had issue by him, a daughter named Anne,
married to George Manors Lord Ros of Hamlake. This Henry Holland so found
drowned, was buried at Westminster, on the Southside of the Chapel, with
these Arms on his Toombe and Targe.

Et portoit, les Arms D'engleterre au bordure de France. HEnry Courtney, Earl
of Deuon, Lord of Ochampton, and Knight of the Garter (son of William
Courtney Earl of Devonshire, and Katherine his wife, daughter of King Edward
the fourth) was created Marquis of Excester at Bridewell, the 8. of June, 1525.
in the seventeenth of King Henry the 8. He married two wives, the first was
Elizabeth, daughter and heir of John Gray, Viscount Lisle, who dyed without
issue. His 2. wife was Gertrude, daughter of William Blount, L. Mountioy, (and
heir to Elizabeth her mother, who was daughter and heir of Sir William Say
knight) by whom he had issue, Edward the last Earl of Devonshire, who dyed
without issue. This Henry Marquess of Excester, was attainted of high treason,
for ayding of Reginald Poole Cardinal and a fugitive with money, etc. (as in
the Title of Devonshire) and was beheaded with Henry Poole Lord Mountague, and
Sir Edward Neuill knight, in the thirtieth year of king Henry the eight. His
last wife Gertrude was also attainted of high treason the same year, but not
executed; she dyed afterward, and was buried at Wynborne Mynster in Dorsetshire
in the year, 1557.

Et portoit, escartellee, France and D'engleterre a vne bordure escartellee de
lun en l'autre, escartelle, Courtney qui est d'or trois torteaux; le tiers le
mesme: le quart; Riuerijs, qui est, d'or au lion rampant d'azur. THomas Cecill,
Baron of Burghley, (son and heir of William Cecill, Baron of Burghley, and
Lord high Treasurour of England) was created Earl of Excester at Greenewich,
in the third year of King James. He married Dorothie, daughter and one of the
co-heyres of John Neuill Lord Latymer, and had issue, four sons and six
daughters, viz. William Cecill Lord Burghley, who married Elizabeth, daughter
and heir of Edward Manors Earl of Rutland, and had issue, William Lord Ros,
Sir Richard Cecill Knight, Sir Edward Cecill knight, and Thomas Cecill Esquire,
fourth son. Luce the eldest daughter, was married to William Paulet Marquess
of Wynchester; Mildred the second daughter, was married first to Sir Thomas
Read, knight, and after to Sir Edmond Trafford of Lancashire, knight; Mary the
third daughter, was married to the Lord Denny; Elizabeth the fourth daughter,
first married to Sir William Hatton, alias Newport, knight; and after to Sir
Edward Coke knight, Lord Chiefe-Iustice of the kings Bench, and one of his
Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel; Dorothy the fifth daughter was married
to Sir Gyles Allington of Hounslow-Heath knight; and Francis the sixth daughter
was married to Sir Richard Tufton, knight.

Et portoit, burelle de six pieces d'argent and d'azur, sur le tout six
escussons de sable, charge de six lions d'argent. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls of
Ewe, or Augy in Normandy, their Arms, Wives, and Children.
William Earl of Ewe and Mutterell, came into England with William Conqueror,
who gave him the Manors of Tudenham, Woleston, and Aluerdeston, with all other
such lands as he could get or conquer from the Welsh. He was after banished
England for rebellion, and his lands given away to Walter Fitz-Richard, son
of Constance, sister of this William Earl of Ewe. The said Walter
Fitz-Richard, conquered Nether-Gwent, and half the Country of Lege. He founded
the Abbey of Tynterne, and dyed without issue, in the third year of King
Stephen; leaving his inheritance to Gilbert, sur-named Strongbow, Earl of
Pembrooke, his Nephew, and was after buried at Tynterne.

John Earl of Augie (son of John) married Alice, daughter of William
Daubigney Earl of Chichester, by Alice his wife, late widow of king Henry the
first, and had issue, Henry Earl of Augie, John de Augie, Matilda and
Margaret, and after dyed in the year of our Lord, 1171. the 18. of Henry the
second.

HEnry Earl of Augie son of John) gave to the Monks of Bermondsey in
Southwarke, his lands called Oswareston, near Romenelin in the Parish of Lida,
and the lands of John the Clarke in Belsinton, and married and had issue, Alice
his only daughter and heir, married to Ralphe de Isodon, 1241. 26. Henry the
3.

RAlphe de Isondon (son of Geffrey de Luzigna, Earl of the Marchesse of
Aquitaine in France, and brother of Hugh le Brun) married Alice, daughter and
heir of Henry Earl of Angy in Normandy, and in her right was Earl of Angie,
after the death of Henry her Father aforesaid. This Ralphe, in the first year
of king John, was one of the Noblemen that swore the league between the said
king, and the Earl of Flanders. He had issue, one only daughter his heir,
named Mauld, married to Humfrey de Bohun, Earl of Hereford and Essex, and
Constable of England.

Et portoit, bar d'argent and d'azur au lambell de gueulles de cinq pieces.
WIlliam Bourchier, created Earl of Ewe, at Maunt in Normandy, the fifth of king
Henry the fifth; and married Anne, daughter of Thomas of Woodstocke, Duke of
Gloucester, and sister and one of the heirs of Humfrey her brother, and had
issue, Henry Bourchier, Earl of Ewe and Essex; William Lord Fitz-Warrin; John
Lord Bernes, and Thomas Arch Bishop of Canterbury, and Cardinal of S. Cirac in
Rome; and Anne his daughter, was married to John Mowbray Duke of Norfolk. This
William, dyed in the eight year of King Henry the fifth, at Troys in Champaine;
and his body being brought over Sea into England, was buried at Eyston, in Kent.

Et portoit, d'argent au croix engreslee de gueulles, enter quatre buffeux de
fable. HEnry Bourchier, son and heir of William aforesaid, was after the
death of his Father, Earl of Ewe in Normandy, until the 28. year of king
Henry the sixth, that Charles the French king had recovered that earldom to
the crown of France. Afterward he sat in Parliament, by the name and title of
Lord Bourchier, until the 35. year of the said Kings Reign, that he was
created Viscount Bourchier, king Edward the fourth in the first year of his
reign, created him Earl of Essex: and in the 13. of king Edward the fourth,
he was Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, as in the title of Essex is
more at large.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. A CATALOGVE OF THE Dukes and Earls of
Gloucester and Hartford, their Arms, Wives, and Children.
RObert, sur-named the Consul of Gloucester, base son of King Henry the
first, (begotten of Nest, the daughter of Rhice ap Tewder, Prince of South-
Wales, who was after married to Girald de Wyndesore, Constable of
Penbroke-Castle, and auncestour of the Earls of Kildare in Ireland) in the 11.
year of his Fathers Reign, was created Earl of Gloucester. He assisted and
took part with Mauld the Empress, his half sister, against K. Stephen the
Usurper; which Stephen being taken prisoner, and imprisoned in the Castle of
Bristoll: This Robert, very shortly after, was likewise taken by King Stephens
forces; whereupon it was concluded, that a King for an Earl, and an Earl for
a King, should make an exchange, and either set the other at liberty. He
married Mabell, daughter and one of the four heirs of Robert Fitz-Hamon, Lord
of Corboil in Normandy, Cardiffe in Wales, and Tewksbury in England, and had
issue, William Earl of Gloucester, Roger Bishop of Wynchester, Richard Bishop
of Bayon in Normandy, and Hamon slain at Tholouze, with William King Stephens
son, 1160. He had also two daughters, one named Mabell, married to Aubre de
Vere; the second was Matilda, married to Randolphe Gernonijs, Earl of Chester.
This Robert, builded the Castles of Bristoll and Caerdiffe in Wales, and the
Monastery of S. James by Bristoll, and dyed in the 12. year of King Stephen,
and was buried in the said Monastery, 1146.

Et portoit, de gueulles au trois Restes des Arms d'or. WIlliam, son and
heir of Robert Consul, was after his Father, Earl of Gloucester, and Lord of
Glamorgan, in right of his grandfather Robert Fitz-Hamon, who won the said
Lordship, from Iustine ap Gurgan, Lord of Glamorgan, in King William Ruphus
time; and made his abode in the said Castle of Caerdiffe, where the said
Robert kept his Courts Monthly, and used therein Iura Regalia, having his
twelve Knights to attend him the first day, they having senerall Lodgings given
to them, and their heirs for ever within the said Castle. He married Hawis,
daughter of Robert Bossu Earl of Leicester, and had issue, Robert that dyed
before his Father, 1166. and three daughters; Mabell the eldest, was married
unto Almericke Mountfort, Earl of Eureux in Normandy; Amicia was married to
Richard, Earl of Clare and Hartford; and Isabell the third daughter of this
William, was first married to King John, and from him was divorced for
neerenesse of kin; and after she was married to Geffrey Mandeuill Earl of
Essex; and for her third husband, she took Hugh de Burgo, Earl of Kent, and
Lord Chiefe-Iustice of England. This William, built the Abbey of Keinsham, and
dyed in the year of our Lord, 1183. and was buried in the said Monastery. M.
Glouer Somerset Herald, has, that King Henry the second, after the death of
this William without issue Male, gave the Title and Earldom of Gloucester, to
John his son, who married Isabell, the third daughter of the said William; and
gave to Mabell the eldest daughter, married to Almericke Mountfort, one hundred
pounds; and to Amicia the second daughter, wife to the Earl of Clare, another
hundredpounds.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. John (sur-named Without Land) the fourth
son of King Henry the second, in right, or by reason of his wife Isabell,
third daughter and co-heyre of William Earl of Gloucester, was made Earl of
Gloucester by the said King his Father, in the year, 1187. Afterward, King
Richard the first, his brother, in his love and bounty gave him the Earledomes
of Cornwall, Deuon, Nottingham, and Lancaster; after whose death, he came to
be King, by the name of King John. And because Isabell his wife was counted
barren, a divorce was procured from the Pope, and he married again to Isabell,
daughter of the Earl of Angolesme, by whom he had issue, King Henry the third.

Et portoit, les arms d'engleterre au baston d'azur brochant sur le tout.
ALmerick Mountfort, Earl of Eureux in Normandy, after the divorce of King
John, from his wife Isabell, youngest daughter and co-heire of Will: Earl of
Gloucester, was the next Earl of Gloucester, in right of his mother Mabell,
eldest daughter and heir of the foresaid William Earl of Gloucester, in the
second year of king John. He married Millescent, daughter of Hugh Gurney and of
Julian his wife, sister to Reginald Earl Bullen, and had with her in marriage,
the Manor of Hanston, but by her had no issue. She was after married to
William Cantelupe, and had issue, Thomas Bishop of Hereford, and Julian married
to Robert Tregoz, Lord of Ewias Herald. This Almerick dyed, and was buried in
the Monastery of Kenisham.

Et portoit, de gueulles party and endente d'argent de six pieces. GEffrey de
Mandeuile, Earl of Essex, son of Geffrey Fitz-Piers of Ludgarshal, married
Isabel, the third daughter and co-heire of William Earl of Gloucester, (the
repudiat wife of K. John) and was after the death of Almerick Mountfort without
issue, made Earl of Gloucester, and by that name and title was a Witness to
king John's Charter of lands and liberties, that he gave to the Church of
Dyrham. This Geffrey died without issue, in the year, 1216. the last year of
king John, of a wound given him at a Tournament held at London, leaving
William Mandeuile his brother to succeed him in the Earldom of Essex, and
Gilbert de Clare in the Earldom of Gloucester.

Et portoit, escartelle d'or and de gueulles a le escarboucle pomette and
fleurette de sable brochant sur le tout. GIlbert de Clare (son and heir of
Richard earl of Clare and Hartford, by Amicia second daughter and co-heyre of
William Earl of Gloucester) was after the death of Geffrey Ma^deuill, made
Earl of Gloucester; and in the 9. year of K. Hen. the 3. he was a Witness to
the said kings Charter, of lands that he gave to the Abbey of Peterborough, by
the name of Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Gloucester and Hertford. He married
Isabell, the 3. daughter of William Marshall the elder, and sister and co-heire
of Anselm Marshall Earl of Penbroke, and Marshal of England, by whom he had
issue, Richard Earl of Clare, Gloucester, and Hertford; Gilbert and William
twins; and three daughters, Isabell the eldest, was wife to Kobert Brus, of
Annanderdale in Scotland; Amie the second daughter, was married to Baldwyn
Rivers Earl of Deuon, and Lord of the Isle of Wight; Anne third daughter dyed
young. He dyed at Penros in Britatne, and was buried in the Priory of
Tewkesbury, the fourteenth of king Henry the third: his widow was after
married to Richard Earl of Cornwall, and King of Romans.

Et portoit, d'or a trois Cheurons de guen^les. RIchard de Clare, second Earl
of Gloucester of that name, married two wives, the first was Margaret, daughter
of Hubert de Burgo, Earl of Kent, and Chiefe-Iustice of England, by whom he
had no issue. His second wife was Matilda, daughter of John Lacie Earl of
Lancolne, and Constable of Chester, by whom he had issue, three sons, and
three daughters; Gilbert the eldest son, was after his Father Earl of
Gloucester; Thomas the second son, was Steward of the Forests in Essex, (who
married Julian, daughter of Maurice Fitz-Maurice of Ireland, and had issue,
Gilbert, Richard, and Thomas) Beuis the third son, was a Churchman in York
Mynster; Margaret the eldest daughter, married Edmond Earl of Cornwall, son
of Richard Earl of Cornwall, and king of Romans; Rose the second daughter of
Richard de Clare Earl of Gloucester, married Roger Lord Mowbray of Axholme; and
Isabell the third daughter, was a Nun at Barking in Essex. Grafton and Fabian
says, that this Richard died in the year, 1260. and that Gilbert his son
succeeded him, to whom the Father gave great charge, to maintain the Statutes
made as Oxford. But M. Milles has in M. Somersets Book of Earls, p. 370. that
(the Annals of S. Augustines in Canterbury has) he died in the year, 1262. at
Emeresfield in Kent, at the Lord John Crioils house; and that his bowels were
buried at Canterbury, in Christ-Church; his heart at Tunbridge, and his body at
Tewkesbury. Diverse other good authors affirm, that this Richard Earl of
Gloucester dyed in France.

GIlbert de Clare (sur-named the Rea) son and heir of Richard aforesaid, was
the third Earl of Gloucester and Hereford of that sur-name, and married two
wives; the first was Alice, the widow of John Earl Warren and Surrey,
daughter of Hughle Brun, Earl of Angolesme, and of the Marches of Aquitaine,
by whom he had issue, a daughter named Isabell, married to Maurice Lord
Berkley. This Alice falling mad, was divorced from this Gilbert her husband;
after which divorce, the second of May, 1290. at Westminster, the said Gilbert
married Ioane, daughter of king Edward the first (sur named Ioane of Acres,
because she was borne at Acres in the Holy Land;) by whom he had issue,
Gilbert the fourth Earl of Gloucester and Hertford; and three daughters,
Elianor the eldest, was married to Hugh Lord Spencer; Elizabeth the second
daughter, was first married to John Burgh Earl of Vlster; secondly, she was
married to Theobald Lord Verdon; and thirdly, to Sir Roger Damory, Baron of
Armoye in Ireland. Isabell the third daughter, was first married to Pierce of
Gaueston, Earl of Cornwall, by whom she had no issue; and after, to Hugh Lord
Audley the younger. This Gilbert, before the marriage with his last wife Ioane,
had lost the favor of king Edward the first, for refusing to go with him over
Seas, to the aid of Guy, Earl of Flanders, against the then French King: for
which cause, king Edward seized all the said Gilberts Lands, and forced him
after to marry his daughter without dower, lands, or money: which done, the
said King granted back again all the Lands, confirming them to the said
Gilbert, and Ioane his wife, and the issue begotten of their two bodies, in
Fee-Farme. This Gilbert, dyed in the Castle of Mounmoth, in the 24. year of
king Edward the first, and was buried in Tewkesbury Priory, by his Father, 1295.

Et portoit, d'or, a trois cheurons de gueulles. RAlphe de Mounte-hermer,
(servant to Gilbert de Clare and Ioane of Acres) after the death of Earl
Gtlbert, married the said Ioane his Mistress, in the year, 1296. Which marriage
being done without the knowledge and consent of king Edward her Father, this
Ralphe was committed to prison, in the Castle of Bristoll; and all those Lands
and Castles as he had formerly made over to the said Ioane and her former
husband Gilbert, he caused to be seized again into his hands. But shortly
after, by the intercession of Anthony Bec, Bishop of Duresme, a peace was made
between the K. and his daughter, and her new husband; and the year following,
1297. at a Parliament held at London, her former lands were restored to her
again, with others: and in the 27. year of the said kings Reign, the same
Ralphe was summoned to Parliament, by the name and title of Earl of Gloucester
and Hertford, and by that name and title of honor, he sat in all Parliaments
after, until the first year of king Edward the second, 1307. In which year,
young Gilbert de Clare being of age, was admitted to his lands and honors, and
sat in Parliament always after, as Earl of Gloucester and Hereford, during
his life. And the said Ralphe Mount-hermer (his Father in law) was ever after
summoned, and sat in all Parliaments, as Lord Mount-hermer. This Ralphe had
issue by his Countess Ioane, two sons, Edward Mount hermer that dyed without
issue, and was buried in the Augustine-Fryars at Clare; and Sir Thomas
Mount-hermer knight, who married and had issue, Margaret, married to John
Mounta-cute, and had issue, John Mounta-cute Earl of Salisbury. He dyed in the
17. year of king Edward the second, 1323. and Ioane his Countess, dyed in the
year, 1305. at her Manor of Clare.

Et portoit, d'or, a l'aigle de vert, members, and becquez de gueulles. GIlbert
de Clare (son and heir of Gilbert de Clare, sur-named the Red, and Ioane of
Acres) was the last Earl of Gloucester and Hartford of that firname and Family.
He married Matilda, daughter of John de Burgh, son and heir of Rich. Earl of
Vlster in Ireland, and had issue, a son which died in his infancy. This Gilbert
being, with K. Edw. the 2. in Scotland, to raize the siedge of Sterling-Castle,
was there slain in the year, 1313. who^ the Scots would gladly have saved for
ransom, had they known him; but he had neglected to put on his Coat of Arms
over his armor. With him were slain (as Tho: Walsingham has) Sir Edmond
Mauley, Sir Robert Clifford, Sir Pain Tiptoft, Sir William Marshall, and Sir
Gyles Argentyne, knights, with many others. K. Robert Brus caused the bodies of
this Gilbert Earl of Gloucester, and Sir Robert Clifford, to be sent to K. Edw.
being then at Barwick, to be buried at his pleasure, demanding no reward for
the same. This Gilbert was borne at Tewkesbury, in the year, 1291. and was
there buried by his Father, leaving his inheritance to be divided between his
three sisters his heirs, who were married as before is expressed. The
partition of these lands, were made in the eleventh year of the reign of king
Edward the second.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. HVgh de Audley, (second son of Nicholas
Lord Audley, and grandchild of James Lord Audley of Heleigh, and of Ela his
wife, daughter of William Longespee, son and heir of William Longespee Earl
of Salisbury) after the death of the last Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester,
at a Parliament held at Westminster, the eleventh year of king Edward the
third. This Hugh Audley, was made Earl of Gloucester, Henry of Lancaster, Earl
of Derby, William Mountague, Earl of Salisbury; William Clinton, Earl of
Huntington; and Robert Vfford, Earl of Suffolk; and did all sit, and had
place and voice in the said Parliament by those honorable Titles. He married
Isabell, the third sister and co-heire of the last Gilbert de Clare Earl of
Gloucester, and had issue, one only daughter, Isabell married to Ralphe, first
Earl Stafford; and after dyed in the year, 1347. and was buried in the Priory
of Tunbridge.

Et portoit, gueulles frette d'or, a la bordure d'argent. THomas of Woodstocke,
sixth son of King Edward the third, in the fiftieth year of his Fathers
Reign, sat in Parliament held at Westminster, by the title only of Constable
of England; which Office he did execute, in right of Elianor his wife, eldest
daughter and one of the two heirs of Humfrey de Bohun, Earl of Hereford,
Essex, and Northampton, and Constable of England; and in the first year of
king Richard the second, he was made Earl of Buckingham and Northampton; and
in the ninth year of the said Kings Reign, he was created Duke of Gloucester;
and after, in the year, 1397 he was taken by force from his Castle of Plessy
in Essex, by Thomas Mowbray, first Earl Marschall, and conuayed to Callis, and
there strangled to death with Towels; after whose death, Elianor his wife
became a Nun in the Abbey of Barking in Essex. This Thomas, by Elianor his
wife had one only son named Humfrey, Earl of Buckingham, and 4. daughters;
the son (after his Fathers death) with Lord Henry, son to the Duke of
Hereford, was by King Richard the second banished into Ireland, where he
remained as prisoner, in the Castle of Tryme, until the first year of king
Henry the fourth; and then being sent for into England, dyed of the plague at
Chester, in his return homeward, without issue, in the year, 1399. Anne, the
eldest sister and co-heyre of this Humfrey, was married first to Edmond Earl
Stafford, and after to William Bourchier Earl of Ewe in Normandy; Ioane the
second sister, was married to Gilbert Lord Talbot; Isabell was a Nun in the
Minories by London; and Philip the fourth sister dyed young, without issue.

Et portoit, escartellee France seem and D'engleterre, a la bordure de argent.
THomas Lord Spencer, great grandchild to Hugh Lord Spencer the younger, and
Elianor his wfe, eldest sister and co-heyre of Gilbert de Clare, the last Earl
of Gloucester aforesaid, was created Earl of Gloucester, in the 21. year of
king Richard the second and in the first year of king Henry the fourth, he was
deposed by Act of Parliament, from the title and dignity of Earl of
Gloucester, and was beh^ded at Bristoll, 1400. He married Constance, daughter of
Edmond of Langley Duke of York, and had issue, Richard Lord Spencer, that dyed
without issue the Kings Ward; and two daughters, Elizabeth that dyed young at
Caerdiffe in South- Wales, and Isabell, who was borne 7. months after her
Fathers death; and was twice married, first to Richard Beauchamp, Earl of
Worcester, and Lord of Abergauenny, by whom she had issue Elizabeth: her second
husband was Richard Beauchamp Earl of Warwick (cousin-germane to her other
husband) by whom she had issue, Henry Duke of Warwick.

Et portoit, d'argent, escartelle gueulles frette d'or, au baston de sable,
brochant sur le tout. HVmsrey Plantagenet, fourth son of king Henry the 4.
was at a Parliament held at Westminster the second of king Henry the fifth,
created first Earl of Pembroke, and after Duke of Gloucester; and in the first
year of King Henry the sixth, he was by Parliament, made Protector of England,
during the Kings minority, (which was fifteen years) and writ in his Style,
Humfrey Duke of Gocester, Earl of Henault, Holland, Zealand, and Penbroke,
Lord of Frisia, great Chamberleine of England, and Defender of the Realm of
England. He married two wives, the first was Iaquet, daughter and sole heir of
William Duke of Bauaria and Holland; (the then wife of John Duke of Brabant)
from whom he was divorced, having no issue by her: his second wife was
Elianor, daughter of Reginald Lord Cobham of Sterburgh in Surrey (who long
before had been his Paramore) by whom he had no lawful issue. After, at a
Parliament held at S. Edmondsbury in Suffolk, 1446. he was arrested of high
Treason, and within few days after, he was found strangled to death, in the
Abbey of Bury, by the procurement of the Marquess of Suffolk. He builded the
Divinity School in Oxford, and his Manor house of Greinwich, and embattelled
the same. He had issue, a base daughter named Antigone, wife to Henry Gray
Earl of Tankeruill: his body was conuayed to the Abbey of S. Albons, and there
buried.

Et portoit, France seem escartelle D'engleterre a la bordure d'argent. RIchard
Plantagenet, fourth son of Richard Duke of York, and brother to king Edward
the fourth, was by his said Brother, in the first year of his Reign, created
D. of Gloucester. To this Richard, was the government committed of king Edward
the fourths two sons, (K. Edw. the 5. and Richard Duke of York) whom he
caused most unnaturally to be murdered in the Tower of London; after whose
death, he usurped the Crown and Kingdom, in the year, 1464. and was styled,
king Richard the third. He married Anne, daughter and co-heire of Richard
Neuill, Earl of Warwick and Salisbury, (widow of Edward Prince of Wales,
slain at Tewkesbury) and was after slain at Bosworth field, by King Henry the
seventh, the 22. of August, 1485. leaving no issue to succeed him.

Et portoit, France, escartelle D'engleterre au lambell de hermines, charge au
trois cantons de gueulles. EDward Seymour, Knight of the honorable Order of
the Garter, was created Viscount Beauchampe, the 28. of king Henry the eight;
and in the year after, he was created Earl of Hartford; (which Earldom, and
the Title of Dignity, had slept from the death of Gilbert de Clare, Earl of
Gloucester and Hertford.) And in the first year of king Edward the sixth, he was
made Duke of Somerset; as in the title of Somerset is more at large.

Et portoit, gueulles a deux volz de L'aigle en L'eurre d'or. EDward Seymour,
son of Edward Duke of Somerset aforesaid, was by Queen Elizabeth, in the
first year of her Reign, restored and created Earl of Hartford, and is now
living, 1618.

A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls of Hereford, their Arms, Wives, and Children.
RAlphe de Maunt, Earl of Hereford, in Edward the Confessors time, and
William the Conquerors, who being sent to encounter Algar Earl of Leicester,
then a banished man, and returned into England; fled very cowardly from his
forces in Herefordshire, leaving his Country and City of Hereford, to the
mercy of the kings enemies, in the year, 1055. For which cause, William
Conqueror degraded him, and took from him his Earldom of Hereford. He dyed,
and was buried at Peter-borow.

WIlliam Fitz-Osborne, Earl of Breteuile in Normandy, (son Osberne de Crepon,
by Albreda his wife, daughter of Ralphe Earl of Iuery) whose grandfather
Herfast us the Dane, was brother to Gonora, wife of Richard the first D. of
Normandy, great grandmother to William Conqueror. This William came into
England with the said Conqueror, and was the chief man that persuaded him to
undertake the Conquest of England; for the which, and his good service, the
said Conqueror made him Earl of Hereford, in the year, 1068. and Marshall and
Lord Steward of England; and in the kings absence in France, the said William
was made Viceroy, and Governor in England. He married Adelice, daughter of
Roger Tonny, Standard Bearer of Normandy; by whom he had issue, three sons
and two daughters; William the eldest son, succeeded his Father in all his
honors and possessions in Normandy; and Roger the second son, after the
death of his Father, was Earl of Hereford, and had all his Fathers lands in
England; Roald the third son, was a Monk: Emme the eldest daughter, was wife
to Ralphe de Waiet a Saxon, and Earl of the East Angles, that is, Norfolk,
Suffolk, and Cambridgeshire; Itta the second daughter, was wife to Robert
Bellemont Earl of Leicester. This William Fitz-Osberne, was slain, as some
have, at Kerdiffe in South- Wales. Others say, in the wars in Planders,
taking part with Arnold Earl of Flanders, in the year, 1072. and William
Gemiticensis has, that he was buried in the Monastery of Cormelias, which was
of his Foundation.

Et portoit, de gueulles au band d'argent, sur le tout an face d'or. ROger de
Breteuile, (second son of William Fitz-Osberne) was after the death of his
Father, Earl of Hereford, in the year, 1072. He made and concluded the
marriage between Emma his sister, and Ralphe de Wayet; at which marriage, the
greatest part of the Nobility were present, and there conspired together, to
turn out William the Conqueror again; Waltheof Earl of Huntington (son of
Siward Earl of Northumberland) being one of them, took shipping and went into
Normandy, and there revealed the whole matter to the said King William,
committing himself wholly to his mercy. But this Roger continuing in his
intended conspiracy, was taken prisoner by Vrso de Abtot, Shirieffe of
Worcestershire, and others, and being brought to his trial by his Peers, was
found guilty of high treason, and condemned to perpetual imprisonment, during
his life; where he dyed without issue. And Waltheof Earl of Huntington
(notwithstanding his submission) was taken and carried to Wynchester, and there
beheaded, and his body buried in the fields without the City, but after
removed to Crowland.

Et portoit, les arms de son pete. MIlo Fitz-Walter (son of Walter,
Constable of the Castle of Gloucester, and of Emme his wife, daughter of Drew de
Balun Lord of Abergauenny) succeeded his Father in the Constableship of
Gloucester; and was by Mauld the Empress, made Earl of Hereford, and Constable
of her Court, in the sixth year of king Stephen. He married Sibell, daughter
and heir of Bernard Newmarch, Lord of Brecknock by Nest his wife, daughter of
Griffith ap Lewellyn, Prince of South- Wales, and had issue, five sons and
three daughters, viz. Roger, Walter, Henry, William, and Mahell, all Earls of
Hereford, and Constables of England, saving William only; (who dyed before his
elder brother Henry) Margaret the eldest daughter, married Humfrey de Bohun the
third of that name, (who after the death of his wives brothers, was both Earl
of Hereford, and Constable of England;) Bertha the second daughter, was married
to Philip de Breus, Lord of Brember, Abergauenny, etc. Luce the third daughter,
was wife to Herbert, son of Herbert, and grandchilde to Henry Fitz Herbert
(Chamberlain to King Henry the first) and of his wife, daughter of Robert
Corbet (Concubine of king Henry the first) Lord of Alencester in Commit Warwick.
This Milo, dyed the eight of king Stephen, and was buried by Sibell his wife,
in the Abbey of Lanthony by Gloucester, which he founded in the year, 1135.

Et portoit, gueulles a la band d or, oue la autre band d'argent. ROger,
eldest son and heir of Milo, unto whom King Henry the second gave the Mote
of Hereford, with the Castle, and the third penny of the Reuennewes of Pleas of
the whole County of Hereford, whereof he made him Earl. He was also Constable
of England Lord of Brecknock, Caer-went, Gower, and of the Forest of Deane,
all which (says Somerset Glouer) were confirmed unto him by King Henry the
second his Letters Patents, bearing date at Warwick, the twelfth day, next
after the conclusion of peace between King Stephen and him. This Roger dying
without issue, Walter Henry, and Mahell his brothers, succeeded him in his
lands and possessions, and died also without issue. Whereby their whole
Inheritance was divided between their three sisters, who were married as
aforesaid.

Et portoit, gueulles deus bands vne d'or and la autre d'argent HEnry de Bohun,
(son of Humfrey de Bohun the fourth, and Grand child to Humfrey the third,
and Margaret his wife, daughter of Milo Earl of Hereford, and Constable of
England, and sister and co-heyre of her five brothers, was in right of the said
Margaret his grandmother, created Earl of Hereford by Letters patents, bearing
date the third of November, in the first year of king John, as also Constable
of England. He married Mauld, daughter of Geffrey Fitz-Piers of Ludgarshall,
Earl of Essex, and sister and heir of Geffrey and William (sur-named
Mandeuils) her Brothers, and had issue. Humfrey de Bohun the fifth. He dyed in
the 4. year of king Henry the third, 1220. going to the holy Land; and his
body being brought back into England, was buried in the Abbey of Lanthony.

Et porteit d'azur a la band d'argent, a deux cottices enter six Lions rampant
d'or. HVmfrey de Bohun, the fifth of that name, son and heir of Henry
aforesaid, was after his Father, Earl of Hereford and Constable of England,
and Patron of the Abbey of Lanthony, and Earl of Essex in right of his mother.
To this Humfrey did king Henry the third, in Anno 1241. release the remainder
of a debt of 20000. Marks, which Geffrey Magnauile Earl of Essex his Uncle,
was to pay unto him as a fine laid upon him, for marrying Isabell, the
repudiate wife of King John, daughter and heir of William Earl of Gloucester.
This Humfrey married two wives, the first was Mauld, daughter and heir of
Ralphe de Isondon, Earl of Angy in Normandy, by whom he had issue Humfrey de
Bohun the sixth, that dyed before his Father in the Castle of Bristew being
taken prisoner at the battle of Eusham, 1265. and two daughters, Mauld the
eldest, was married first to Anselme Marshall Earl of Penbroke, and after to
Roger Quincy Earl of Winchester; and Alice the second daughter, was married to
the Lord Thony. The said Humfreys second wife, was Mauld de Auenesbury, by whom
he had issue, John de Bohun Lord of Haresfield, Father of Edmond, and then died
in the third year of King Edward the first, 1274. and was buried at Lanthony.

Les arm de son pere. HVmfrey de Bohun, the seventh of that Christian name,
(son and heir of Humfrey the sixth, that dyed before his Father) was after
the death of Humfrey de Bohun the fifth his grandfather, Earl of Hereford, and
Constable of England; and by his Mother Elianor, daughter and co-heire of
William de Breose, he was Lord of Brecknocke. He married Mauld, daughter of
Ingelrame de Fines a Frenchman, and had issue Humfrey de Bohun the eight; and
after dyed at Plaisie in Essex, the 27. of king Edward the first, 1298. and was
buried with his wife, at Walden Abbey.

Et portoit, d'azur a la band d'argent, a deux cottices enter six Lions
rampant d'or. HVmfrey de Bohun, the eight of that Christian name, son and heir
of Humfrey the seventh, was Earl of Hereford, Constable of England, and Patron
of Lanthony Abbey, third Earl of Essex, and Lord of Brecknock. He married
Elizabeth, daughter of King Edward the first, (Widdowe of John Earl of
Holland, with whom he had no dowry, but only the Kings favor, which before
he had lost, by refusing to go with him into Flanders, to the aid of Guy Earl
of Flanders against the French King) by whom he had issue four sons and two
daughters; John the first son, was after his Father, Earl of Hereford,
Essex, and Constable of England, and died without issue; Humfrey the second
son, had all his brother John's honors, aad dyed also without issue; Edward and
William were twins, borne at Caldecot in Wales; Edward dyed drowned in
Scotland, before the death of his brother Humfrey, and was buried at Walden;
William the 4. brother, was a Martial man, and by K. Edw. the third. 1336. was
created Earl of Northampton, and did execute the Office of Constable of
England, for his brother Humfrey, and dyed before him, in the year, 1359.
Elianor the eldest daughter of this Humfrey the eight, was married to James
Butler Earl of Ormonde; and Margaret the second daughter, was wife to Hugh
Courtney Earl of Devonshire. This Humfrey the eight, was slain with Thomas
Earl of Lancaster, at Burrowbridge, by Andrew of Harcla, Earl of Carlell, the
15. of king Edward the second, 1322. and was buried in the Black-Fryars in
York; and Elizabeth his wife, dyed the 9. of king Edward the second, and was
buried in the Abbey of Walden in Essex.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. John de Bohun, son and heir of Humfrey
the eight, was after his Father, Earl of Hereford, Essex, and Constable of
England. He married two wives, the first was Alice, daughter of Edmond
Fitz-Alan Earl of Arundell, who dyed in childe-bed, and was buried at Walden,
with her infant son. His second wife was Margaret, daughter of Ralphe Lord
Basset, by whom he had no issue. He dyed at Kirby There, 1334. the 9. of king
Edward the third, and was buried at Stratford Abbey near London.

Et portoit, d'azur a la band d'argent, a deux cottices enter six lions
rampant d'or. HVmfrey de Bohun the ninth, second son of Humfrey the eight,
and brother and heir of John de Bohun, Earl of Hereford, Essex, and Constable
of England, succeeded his Father and Brother: he ouer-liued his brother William
of Northampton, one year, one month, and five days, and dyed without issue,
at Plaisie in Essex, 1361. and was buried in the Augustine-Fryars in London,
leaving Humfrey de Bohun the tenth, his Nephew by his brother William de Bohun,
Earl of Northampton, to succeed him in all his Lands and Dignities.

Les arms de son pere. HVmfrey de Bohun, the tenth and last of that name, was
after the death of William his Father Earl of Northampton; and after the death
of Humfrey his Uncle, Earl of Hereford, Essex, and Constable of England, Lord
of Brecknock, and Patron of the Abbey of Lanthony. He married Ioane, daughter
of Richard Fitz-Alan Earl of Arundell, and had issue, only two daughters his
heirs, Elianor the eldest, was married to Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of
Gloucester, a younger son of king Edw. the third; and Mary the second
daughter, was wife to Henry Plantagenet, son and heir of John of Gaunt Duke
of Lancaster, and after King of England, by the name of king Henry the fourth.
He dyed in the 46. year of king Edward the third, 1371. and was buried at
Walden.

Et portoit, d'azur, a la band d'argent, a deux cottices enter six lions
rampant d'or. HEnry Plantagenet (or Henry of Bullingbroke) Earl of Derby,
son and heir of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, married Mary, second
daughter and co-heire of Humfrey de Bohun the tenth of that name, with whom he
had the Earldom of Hereford and Northampton, with the Lordship of Brecknock,
and the Patrionage of Lanthony; and in the year, 1397. he was created Duke of
Hereford, by King Richard the second; and after the death of his Father, he
was also Duke of Lancaster. This Henry Duke of Hereford, being accused of
diverse points of high treason, (against king Richard the second) by Thomas
Mowbray then Duke of Norfolk; for clearing himself thereof, he challenged the
said Duke of Norfolk to a single combat, which was by him accepted, and
allowed by the King. But when the appointed day was come, and the two Dukes
within the lists in field, ready to perform the same, the king would not
suffer them to proceed; but banished the Duke of Norfolk the land for ever,
(who shortly after dyed at Venice) and the Duke of Hereford for six years.
But this Duke Henry returned back again the same year, and by force took
king Richard prisoner at Flynt Castle, and brought him to the Tower of London,
where he was unjustly constrained to resign his kingdom to this Henry, who
was after crowned king, by the name of king Henry the fourth. He had issue by
his wife Mary, Henry who was after king of England, by the name of king Henry
the fifth; and dyed the 20. of March, 1412.

Et portoit, seem de France, escartelie d'engleterre, au baston de gueullce. A
CATALOGVE OF THE Earls of Huntington, their Arms, Wives, and Children.
VVAltheof (son of Siward the great Earl of Northumberland) married Judith,
daughter of Lambert Earl of Lens in Artoys, and Niece to William the
Conqueror, by Mauld his half sister (by the Mother) daughter of Herlwyn
Comittis Villa, and Arleta his wife; with whom the said Conqueror gave in
marriage, the Earldom of Huntington. The said Waltheof and Judith had issue,
three daughters only; Mauld the eldest was married first to Simon Saint Lize,
and had issue, Simon the second; Earl of Northampton; after she married
David, son of Malcolme Makduncan, and brother to the second Mauld, Queen of
England, and had issue, Henry Earl of Huntington; Judith the second daughter,
was married to Ralphe Lord Toney of Flamsted; and Bertha the third daughter,
was wife to Robert Fitz-Richard Dapifer, (descended out of the Family of
Clare.) This Waltheof (at the marriage of Ralphe de Waiet, with Emme the sister
of Roger Bretiuile) with diverse other great Lords, did conspire together, to
turn William the Conqueror and his Normans again out of England: which
conspiracy being revealed by Waltheof, and he submitting himself to the Kings
mercy, the said Conqueror notwithstanding, caused him to be beheaded at
Winchester, 1075. and his body to be buried in the Fields, near the Town;
which afterward was taken up again, and buried at Crowland in Lincolnshire.

Et portoit, d'argent au lion rampant d'azur, au chef de gueulles. SImon
Saint-Lize (the first of that name, son of Randoll, sur-named the Rich, a
Norman borne) with Warner le Rich, his brother, came into England to the aid
of William Ruphus, who bestowed the Hundred of Falkeley (valued then at forty
pounds a year) upon him, to shoe his Horses; For the said Simon and his
brother Warner, had brought with them to aid the said King, forty knights.
King Henry the first, entreated a marriage between the said Simon, and
Judith, the Widow of Earl Waltheof, which she refused, because the said
Simon was lame; whereupon the King gave him in marriage, Mauld, the eldest
daughter and co-heyre of Waltheof and Judith, with the Earldom of Huntington.
This Simon, with Mauld his wife, builded the Castle and Abbey of S. Andrews in
Northampton, in the sixth year of king Henry the first, and had issue, Simon
the second Earl of Huntington, and Waltheof, Abbot of Melrose; and after dyed,
in the year, 1127. and was buried in the Abbey of Bourne.

Et portoit, per pale endente d'argent and gueulles. David (son of Malcolme
king of Scots, and brother to king Alexander) by the favor of king Henry the
first, had to wife, Mauld, the eldest daughter and co-heyre of Earl Waltheof,
the widow of Simon Saint-Lize Earl of Huntington, (and by that title of Earl
of Huntington, the said David was a Witness to king Henry the firsts Charter,
of lands and liberties he gave to the City of London.) But when Alexander his
brother was dead without issue, and he sent for to be king, there was a peace
made between King Stephen and him, with condition, that the Earldom of
Huntington should abide and remain to Henry, son of the said David; for
which, he should swear fealty, and do homage to king Stephen. By reason
whereof, Simon Saint-Lice the second of that name, to whom of right, as the
elder son of Mauld his Mother, the said Earldom of Huntington did belong,
was neglected and excluded. This David had issue, Henry Earl of Huntington,
(in his Fathers life time) and dyed in the year, 1153. and was buried at
Dunfirmlyn in Scotland.

Et portoit, d'or au lion rampant d'gueulles. HEnry, son of David king of
Scots, was Earl of Huntington in the life time of his Father: He married Ada,
daughter of William de Warren the second, and sister of William the third Earl
Warren and Surrey, and had issue, Malcolme and William, both Kings of Scots;
and David the third son was Earl of Huntington and Carect; he had also
three daughters, Ada married to Florence Earl of Holland; Margaret married to
Conanle Petit, Earl of Britain; and Mauld that dyed young. This Henry, dyed
at Calcone, the 18. of king Stephen, 1152. his Father being then living.

Et portoit, d'or, au lion rampant de gueulles. SImon Saint-Lice, the second of
that name, Earl of Northampton, (after the death of king Henry the first; and
Henry son of David king of Scots) entered into peaceable possession of the
Earldom of Huntington, which he could never obtain before, during the said
kings Reign, for that he had given the said Earldom to David, his wives
brother, who had married this Simons Mother, whose children by her first
husband Simon Saint-Lice the first, being young, were sent into Normandy, and
committed to the custody of Stephen Earl of Albemarle, their Mothers Uncle.
This Simon married Isabell, daughter of Robert Bellomont (sur-named
Crouch-backe or Bossue) Earl of Leicester, and had issue, the third Simon
Saint-Lice, Amicia, and Hawis. He founded the Abbey of S. Mary de Pratis, near
Northampton, and Sawtre in Huntingtonshire; and dyed the 18. of king Stephen,
1152. as Henry of Huntington has, Fol. 227. b.

Et portoit, per pale endente d'argent and gueulles. MAlcolme king of Scots,
eldest son and heir of Henry Earl of Huntington aforesaid, and grand child
to king David (in the minority of Simom Saint-Lice the third) was Ward to king
Henry the second, and was with him in his expedition to Tholosse, for which he
had given unto him the Earldom of Huntington, which he held during his life.
The King was often sued unto in the behalf of young Simon the right heir, for
Justice, but it was ever denied him; at the end of 12. years and six months
of his Reign of King of Scotland, he dyed at Gedworth, and was buried at
Dumfirmelyn without issue, 1165. leaving William his brother to succeed him; in
whose time, Simon Saint-Lice could obtain no favor or grace, until king
Henry the younger, and the said William and David his brother with others, made
wars against king Henry the second.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. WIlliam, second son of Henry Earl of
Huntington aforesaid, in the life time of king Malcolme his elder brother; by
the favor of king Henry the second, was Earl of Huntington; but after his
brothers death, and he in the kingdom, forgot his duty, and in Arms forcibly
entered Northumberland, where he was taken prisoner at Anwike, and led to
Richmond, in the year, 1174. and after was ransomed upon these conditions,
that he should acknowledge himself the king of Englands Liegeman, against al
men for the Relme of Scotland, and his other lands, and to pay one hundred
thousand pounds sterling; part whereof he should pay presently, and for the
rest, he should pawn and morgage Cumberland, Huntington and Northumberland,
until the money were paid, and for farther security, that he should never
after invade or move war against England, he should deliver into King Henry
the seconds custody, four Castles. viz. Barwick, Roxborow, Edenborough, and
Sterling Castles; and so Huntington was taken from King William, and restored
to Simon S. Lice, the third of that name, who was right heir thereof; but he
dying without issue, the Earldom of Huntington returned again to William
king of Scots, who with the consent of king Richard the first, gave it to David
his younger brother (Hollingshed, page 189. Title of Scotland.) This William
married Ermingard, daughter of Richard Beaumont, son of Roscellin, Viscount
Beaumont, and had issue, Alexander king of Scots; Isabell married to Roger
Bigot Earl of Norfolk, that dyed without issue; Margaret wife to Hubert de
Burgo Earl of Kent; Mariona wife to Eustace de Vescy; Ada wife to Patricke
Earl of Dunbarre; and Aufrica married to William de Say of Ireland. This
William king of Scots dyed, 1124.

Et portoit, d'or au lion rampant de gueulles. SImon Saint-Lice, the third of
that name, and son and heir of Simon the second, after that William king of
Scots was deprived of the earldom of Huntington, received both the Castle and
Earldom of Huntington, as his right inheritance, and so peaceably enjoyed the
said title and Earldome during his life, by king Henry the second, and restored
every man to his right, whom the Scots had either wronged or dispossessed in that
County. But the said king Henry, seeing daily contention to arise between the
Scots, and the Saint-Lices, for this Earldom of Huntington, caused the Castle
to be raced to the ground; but Simon held the Earldom, and married Alice,
daughter of Gilbert de Gaunt Earl of Lincoln, but died without issue, in the
year, 1184. the 31. of Henry the 2. After whose death, the said King restored
the Earldom of Huntington again to William King of Scots; who by the
permission of king Richard the first, surrendered the same to David his younger
brother.

Et portoit, lez armoiries de son pere. David Earl of Carect, third son of
Henry Earl of Huntington, was knighted by king Henry the second, the day of
his son Henry's Coronation, and had by the gift of William king of Scots his
eldest brother, the Earldom of Huntington, with the third penny of the County
of Cambridge given him, in Anno, 1190. after the death of Simon Saint-Lice the
third, without issue. And having sworn fealty to King Richard the first, he
went with him toward the Holy Land, and carried with him 500. knights, whom
he carried upon his own charges. He married Mauld, the eldest daughter of Hugh
Kiuilioke, and sister and co-heyre of Randoll Blundeuile, the sixth Earl of
Chester and of Lincoln, and had issue, John sur-named Scot, Earl of
Huntington and Chester, and Margaret, wife to Alan of Galloway, Constable of
Scotland: Isabell the second daughter, was married to Robert Brus Lord of
Annandale; Ada was married to Henry Hastings; and Mauld dyed a Virgin. He dyed
at Yerdley in Northamptonshire, and was buried in the Abbey of Saultrey, near
Counington in Huntingtonshire (as Sir Robert Cotton has.)

Et portoit, d'or trois estaches de gueulles, ioynantz en point. John sur-named
Scote, (son of David Earl of Huntington before mentioned) was after his
Father, Earl of Huntington; and in right of Mauld his Mother, eldest sister
and co-heyre of Randoll Bloundeuile Earl of Chester, he was also Earl of
Chester; and after, in the one and twentieth year of king Henry the third, he
was restored to the Earldom of Northampton, and married Helyn, daughter of
Lewellyn, Prince of North Wales, and dyed without issue at Darnhall, the two
and twentieth of king Henry the third, (as is more at large in the Title of
Earls of Chester) and was buried at Chester; after whose death, the said King
resumed and took into his hands the said Earldom and Principality of
Chester, and gave other lands and signeuries to the said John's Sisters
aforesaid, who after their brothers death, challenged the kingdom of Scotland.

Et portoit, les armoiries les son Pere. William de Clinton, son and heir
of John de Clinton and Mauld his wife, daughter of Lewis Viscount Beaumont, and
grandchild to another John de Clinton, and Idona his wife, daughter and one
of the heirs of Sir William Odingselles knight; was created Earl of
Huntington, in the eleventh year of king Edward the third; and three years
after, he was made Lord Admiral of England, and was taken prisoner in France;
for which he was forced to sell most part of his lands for to pay his ransom.
He married Julian, daughter and heir of Sir Thomas Leyborne knight, but by
her had no issue. He founded the Priory at Marstock, and dyed without issue, in
the year, 1353. leaving John Lord Clinton his Nephew by his Brother John, to
be his heir.

Et portoit, d'argent six croix au pied fiche d'or, au chef d'azur chargee de
deux molettes d'or perce de gueulles. GViscard de Angolisme (or Guichard d'
Anguillem) a French man borne in Gascoigney, a very expert man in warlike
affairs, was made Knight of the honorable Order of the Garter, by king Edward
the third, and set in the eight Stall of the Souereignes side. After, in the
first year of king Richard the second (whose Tutor he was) he was created
Earl of Huntington, and had given him a thousand Marks yearly out of his
Treasury. He married one Constance, but I find not any issue that he left
behind him. He dyed in the third year of the reign of King Richard the
second, 1379.

Et portoit, d'or seem de billettes au lion rampant d'azur. John Holland
Knight, (second son of Sir Thomas Holland knight, Steward of the house to
William Mountague, Earl of Salisbury; who marrying his Mistress Ioane, daughter
of Edmond of Woodstocke, and sister and heir of John Earl of Kent, was in her
right Earl of Kent, and sat in Parliament, held at Westminster the 34. of
king Edward the third, by the name and title of Thomas Holland Earl of Kent,
and the next year after, dyed;) in the eleventh year of king Richard the
second, was created Earl of Huntington; and in the 21. year of the said kings
reign, he was created Duke of Excester, and made Governor of Callis: and
Alberick de Vere, Earl of Oxford, (Uncle of Robert Vere Duke of Ireland)
having resigned all his interest and right of the Office of Lord high
Chamberlain of England, king Richard bestowed the same upon this John, Duke of
Excester, by Letters Patents, bearing date, 1397. But after, in the first year
of king Henry the fourth, this John was deposed by Parliament, from the title
and dignity of Duke of Excester, and in the same year was taken at Circester
by the Townes-men, and beheaded in the Marketplace, with the Duke of Surrey
and the Earl of Salisbury, for plotting king Henry the fourths death. This
John, Duke of Excester, married Elizabeth, daughter of John of Gaunt, Duke of
Lancaster, and sister to king Henry the fourth, by whom he had issue, John
Holland Duke of Excester, and Earl of Huntington, Sir Edward Holland knight,
and Constance, first married to Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, and Earl of
Nottingham, by whom she had no issue: after she married John Lord Gray of
Ruthyn, by whom she had issue, two sons, Edmond created Earl of Kent, and
Thomas Gray, Lord of Rugemond.

Et portoit, les arms D'engleterre au bordure de France. John Holland, the
second Earl of Huntington, restored by Act of Parliament, the fourth of king
Henry the fifth (he was son of John Holland Duke of Excester, beheaded at
Circester.) This John, when king Henry the fifth was to go into Normandy, was
sent before to skoure the Seas, who meeting with nine Carricks of Genoa, which
were going to aid the French King, fought with them, and sunk six of them,
and took the other three, with great store of money and treasure, and brought
them with his prisoners to the King, in the year, 1416. And in the 22. year,
of king Henry the 6. this John was restored to the Dukedom of Excester, and
writ in his Style, Duke of Excester, Earl of Huntington, and of Iuory in
Normandy, Lord of Sparre, Admiral of England, Ireland, and Aquitaine,
Lieutenant General of the Duchy of Aquitaine, and Constable of the Tower of
London. He married two wives, the first was Anne, daughter of Edmond Earl
Stafford, by whom he had issue, Henry Duke of Excester, and Earl of
Huntington: his second wife was Anne, daughter of John Mountague Earl of
Salisbury, by whom he had issue, a daughter named Anne, first married to John
Lord Neuill, son and heir of Ralphe the second Earl of Westmerland, by whom
she had no issue; after she married Sir Thomas Neuill knight, Uncle to her
former husband, and had issue, Ralphe Neuill the third Earl of Westmerland.
This John Holland Duke of Excester, died in the 26. of king Henry the sixth, and
was buried by his two wives, in S. Katherines Church near the Tower of London.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. HEnry Holland, Duke of Excester, and Earl
of Huntington, only son of John his Father, in the first year of king
Edward the fourth, was disinherited by Act of Parliament, with king Henry the
sixth, his Queen, and his son and others, to the number of 140. And in the
13. year of the same Kings Reign, having long followed the Duke of Burgundies
Camp in mean sort, was found drowned in the seas, between Dover and Callis.
He married Anne, daughter of Richard Duke of York, and sister to King Edw. the
fourth; which lady was after married to Sir Thomas S. Leoger knight, by whom she
had issue, a daughter named Anne, married to George Mannours Lord Ros of
Hamlake, of whom the now Earl of Rutland is descended; as more at lardge is
set down, in the Duke of Excester.

THomas Gray, son of Sir John Gray knight, and half brother by the mother to
king Edward the fifth, was by Letters Patents bearing date at Westminster, the
14. day of August, in the 12. year of king Edward the fourth, created Earl of
Huntington, to him and the heirs male of his body. And in the 15. of the said
Kings Reign, he was created Marquess Dorset: he married Cicely, daughter and
heir of William Lord Harington and Bonuill, by whom he had issue, as in the
title of Dorset is more at large.

Et portoit, burelle de six d'argent and d'azur a chef trois torteaux, au
lambell d'hermines. WIlliam Lord Herbert of Gower, son and heir of William
Earl of Penbroke slain at Banbury, the 9. of king Edward the fourth) was
after his Father, Earl of Penbroke; which Earldom he surrendered unto King
Edward the fourth, who made his eldest son Prince Edward, Earl of Penbroke,
and this William Lord Herbert, Earl of Huntington, at Oburne, the 19. of king
Edward the fourth; which Earldom of Huntington, king Henry the seventh
confirmed unto the said William in the third year of his Reign. He married
Mary, daughter of Richard Wooduill Earl Rivers, and Iaquet his wife, and
sister and one of the heirs of Richard Wooduill Earl Rivers her brother, by
whom he had issue, one only daughter his heir, named Elizabeth, married to
Charles Somerset Earl of Worcester. He dyed the 16. of July, in the sixth year
of King Henry the seventh.

Et portoit, per pale d'azur and de gueulles, trois lions rampant dargent.
GEorge Lord Hastings, Hungerford, Botreaux, Molyns, and Moeles, was created at
White Hall, in the 21. year of K. Henry the 8. Earl of Huntington; he was
son of Edward Lord Hastings, Chamberlain to king Edward the fourth, and
married Anne, daughter of Henry Lord Stafford, second D. of Buckingham, by whom
he had issue, Francis Lord Hastings and second Earl of Huntington; Edward
created by Queen Mary, Lord Hastings of Loughborough in Leicestershire; Sir
Thomas Hastings knight, Henry Hastings and William; he had 3. daughters also,
Dorothy married to Richard Deuereux, son and heir of Walter Viscount
Hereford, Mary and Katherine. He died in the 36. year of king Henry the 8. and
was buried at Ashbye de la Zouch in Leicestershire.

Et porteit, d'argent au manch de sable. FRancis Hastings, son and heir of
George, was after the death of his Father, Earl of Huntington, Lord Hastings,
Hungerford, Botereux, Molyns, and Moeles: He married Katherine, daughter and
one of the heirs of Henry Pole Lord Montacute, son and heir of Margaret
Plantagenet, Countess of Salisbury, beheaded in the Tower of London, 1541.
(condemned by Parliament) never being arraigned nor tried before. The said
Francis and Katherine had issue, Henry Lord Hastings, and Earl of Huntington,
that dyed without issue; Sir George Hastings knight, Earl of Huntington; Sir
Edward Hastings kinght; William, Francis, and Walter; Katherine wife to Henry
Clinton Earl of Lincoln; Francis wife to Henry Lord Compton; Anne, Elizabeth
married to Edward Somerset, now Earl of Worcester, 1618. and Mary Hastings.
This Francis Earl of Huntington, dyed in the second year of Queen Elizabeth,
1560. and was buried at Ashbie de la Zouch.

Et portoit, d'argent au Manch de fable. HEnry Hastings, knight of the Garter,
after the death of Francis his Father, was also Earl of Huntington, Lord
Hastings, Hungerford, Botereux, Molyns, and Moeles, Lord President of the
Counsel at York, married Lady Katherine, daughter of John Dudley Duke of
Northumberland, and sister to Ambrose Earl of Warwick, and Robert Earl of
Leicester, by whom he had no issue: He dyed in the year, 1^95.

Et poitoit, les arms de son pere. GEorge Hastings, second son of Francis
Earl of Huntington, and brother and heir of Henry aforesaid, was the fourth
Earl of Huntington, of that Family and sur-name, and married Elianor, daughter
and co-heyre of Sir John Port of Derbyshire, knight; and had issue, Francis
Lord Hastings that dyed before his Father, who married Sara, daughter of Sir
James Harington, and sister of John Lord Harington; by whom he had issue, Henry
now Earl of Huntington, 1618. and others; the said George had issue also, Sir
Henry Hastings knight, who married Dorothy, daughter and co-heyre of Sir
Francis Willoughby of Wollarton in Nottinghamshire knight; Edward that dyed in
Germany; Katherine wife to Edward Vmpton, and after his death, she married Sir
Walter Chetwin of Staffordshire knight; and Dorothy was married to (...)
Stewart a Scotchman, slain at Islington in single combat, by Sir George
Wharton, son and heir of the Lord Wharton.

Et portoit, d'argeut au Maunch de fable. HEnry Hastings, son and heir of
Francis Lord Hastings, and grand child to George Earl of Huntington; after
the death of his said Grandfather, was the fifth Earl of Huntington of that
sur-name, and married Elizabeth, third daughter and co-heyre of Ferdinando
Earl of Derby, and had issue, Henry Lord Hastings, Ferdinando, Alice, and
Elizabeth.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. A Catalogue of the Earls of Kent, their
Arms, Wives, and Children.
ODO, half brother to William Conqueror by the Mother, was by the said
William, first made Bishop of Baieux in Normandy, and after Earl of Kent in
England. He was a subtle man, and after the death of William Fitz-Osberne, had
the whole rule and government of England, under William Conqueror his brother.
He was a great enemy to Lanfranke, Archbishop of Canterbury, and was banished
England, for taking part with Robert Duke of Normandy, his Nephew, against
William Ruphus. He went with the said Robert his Nephew to the Holy Land, and
at the siedge of Antioch he ended his life. It is said he bare for his Arms,
Gueulles a lion rampant d'argent, au Crosier stafe en band sinester d'or.

WIlliam de Ipre, a Fleming borne, (and base son of Philip Viscount of Ipre)
came into England in the 4. year of king Stephen, to aid him in his wars
against Mauld the Empress; for which service, the said king created him Earl
of Kent, 1141. After which, king Stephen was taken prisoner at Lincoln, by
Mauld the Empress, and Robert Earl of Gloucester, and imprisoned in the Castle
of Bristoll. But not long after, Mauld the Empress, with her Brother Robert
Earl of Gloucester, went to Winchester, where Henry Bishop of Winchester,
brother to King Stephen and William of Ipre, gathered a great Army, and made
her to abandon the Castle; but Robert her brother, seeking to back her in her
flight, was himself taken prisoner, and delivered to king Stephens Queen,
then newly entered Winchester, who delivered the said Robert, to William of
Ipre, to be imprisoned in the Castle of Rochester in Kent. These two great
prisoners being straitely kept, at length through mediation of friends, a peace
was concluded, that they should both be delivered, the King to his Kingdom,
and the Earl to his liberty. This William of Ipre, was after made Steward of
the kings house, and founded the Abbey of Boxley in Kent, and was banished
England, by king Henry the second, 11.4. and before his death became blind,
and took upon him the habit of a Monk, in the Abbey of Loan, and there dyed,
1164.

Et portoit, geronne d'er and d'azur a l'escusson de gueulles, au baston
sinester d'argent broch nt sur le tout. HVbert de Burgo (or de Burgh) Lord
Chamberlain to K. John, Steward of Poytow, and Lord Chiefe-Iustice of England,
was created Earl of Kent by Letters Patents, bearing date the 10. of December,
in the 13. year of king Henry the 3. and had the keeping of Dover, Rochester,
and Canterbury, granted to him during life, by a Charter bearing date the 16.
of Hen. the 3. At last he procured himself great hatred of all the Nobility,
for causing the said king to break his word and deed, for the restitution of
those laws and ancient customs, which before he had granted to the Subjects;
which did greatly agrauate the hate of the Commons. He married three wives, the
first was Margaret, daughter of Sir Robert Arsike knight; the second was
Isabell, daughter and one of the heirs of William Earl of Gloucester, (the
repudiate wife of king John.) His third wife was Margaret, daughter of William,
and sister of Alexander king of Scots: he had issue by his first wife, John de
Burgo, who married Hawis Lamale, and dyed before his Father, leaving his son
John, Baron of Lamale, his heir. This Hubert, dyed at his Castle of
Barkhamsted in Hartfordshire, the 27. of king Henry the third, and was buried
at the Friars Predicants in London, where now White Hall stands.

Et portoit, gueulles sept lozengies vaire. 3.3.1. EDmond Plantagenet,
sur-named of Woodstocke, the place of his birth, third son of king Edward the
first, by his second wife Margaret, daughter of Philip king of France, in the
15. year of king Edward the second, his brother, was created Earl of Kent.
And after, at a Counsel held at Winchester, the 5. of Edward the third, 1330.
the morrow after S. Gregory's day, he was arrested, and on the Vigill of S.
Cutbert, adjudged to dye for high treason; for abetting many of the Nobility to
plot the delivery of king Edward the second out of prison: for which, by the
malice of Queen Isabell, the then Kings Mother, and Roger Mortimer her
Sweetheart, he was beheaded at Winchester, in the year aforesaid: He married
Margaret, daughter and heir of John Lord Wake of Lidell and Burn, and had
issue, two sons, Edmond and John, and one daughter named Ioane; the two
sons were both Earls of Kent one after the other, and dyed without issue;
Ioane their only sister and heir, sur-named the Fair Maid of Kent, was
first married to William Monta-cute Earl of Salisbury, from whom she was
divorced; and after married to Sir Thomas Holland knight; and lastly, she was
married to Edward the Black Prince, Father of K. Richard the 2.

Et portoit, d'engleterre au bordure d'argent. EDmond Plantagenet, eldest son
and heir of Edmond of Woodstocke aforesaid, succeeded his Father in the
Earldome of Kent, and dyed the Kings Ward without issue, the sixth of king
Edward the third, leaving John his brother to succeed him in the Earldom of
Kent.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. John Plantagenet, second son of Edmond of
Woodstocke, was after the death of his elder brother, Earl of Kent, and by
that title of honor, sat in Parliament, the 25. of King Edward the third, and
dyed the year after without issue. He married Elizabeth, daughter of the Duke
of Iu^iers, who after was married to Eustace Dampreticourt, second son of the
Lord Dampreticourt in Henault, by whom she had issue, Sanchius Dampreticourt,
knight of the Order of the Garter, in king Edward the thirds time, and one of
the first Founders of the said Order.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. SIr Thomas Holland knight, and one of the
first Founders of the Noble Order of the Garter, (son of Sir Thomas Holland
of Lancashire, knight) was Steward of the house to William Monta-cute, Earl of
Salisbury; and in right of Ioane his wife (sister and heir of John Earl of
Kent aforesaid) was by king Edward the third, created Earl of Kent, and Lord
Wake of Lidell, and had issue, Thomas Holland, Earl of Kent, and Duke of
Surrey; John Holland Earl of Huntington, and Duke of Excester, by king Richard
the second; and a daughter named Ioane, married to the Earl of S. Pole. He
dyed in the 34. year of king Edward the third, 1360.

Et portoit, d'azur au leopard rampant le Champ fleurette d'argent. THomas
Holland, half brother (by the Mother) to King Richard the second, was after
the death of Thomas, his Father, Earl of Kent, and Lord Wake of Lidell. He
married Alice, daughter of Richard Eitz-Alan, Earl of Arundell, and had issue,
Thomas Earl of Kent, Edmond, John, and Richard; and 6. daughters, Elianor
first married to Roger Mortimer, Earl of March, and after to Edward Charlton
Lord Powes; Margaret, married first to John Beauford, Marquess Dorset, and
Earl of Somerset; and after to Thomas Duke of Clarence, son of king Henry;
Ioane the 3. daughter, was first married to Edward Duke of York; and after, to
William Lord Wiloughby of Eresbie; and thirdly, to Henry Lord Scroope; and
lastly, to Sir Henry Bromflet knight; Alice the fourth daughter, was wife to
Thomas Mountague Earl of Salisbury; Elizabeth the fifth daughter, was married
to John Lord Neuill, son of Ralphe, first Earl of Westmerland; and Bridget
the sixth daughter, was a Nun at Barking. This Thomas Holland, dyed the 20. of
King Richard the second.

Et portoit, les arms d'engleterre au bordure d'argent. THomas Holland, Earl
of Kent and Lord Wake (son of Thomas aforesaid) married Constance, daughter
of Edmond of Langley Duke of York, widow of Thomas Lord Spencer, but by her
had no issue; after he took to wife Ioane, daughter of Hugh Earl Stafford, by
whom he had no issue. This Thomas was created Duke of Surrey, the 21. of King
Richard the second, 1398. And in the year, 1400. he, with the Earls of
Huntington and Salisbury, intending under color of a Mask or Mummery, at the
Castle of Windesorre, to have surprised king Henry the fourth, and to have
restored King Richard again; and so by that means to have gotten restitution
of their former titles of honor, with their possessions which they had lost,
by judgment of the last Parliament, a little before. But this their conspiracy
being discovered to the King, and he fled to London, they were driven to fly
to Cicester, where the rude Townsmen and others set upon them, took them, and
in the Marketplace stroke off their heads: his body was buried at Cicester,
but after taken up again, and enterred in the Priory of Montgrace, which was
of his Fathers foundation. This Thomas Duke of Surrey, did bear for his Arms,
King Edward the Confessors Arms, within a border ermyne, impaled with the
Arms of England, within a border argent; as by his Seals is manifested.

EDmond Holland, second son of Thomas Holland Earl of Kent, and brother to
the last Thomas Holland, Earl of Kent, and Duke of Surrey, slain at Cicester,
was after the death of his said Brother, Earl of Kent, and Lord Wake of
Lidell; and by king Henry the 4. was made Lord high Admiral of England; and
being at the siedge of Briake in Britain, the 9. of the said Kings Reign, was
wounded in the head with an Arrow, shot out of a Crosse-bowe, whereof he dyed
within five days after. He married Luce, daughter of Barnaby, Viscount of
Millaine, the widow of Lewis of Valoys; who after this Edmonds death, married
for her third husband, Sir Henry Mortimer knight. This Edmond dyed without
issue, the 9. of king Henry the 4. 1408, and lies buried at Bourne in
Lincolnshire, leaving his six sisters his heirs, married as aforesaid.

Et portoit, les arms d'engleterre, au bordure d'argent. WIlliam Neuill, a
younger son of Ralphe Neuill, first Earl of Westmerland, begotten of Ioane
his second wife, daughter of John of Gaunt, and Lady Katherine Swynford, was
created Earl of Kent, in the first year of king Edward the fourth; and after
made Lord Admiral of England and knight of the Garter. He married Ioane,
daughter and heir of Thomas Lord Falconbridge of Shelton; in whose right he
was also Lord Falconbridge, and had issue, Ioane, wife to Sir Edward Bedhowing
knight; Elizabeth married to Sir Richard Strangwais knight; and Alice married
to Sir John Coigniers knight. This William, dyed about the second year of king
Edward the fourth, and was buried in the Priory of Gisburg.

Et portoit, gueulles au faulteur d'argent, charge d'une Molette d'sable.
EDmond Gray, Lord of Ruthin, Hastings, and Weishford, was created Earl of
Kent, in the fifth year of king Edward the fourth, and married Katherine,
daughter of Henry Percy, second Earl of Northumberland, by whom he had issue,
Lord Anthony Gray, that dyed without issue before his Father, and was buried at
Luton, near S. Albons; George Gray, second son, was after his Father, Earl
of Kent; he had issue also two daughters, Elizabeth married to Robert
Grestocke, son and heir of Ralphe Baron of Grestock; and Anne, the wife of
John Lord Gray of Wilton.

Et portoit, burellee de six d'argent and d'azur, au chef trois torteux. GEorge
Gray, Lord Gray of Ruthin, Hastings, and Weshford, second son and heir of
Edmond aforesaid, was after his Father, the second Earl of Kent of that
sur-name. He had two wives, the first was Anne, daughter of Richard Wooduile
Earl Rivers, the widow of William Viscount Bourchier, by whom he had issue,
Richard Earl of Kent: His second wife was Katherine, daughter of William
Herbert, Earl of Penbroke, slain at Banbury; by whom he had issue, Sir Henry
Gray of Wrest, knight; (who after the death of his brother Richard the
unthrift, did discontinue and refuse to take upon him the title and name of
Earl) George Gray third son, Edmond and Anthony; and one daughter named
Anne, married to John L. Husee, who had issue, Bridget first married to Henry
Manners Earl of Rutland; and after, to Sir Rich. Morison knight; and lastly,
to Francis Russell Earl of Bedford. This George, dyed in the twentieth year
of King Henry the seventh.

Et portoit, les armoiries de son pere. RIchard Gray, son and heir of George
Earl of Kent aforesaid, was after the death of his Father, the third Earl of
Kent of that Family: he married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir William Hussee
knight, Chiefe-Iustice of the Kings Bench; and dyed (when he had greatly wasted
his estate) fifteenth of king Henry the eight, at his house in Lumberdsstreete
in London, without issue, and was buried in the White Frayars in Fleetstreete,
1523.

Et portoit, burelle de six, d'argent and d'azur a le chef trois torteux.
REginald Gray Esquire, (son and heir of Henry Gray Esquire, grandchild to
George Earl of Kent aforesaid, by his son Sir Henry Gray of Wrest, knight)
was in the year, 1571. advanced to the title and Earldom of Kent, (which
before was discontinued, for want of competent living to maintain the same, by
this Reginalds Father, and Grandfather) by the special favor and bounty, of
the most famous and renowned Queen of famous memory, Queen Elizabeth. He
married Susanna, daughter of Richard Berty Esquire, and Katherine Duchess of
Suffolk his wife, by whom he had no issue, and died in the year of our Lord,
1572. and was buried in S. Giles Church without Cripplegate, in London, by his
Grandfather, Sir Henry Gray knight; leaving Henry Gray his brother, to succeed
him in his Earldom.

Et portoit, les arms de Gray. Burell^e de six d'argent and d'azur a la chef
trois torteux. HEnry Gray, third son of Henry Gray Esquire, and brother and
heir of Reginald Earl of Kent aforesaid, was the fifth Earl of Kent of that
Family. He married Mary, daughter of Sir George Cotton of Cheshire, knight;
the widow of Edward Stanley Earl of Derby, by whom he had no issue. He dyed
in the year, 1613. and was very honorably buried at Wrest, leaving Sir
Charles Gray knight, his brother, to succeed him in his Earldom.

Et portoit, les arms de son friar. CHarles Gray, third son of Henry Gray
Esquire, and brother and heir of Reginald and Henry Earls of Kent, before
mentioned, was after their deaths, the sixth Earl of Kent of that sur-name; and
married Susan, daughter of Richard Cotton of Hampshire, Esquire, and had issue,
Sir Henry Gray, Lord of Ruthin, who married Elizabeth, second daughter and
co-heyre of Gilbert Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, and a daughter named Susan,
married to Sir Michaell Longfield of Buckinghamshire, knight, 1618.

Et portoit, burellee de six d'argent and d'azur a la chef trois torteux, au
lambell crmyne. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls of Kendall, their Arms, Wives, and
Children.
John Duke of Bedford, third Son of king Henry the fourth, was by his Brother,
king Henry the fifth, created Earl of Kendall, and made Regent of France. He
married two wives, but had no issue by either; the first was Anne, daughter of
John Duke of Burgundy; the second was Iaquet, daughter of Peter of Luxenburge,
Earl of S. Paul in France. He dyed in the 23. year of king Henry the sixth,
and lies buried in a fair Toombe, in the Cathedral Church at Roan: whose
Monument, when king Charles the eight came to see, one of his Nobles willed him
to deface the same, that no further memory might be had of him there. To which
speech, the said king replied and said; That if the whole strength and power
of France could not expel him living, it were no honor to take revenge upon
the dead; and therefore, said he, let him now rest in peace.

Et portoit, France seem, escartelle d'engletetre, a lambell de cinq pointz de
Britanie and de France. John Duke of Somerset, after the death of John Duke of
Bedford, without issue, was by king Henry the sixth, made the next Earl of
Kendall. He was at the battle of Bangiebridge, where Thomas Duke of Clarence
the kings brother, was slain, and himself taken prisoner by the Duke of
Orliance, the 9. of king Henry the fifth; from which imprisonment he was shortly
after delivered by ransom. He married Margaret, daughter and heir of Sir John
Beauchampe of Bletso knight, the widow of Sir Oliver S. John knight, descended
of the S. John's of Fanmon in South Wales, by whom he had issue, Margaret his
only daughter and heir, married first to Edmond of Hadham Earl of Richmond,
by whom she had issue, king Henry the seventh: she married afterward, Thomas
Stanley, Earl of Derby, but by him had no issue. This John, dyed in the 22. of
king Henry the sixth, and was buried at Wimborne Minster, in Dorsetshire.

Et portoit, France, escartellee d'engleterre, au bordure gobonne d'argent and
d'azur. John de Foix, Viscount Casleton, and Lord Greyley (son of Gaston de
Foix, knight of the Order of the Garter, brother to the Count de Foix
Captain de la Bouche County de Longueuile et de Beuancies) for his good
service done against the French, was by king Henry the sixth, 1446. created
Earl of Kendall in England, and made Knight of the Order of the Garter: some
of the house of Foys, now Earls of Longueuile in France, do write themselves
at this day, Earls of Longueuile and Kendall. He married Margaret, daughter of
Michaell de la Pole, Earl of Suffolk, and sister to William de la Pole, Duke
of Suffolk, by whom he had issue, John de Foys, father of Anne, wife of
Vladislaus king of Hungary. This John de Foix, had his Arms pulled down at
Winsore, the third of king Edward the 4.

Et portoit, a deux vaches passans de gueulles, accolees, accornees, and
clarinees de azur, escartelle d'or a trois palz de gueulles, sur le tout au
lambell de fable charge de cinq coquilles d'argent. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls
of Lincoln, their Arms, Wives, and Children.
William de Romare, a Norman borne (son of Roger de Romare, and half
brother of Randoll Meschines, the fourth Earl of Chester by his Mother Luce,
daughter of Algar the Saxon, Earl of Chester, and sister of Morcar, Earl of
Northumberland and Lincoln) was created Earl of Lincoln in the sixth year of
king Stephen, to whom the said king gave the Manor of Chircheton, the Castle
of Geynsborough, and the Castle of Pontfret in Yorkshire. Unto which Grant,
were Witnesses, Randoll Meschines. Earl of Chester; Gilbert de Clare, Earl of
Penbroke; and Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Hartford, and others. He married
Hawis, daughter of Stephen, son of Eudo Comes Blesensis and Champaine, and
sister of William le Gross Earl of Albemarle, by whom he had issue, William
de Romare the second, Lord of Bullingbroke, who took to wife, Mauld, daughter
of Baldwyn Rivers Earl of Devonshire, and dyed before his Father, in the
year, 11^1. leaving issue, a son named William the third, who also dyed
without issue, in Anno, 1175. and one daughter named Hawis, married to Gilbert
de Gaunt, Earl of Lincoln. This last William de Romare, by his Deed, gave
lands to the Abbey of Reuesbie, to pray for the soul of William his Father,
and William the Earl, his Grandfather, 1172. the 19. of King Henry the 2.

Et portoit, gueulles sept macles d'or seen de croix recroisettees de mesme.
GIlbert de Gaunt, Lord of Lindesey in Lincolnshire (son of Walter de Gaunt,
by Mauld, daughter of Alan Earl of Britain, and grandchild to Gilbert de
Gaunt (that came into England with William Conqueror) by Eustacia, daughter of
the Earl of Cenomania) taking part with king Stephen, against Mauld the
Empress, was taken prisoner by king Henry the second, being then Duke of
Normandy; who committed him to the custody and keeping of Randoll Meschines,
alias Gernons, the fourth Earl of Chester, who married him to Hawis, daughter
of William de Romara, his half brother by the Mother, by whom he had issue,
Gilbert de Gaunt, that dyed in the year, 1160, Father of the last Gilbert
Earl of Lincoln; Baldwyn second son, Lord of Bourne and Dipping, who
founded the Abbey of Bourne, 1140. and dyed in the year, 1156; and one
daughter named Alice, married to Simon S. Lize Earl of Northampton, who dyed
without issue. This Gilbert the Earl, dyed in the year, 11^6. and was buried
in the Abbey of Bardens in Lincolnshire.

Et portoit, burelle d'or and d'azur au band de gueulles. GIlbert de Gaunt,
grandchild of Gilbert de Gaunt, Earl of Lincoln, (by his son Gilbert, who
was disinherited by King Henry the second, for taking part with king Stephen)
was made Earl of Lincoln, by Lewis King Philip the French kings son, in the
18. year of king John, which king Henry the third did afterward confirm to
the said Gilbert, in the third year of his Reign: In which year he dyed, and
was buried in the Abbey of Ramsey, without issue; after whose death, king Henry
the third did give the said Earldom of Lincoln, to Randoll sur-named
Blundeuile, the sixth Earl of Chester.

Et portoit, burelle d'or and d'azur au band de gueulles. RAndoll Meschines
(sur-named Blundeuile) the sixth Earl of Chester from Hugh Lupus, and the
fourth Earl of this Family, son of Hugh Keueliock, son of Randoll Gernons,
half brother by the Mother, to William Romara Earl of Lincoln, was restored
to the Earldom of Lincoln, in the year, 1218. the third of king Henry the
third, after the death of his kinesman Gilbert de Gaunt the last Earl of
Lincoln of that sur-name. ( It is set down by some exquisite Writers, that
this Randoll dying without issue, did give the Title and Earldom of Lincoln,
to his sister Auice, the wife of Robert Quincy, and so he the said Robert,
became Earl of Lincoln; which thing I can hardly believe; for that all
honors and titles of Dignities are derived and enjoyed by the bounty and
favor of the King or Sovereign; and therefore, that this gift of Randoli to
his sister, could make her Countess, or Robert her husband Earl of Lincoln,
is idle and altogether untrue.) He married first, Constance, daughter of Conan
Earl of Britain and Richmond, (the widow of Geffrey Plantagenet) from whom
he was divorced, the second of king John; and after married Clemence, daughter
of William Fengeres; and to his third wife, he took Margaret, daughter of
Humfrey de Bohun, Earl of Hereford, but had no issue by any of them. He was a
Witness to king Henry the thirds Charter, bearing date, 1224. of lands that he
gave to the Abbey of Peterborough, by the name of Randoll Earl of Chester and
Lincoln; and after dyed at his Castle of Wallingford, the 17. year of King
Henry the 3. and was buried at Chester, leaving his four sisters his heirs,
which were married, as in the title of Earls of Chester.

Et portoit, d'azur a trois garbes d'or. John Lacie, Baron of Halton, Lord of
Ponfret and Blackeburneshire, and Constable of Chester, son and heir of
Roger, was created Earl of Lincoln, in the 17. year of king Henry third, and
married Alice, daughter of Gilbert, Lord of the Egle, and Baron of Pimsey; and
to his second wife, he married Margaret, daughter and one of the two heirs of
Robert Lord Quincy (son and heir of Saire Quincy Earl of Winchester) by
Hawis his wife, the fourth sister, and one of the heirs of Randoll Blundeuile,
Earl of Chester and Lincoln, by whom he had issue, Lord Edmond Lacie, that
dyed before his Father, in the year, 1257. who before had married Alice,
daughter of the Marquess of Saluce in Italy, and had issue, Henry Lacie Earl
of Lincoln; and Mauld, married to Richard de Clare Earl of Gloucester. This
John, dyed in the 24. year of king Henry the third, and was buried in the
Abbey of Stanloe.

Et portoit d'or au lion rampant de pourp^e. HEnry Lacie, (grandchild of John
Lacie Earl of Lincoln, by his son Edmond) was the second Earl of Lincoln
of that Family, Baron of Halton, and Constable of Chester, and Lord of
Denbeigh, by king Edward the first. He writ in his style, Earl of Lincoln,
Constable of Chester, Lord Ros and Roweniock, and married to his first wife,
Margaret, daughter and heir of William Lonspee, grandchild of William
Longspee Earl of Salisbury, by his son William, by who^ he had issue, Edmond
Lacie drowned in a Well in Denbeigh Castle, in the life time of his father; and
Alice, married to Thomas Plantagenet, Earl of Lancaster, Leicester, and Derby.
This Henry, married to his second wife, Ioane, daughter of William Martyne Lord
Camoys, but by her had no issue. He dyed at his house, now called Lincolnes
Inn, in Chancery Lane, in London, 1311. and lies buried in Paul's Church, in
London, in S. Dunstans Chapel.

Et portoit, d'or au lion rampant de purpre. HEnry of Mounmoth (sur-named
Tortcoll) son of Henry Earl of Lancaster, and brother and heir of Thomas
Earl of Lancaster, Leicester, and Derby, that married Alice Lacy aforesaid,
was created Earl of Derby, in the life time of his Father; after whose death
(which was in the year, 1345.) he was also Earl of Lancaster, Leicester, and
Lord high Steward of England; and in the 25. of king Edward the third, he was
made Duke of Lancaster; and in the 27. year of the same Kings reign, he had
the Earldom of Lincoln given him. He married Isabell, daughter of Henry Lord
Beaumont, and had issue, two daughters his heirs; Mauld the eldest was married
to William Duke of Bauarre, Earl of Henault, Holland, and Zeland; Blanch the
second daughter, was wife to John of Gaunt Earl of Richmont, (fourth son of
king Edward the third) who after the death of this Henry, his Father in law,
was the second Duke of Lancaster. This Henry, dyed in the 35. year of king
Edward the third.

Et portoit, d'engleterre au band d'azur. John de la Pole, son and heir of
John de la Pole second Duke of Suffolk, was created Earl of Lincoln, in the
seventh year of king Edward the fourth, and married Margaret, daughter of
Thomas Fitz-Alan Earl of Arundell, by whom he had no issue. He was slain in
the life time of his Father, at Stokefield, taking part with Martine Swarth,
the 16. of June, in the second of king Henry the seventh, 1487.

Et portoit, d'azur a la face a trois testes de leopards d'or, au lambell
d'argent. HEnry Brandon, son and heir of Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk,
by Mary the French Queen, being about twelve years of age, was created Earl
of Lincoln, at Bridewell, in the seventeen year of king Henry the eight, and
then dyed without issue, his Father living.

Et portoit, burelle d'argent and de gueulles de dix pieces au lion rampant
d'or, correne perpale gueulles and d'argent au lambell d'argent. EDward
Clinton, Lord Clinton, was created Earl of Lincoln, in the 14. year of
Queen Elizabeth, 1572. and made Lord Admiral of England. He married three
wives, the first was Elizabeth, daughter of Sir John Blount, the widow of the
Lord Talboys, by whom he had issue, Bridget, wife to Robert Dymock of
Lincolnshire, Esquire, Father of Sir Edward Dymock, his Majesty's most worthy
Champion; Katherine, wife of William Lord Borough, Father of Thomas Lord
Borough, Lord Deputy of Ireland; Margaret, wife to Charles Lord Willoughby of
Parham. His second wife was Vrsula, daughter of William Lord Sturton, by whom
he had issue, Henry lord Clinton, Edward, and Thomas, which Tho: had to wife,
Mary, daughter of John Terrell of Warley; Anne Clinton married to William
Ascough, son and heir of Sir Francis Ascough of Kelsey in Lincolnshire,
knight; Francis married to Gyles Bruges, Lord Shandos of Sudley Castle: His
third wife was Elizabeth, daughter of Gerald, Earl of Kildare in Ireland, by
whom he had no issue. He dyed in the 26. year of Queen Elizabeth, and was
honorably buried at Windesore, 1585.

Et portoit, d'argent six croiseletz de sable, au pied fiche, au chef d'azur
charge de deux molettes d'or. HEnry Lord Clinton, Son and heir of Edward Earl
of Lincoln, and Lord high Admiral of England, after the death of his Father,
was Earl of Lincoln, and married Katherine, daughter of Francis Hastings,
Earl of Huntington, by whom he had issue, Thomas Lord Clinton, and Earl of
Lincoln, 1616. Sir Edward Clinton knight, who married Mary, daughter of Thomas
Dighton of Sturton; and Elizabeth Clinton, wife to Sir Arthur Gorge knight.

THomas Lord Clinton, and Earl of Lincoln now living, 1618. married
Elizabeth, daughter and one of the heirs of Sir Henry Knyuet knight, and has
issue, Edward Lord Clinton, knight of the Bath, Henry and Thomas Clinton,
Katherine, Elizabeth, and Francis.

A CATALOGVE OF THE Dukes and Earls Palatines of Lancaster, their Arms,
Wives, and Children.
John (sur-named Without-Land) brother of king Richard the first, was by the
said King, created Earl of Lancaster, and had given him also the Earledomes of
Nottingham, Devonshire, and Cornwall. He married Isabell, third daughter and
one of the heirs of William Earl of Gloucester, by whom he had the said
Earldome, conditionally, that he should give yearly between the other two
sisters, four hundred pounds; but from the said Isabell he was divorced, in
the first year he came to be King; as in the title of Earls of Gloucester, is
more at large.

Et portoit, les arms d'engleterre an baston d'azur brochant sur le tout.
EDmond (sur-named Crouchbacke) second son of king Henry the third, borne in
the year, 1245. and created Earl of Lancaster by his Father, in the year,
1267. He had also given him, the Earledomes of Leicester and Derby, with the
Office of high Steward of England, after the attaindor of Simon Mountfort Earl
of Leicester, slain at the battle of Euesham, and the disinheriting of
Robert Ferrars Earl of Derby. He married two wives, the first was Auelina,
daughter of William de Fortibus, Earl of Albemarle, and sister and heir of
William de Fortibus, Earl of Albemarle, by whom he had no issue. His second
wife was Blanch, Queen of Navarre, daughter of Robert Earl of Artoys, by whom
he had issue, Thomas Earl of Lancaster, Henry Lord of Munmoth, and John that
dyed in France, without issue. This Edmond was Lieutenant of Gascoigne, in the
first year of king Edward the first; and being sent into Aquitaine with an
Army, dyed at Bayon, in the year, 1296. and his body being brought over Seas
into England, was buried at Westminster, on the North-side of the high-Altar.

Et portoit, gueulles au trois leopards passant d'or, au lambell de cinq pointz
seem de France. Or thus, d'engleterre au lambell de France. THomas Plantagenet,
son and heir of Edmond Crouchbacke, was after the death of his Father, Earl
of Lancaster, Leicester, and Derby, and Lord Steward of England. He married
Alice, daughter and heir of Henry Lacie Earl of Lincoln, by the daughter and
heir of William Longspee, Son and heir of William Longspee Earl of
Salisbury, by whom he had no issue. This Alice was held to be a very loose and
unchaste woman of her body, for in the life time of this Thomas, her husband,
she maintained Sir Richard S. Martyn for her Sweetheart, and after her
husbands death, she married two other husbands, the first was Ebulo Lord
Strange of Knocking; and the second, was Hugh de Frenes, by whom she never had
any issue. Notwithstanding, she gave all her lands and inheritance to Thomas
her first husband, and to his heirs for ever. This Thomas, siding with the
Barons against king Edward the second, in hatred of the Spencers, was taken
prisoner at Borough Brigge, by the treachery of Robert Holland and Andrew of
Hercley, and brought to Pomfret, a Castle of his own, and without the Walls
thereof was beheaded, in the 14. year of King Edward the second, leaving Henry
his Brother, his heir.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. HEnry of Lancaster, Lord of Monmouth,
brother and heir of Thomas Earl of Lancaster, beheaded at Pomfret aforesaid,
was restored to the Earldom of Lancaster, Leicester, and Derby, with the
Office of high Steward of England, in the first year of king Edward the third.
He married Mauld, daughter and heir of Sir Patrick Cadurcis (or Chaworth)
knight, Lord of Kidwelly and Ogmore in Wales, and had issue, Henry Earl of
Derby, and first Duke of Lancaster; and six daughters, Blanch the eldest, was
married to Thomas Lord Wake of Lidell; Mauld the second, was first married to
William Lord Burgh, Earl of Vlster in Ireland; and after, to Sir Ralphe Vfford
knight; Ioane the third daughter, was married to John Lord Mowbray of Axholme;
Isabell was Abbess of Almesbury; Elianor the fifth daughter, was first married
to John, son of Henry Lord Beaumond; and after to Richard Earl of Arundell;
and Mary the sixth daughter, was married to Henry Lord Percy of Alnewike. He
dyed at Leicester, and was there buried in the Monastery of the Channons, in
the year, 1345.

Et portoit, les arms d'engleterre au band d'azur. HEnry of Monmouth,
sur-named Tortcoll, son and heir of Henry Earl of Lancaster, and
grandchild of Edmond Crouch-backe aforesaid, was created Earl of Derby, in
the tenth year of king Edward the third; his Father being then living; after
whose death, he was also Earl of Lancaster, Leicester, and Lord high Steward
of England; and at a Parliament held at Westminster, the 25. of the said
Kings Reign, he was created Duke of Lancaster; and about two years after, the
said King gave him the Earldom of Lincoln. He married Isabell, daughter of
Henry Lord Beaumont, (cousin-germane to Queen Isabell, wife to king Edward the
second, by whom he had issue, two daughters his heirs; Mauld, married William
Duke of Bauarre, Earl of Henault, Holland, Zeland, and Frizeland; Blanch the
second daughter, was married to John of Gaunt, fourth son of king Edward the
third, and after Duke of Lancaster. This Henry, for some disgraceful words,
supposed to be spoken by him, against the Duke of Brunswicke, was by the said
Duke challenged to a single combat, before king John of France; which this
Henry gladly accepted of; and at the appointed time, they being both provided,
entered the listes with haughty courage, for the trial of their cause: but King
John reconciled them, to the great contentment and honor of the Duke of
Lancaster. This Henry dyed of the plague, and was buried in the Collegiate at
Leicester, which himself founded, and placed therein a Deane, twelve Mayor
Canons, and so many inferior Brethren) in the 35. year of king Edward the
third.

Et portoit, d'engleterre au band d'azur. John of Gaunt, (so named of the place
where he was borne) fourth son of king Edward the third, was created Earl of
Richmond, in the year, 1355. and in the 38. year of the said Kings Reign,
he sat in Parliament, with the title of Duke of Lancaster, and Earl of
Richmond; and did write in his style, John, son to the King of England, Duke
of Aquitaine and Lancaster, Earl of Derby, Lincoln, and Leicester, and high
Constable of England, (and as some have, high Constable of France; but of that
I doubt; For Robert de Morell Lord of Fiennes, was then Constable of France.)
And in the fiftieth year of King Edward the third, he sat in Parliament, by
the name of John, King of Castile and Lions; also in the 14. year of king
Richard the second, his Nephew, he was made Duke of Aquitaine, by delivering
him a golden Rod, and putting upon his head a rich Bonnet. He married three
wives, the first was Blanch, daughter and co-heyre of Henry the first Duke of
Lancaster, by who^ he had issue, Henry, after king of England; Phillip, wife to
John king of Portingall; and Elizabeth married to John Holland Duke of
Excester. His second wife was Constance, daughter and one of the co-heyres of
Peter, king of Castile, by whom he had issue, Katherine, married to Henry,
son of king John of Spain, with the Title to the kingdoms of Castile and
Lions. His third wife was Katherine, daughter of Pain Ruet, alias Guien, king
of Arms, and Widow of Sir Otes Swynford, knight, by whom he had issue before
marriage, John sur-named Beaufort, Earl of Somerset, and Marquess Dorset;
Henry Beaufort, Bishop of Winchester, and Cardinal of S. Eusebius, as also
Chancellor of England; Thomas Beaufort, Earl of Dorset, Duke of Excester, and
Chancellor of England; Ioane Beaufort, first married to Ralphe Neuill, first
Earl of Westmerland; and after to Robert Ferrars, Lord of Ousley: This last
marriage with Katherine Swynford, and the legitimating of her children was made
good, by a Bull from Rome. This great Duke and Prince, dyed in the 22. of king
Richard the second, and lies buried in Paul's Church in London.

Et portoit, seem de France, escartelle d'engleterre, au lambell d'hermines.
HEnry Plantagenet, borne at Bullingbroke, son and heir of John of Gaunt, was
created Earl of Derby in the life time of his Father, 1385. by king Richard
the second; and in the 21. year of the said kings reign, he was made Duke of
Hereford, and by that name and title sat in the Parliament, held at
Westminster; and after being accused of treason, by Thomas Mowbray Duke of
Norfolk, was banished England for ten years; mean time dyed John of Gaunt
Duke of Lancaster, his Father; whom this Henry succeeded in the Dukedom of
Lancaster; and after, deposing King Richard, and obtaining the kingdom, he
ordained by assent of Parliament, that Henry his eldest son should enjoy the
same Dignities, and be styled Prince of Wales, Duke of Lancaster and Cornwall,
and Earl of Chester: and so this Henry being crowned King, united the whole
Inheritance of Lancaster unto the Crown. Since which time, the Ducall Title of
Lancaster has been drowned in the Title of the Regal Dignity. This Henry,
married Mary, daughter and one of the two heirs of Humfrey de Bohun Earl of
Hereford, Essex, and Northampton, and Constable of England, by whom he had
issue, Henry Prince of Wales, Thomas Duke of Clarence, John Duke of Bedford,
Humfrey Duke of Gloucester; Blanch married to William Duke of Bauarre; and
Philip married to John, king of Denmark and Norwey. He dyed in the year, 1412.

Et portoit, les armoiries de son pere A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls of Leicester,
their Arms, Wives, and Children.
RObert de Bellomont (a Norman borne) son of Roger de Bellomont, Lord of
Ponteaudemer, and Adelina his wife, sister and heir of Hugh Earl of Mellent,
(after the death of Leofrike, Algar, and Edwin, Saxon Earls) was made Earl of
Leicester, by king Henry the first, 1103. He married Elizabeth, daughter of
Hugh the great Earl of Vermandois, and had issue, Waleran, Earl of Mellent in
Normandy, and of Worcester in England; and Robert sur-named Bossu; Adelina
wife to Hugh Mounfort; and Isabell, married to Gilbert Strongbow Earl of
Penbroke: this Isabell, daughter of Hugh the great Earl of Vermandois,
ouer-liued her first husband, and after married William the second Earl Warren
and Surrey. This Robert, dyed in the year of our Lord, 1118. the 19. of King
Henry the first.

Et portoit, de gueulles, a l'quintfoille d'hermyne. RObert de Bellomont,
sur-named Bossu, (of his crooked back) was the second Earl of Leicester,
after the death of his Father; he was Chiefe-Iustice of England, in King Henry
the seconds time, and married Itta, daughter of Roaldo de Waet, Earl of the
East Angles, and had issue, Robert Blanchmaynes the third Earl of Leicester,
Henry, Geffrey, and John; Isabell married to Simon S. Lize, Earl of
Northampton; and Hawis, married to William Earl of Gloucester. This Robert,
dyed in the thirteenth year of king Henry the second, and was buried at
Leicester.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. RObert de Bellomont, sur-named
Blanchmaynes, of his white hands, son of Robert Bossu, was the third Earl of
Leicester after the Conquest: He married Pernell (or Petronell) daughter and
co-heire of Hugh Grentmesnell, Lord of Hinckley, and Lord Steward of England;
with whom he had in marriage, the Honor of Hinckley, and Office of Lord
Steward of England. She built the body of the great Church of Leicester, and
lies there buried in the Quier, by the high Altar; leaving issue, Robert
Fitz-Pernell, Earl of Leicester; William a leaper, who built the Hospital of
S. Leonards in I eicester, and dyed before his Father, without issue; Roger,
Bishop of S. Andrews in Scotland; Amicia, wife to Simon Earl Mountfort,
Brother of Almericke Earl of Eureux; and Margaret married to Saier de Quincy,
Earl of Winchester. This Robert, was slain in the Holy Land, at Duras in
Greece, where he was buried in the year, 1190.

Et portoit, de gueulles a l'quintfoille d'hermyne. RObert, surnamed
Fitz-Pernell, son of Robert Blanchmaynes, was after the death of his Father,
the fourth Earl of Leicester; and in right of his Mother, Lord high Steward of
England. He married Lourette, daughter of William Lord Brews of Brember in
Sussex, by whom he had no issue. This Robert went with King Richard into the
Holy Land, and was there taken prisoner, and paid for his ransom, two
thousand Marks: He dyed in the year of our Lord, 1204. and was buried in the
Abbey of Leicester, the sixth of King John; leaving Simon de Mountfort, and
Saier de Quincy, who had married his two sisters his heirs.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. SImon de Mountfort (son of Simon Earl
Mounfort in France, son of another Simon Earl Montfort, and Bertha his wife,
daughter of Richard Earl of Eureux, and Constable of France: which last Simon,
was grandchild of Robert, sur-named the Holy King of France, by his base
son Almericke Earl Mountfort) married Amicia, eldest fister and co-heyre of
Robert Fitz-Pernell Earl of Leicester, in whose right he was created Earl of
Leicester, and made Lord Steward of England, in the eight year of king John,
as may appear by his Charter, dated at Slingesbie, the tenth day of March,
1206. This Simon, with his son was after banished England, and disinherited
for rebellion against the king, and allying themselves to the French King. He
was General of the Army, at the siedge of the City of Toulouse, who before
the Gates thereof, was stricken in the head with a stone shot out of an Engine,
whereof he dyed suddenly; and his Brother Almericke, besiedging a Castle hard
by the said City, at the same time, was likewise slain in the year, 1218.
This Simon had issue by his wife Amicia, Almericke Earl Montfort in France;
and Simon that was after Earl of Leicester, in England.

Et portoit, gueulles, au hon d'argent a la double queue passee en en Saulteur.
SImon de Montfort, second son of Simon Montfort Earl of Leicester, and
Amicia his wife, having compounded and agreed with Almericke his elder brother,
for his right and title of the Earldom of Leicester, came into England, and
was graciously received of king Henry the third, 1235. who did not only
restore to him the Earldom of Leicester, with the Office of Lord Steward of
England, but also in the year, 1237. gave unto him in marriage, his sister
Elianor, the widow of William Marshall (the younger) Earl of Penbroke, by who^
he had issue, Henry Montfort, slain with his Father at the battle of
Eue^sham, in the year, 1256. Simon Montfort, Guy, and Almerick, were all three
banished the Land by Act of Parliament; Edward and Richard dyed young; and
Elianor his daughter, was married to Leolyne, Prince of Wales. When the
Noblemen of England raised war against king Henry the third (for denying to
perform the Orders and Decrees made a little before, at a Parliament held at
Oxford) this Simon was made their General; and at a battle, strocke near
Lewis in Sussex, he took the King with his Brother Richard, Earl of Cornwall
and king of Almayne, with Prince Edward his son, prisoners; but Prince Edward
escaping, bid the Barons battle again at Eue^sham, where this Simon was
slain, and the Barons overthrown, in the 40, year of the said kings Reign.
This Simon the second Earl of Leicester, at the Coronation of Queen Elianor,
challenged the Office of Lord Steward of England (in right of Amicia, his
Mother, daughter of Robert Blanchmaynes, and Pernell his wife, eldest daughter
and co-heyre of Hugh Grentmesnill) which Roger Bigot Earl of Norfolk
gainsaid, alleging, that that Office belonged to him of right, by Alice the
other daughter of Hugh Grentmesnill; to which this Simon answered, That in King
John's time this Controversy was agreed, That the Earl of Leicester that then
was, should give to the then Earl of Norfolk, ten Knights Fees; for which
the Earl of Norfolk did release all his right and claim to the said Office
of Lord high Steward of England; Whereunto Earl Roger replied and said, That
of those ten Knights Fees, there were yet two and a half unpaid; To which it
was answered, That by the Laws of the Realm, the said Roger might recover
the remainder of those Knights Fees: And so Simon was received to execute the
said Office, at the Coronation of Queen Elianor.

Et portoit les arms de son pere. EDmond (sur-named Crouch-backe) second son
of king Henry the third, in the fiftieth year of his Fathers reign, was made
Earl of Leicester, and high Steward of England, and had also given him the
Castle of Kenelworth, and married Aueline, daughter and heir of William de
Fortibus, Earl of Albemarle; as in the title of Earls of Lancaster is more at
large. He married to his second wife, Blanch, Queen of Navarre, daughter of
Robert Earl of Arthoys, and had issue, Thomas Earl of Lancaster, Henry, and
John; and after died at Bayon in France, 1295. and was buried at Westminster,
on the North side of the Altar.

Et portoit, d'engleterre, au lambell de France. THomas, eldest son and heir
of Edmond Crouchbacke, Earl of Leicester, and high Steward of England, married
Alice, daughter and heir of Henry Lacie Earl of Lincoln, but by her had no
issue. He was beheaded at Pomfret, in the year of our Lord, 1322. as is more
at large in the Title of Earls of Lancaster.

Et portoit, d'engleterre, an lambell de France. HEnry of Lancaster, Lord of
Monmouth (brother and heir of Thomas aforesaid) was restored to the Earledomes
of Lancaster, Leicester, and Derby, with the Office of high Steward of England,
in the eighteenth year of king Edward the second, and married Mauld or Matild,
daughter and heir of Sir Patrick Chaworth knight, and had issue, as in the
Earls of Lancaster. He dyed in the year, 1345. and lies buried at Leicester.

Et portoit, les arms, d'engleterre a la band d'azur. HEnry of Monmouth
(sur-named Tortcoll) son and heir of Henry Lord of Monmouth, and
grandchild of Edmond Crouchbacke, was after the death of his Father, Earl of
Lancaster, Leicester, and high Steward of England, and after created Duke of
Lancaster, in the year, 1351. He married Isabell, daughter of Henry Lord
Bellomont or Beaumont; and had issue, two daughters his heirs, Mauld the
eldest, married to William Duke of Bauary; and Blanch the second daughter, was
married to John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster. He dyed of the plague, and was
buried at Leicester, the 35. of king Edward the third.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. WIlliam of Bauary, Earl of Henault,
Holland, Zeland, and Frizland, married Mauld, daughter and co-heire of Henry of
Monmouth, sur-named Tortcoll, the first Duke of Lancaster; by reason whereof,
he was Earl of Leicester, in the 35. year of king Edward the third; as does
appear by his Charter, bearing date, 1360. He dyed withour issue.

Et portoit, les arms de Bauary Perbendee lozengie d'argent and d'azur. John
of Gaunt, (so named of the place where he was borne) fourth son of king
Edward the third; after the death of William of Bauary, his brother by
marriage, was by his Father, created Earl of Leicester, Lincoln, and Derby,
in the year, 1361. as in the Earls of Lancaster, is more at large. He married
Blanch, the second daughter and co-heyre of Henry first Duke of Lancaster, by
whom he had issue, King Henry the fourth, and others. He dyed in the year,
1399.

Et portoit, France seem, escartelle d'engleterre au lambell d'hermyns. HEnry
of Bullingbroke, son and heir of John of Gaunt, was Duke of Hereford in the
life time of his Father; and after created Earl of Leicester and Derby, as
also Lord high Steward of England; and lastly, king of England, by the name of
king Henry the fourth.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. RObert Dudley, fifth son of John Dudley
Duke of Northumberland, was created Earl of Leicester, and Baron of Denbeigh,
in the sixth year of Queen Elizabeth, 1564. at S. Ima^s house on Michelmas
day. He was Knight of the honorable Order of the Garter, and of S. Michael, L.
Steward of her house, and Master of the Horse, and one of her Majesty's most
honorable privy Counsel. He married two wives, the first was Amie, daughter
and heir of Sir John Robsert, knight, who dyed without issue. His second wife
was Lettice, daughter of Sir Francis Knolles, Treasurer of the household to
Queen Elizabeth, and Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter, by whom he had a
son named Robert, Baron of Denbeigh, who dyed young without issue. This
Robert dyed without any lawful issue, at Cornebury Lodge in Oxfordshire, 1588.
and was buried at Warwick, leaving issue, Robert a base son, begotten of
Duglasse Howard, sister of Charles Earl of Nottingham.

Et portoit, d'or au lion rampant vert a la double queue'. RObert Sidney, Lord
Governor of Vlishing, son of Sir Henry Sidney, Knight of the Garter, Lord
Deputy of Ireland, and President of the Counsel of the Marchesse of Wales, and
of Lady Mary his wife, eldest sister and co-heyre of Robert Dudley Earl of
Leicester, fifth son of John Dudley, Duke of Northumberland, was by King
James, the thirteenth day of May, 1603. created Baron Sidney of Penshurst, in
the Tower of London: and on the forth day of May, 1605. he was created Viscount
Lisle at Grienwich; and lastly, on Sunday, the second day of August, 1618. he
was created Earl of Leicester, at Salisbury: he being then Lord Chamberlain
to Queen Anne, and knight and companion of the Noble Order of the Garter. He
married Barbary, the only daughter and heir of John Gamage, Lord of Coytie in
Glamorganshire, by whom he has issue now living, Robert Lord Lisle, who
married Lady Dorothy, eldest daughter of Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland;
Lady Mary married to Sir Robert Wroth; Lady Phillip wife to Sir John Hubert
knight, son and heir of Sir Henry Hubert knight, Baronet and Lord
Chiefe-Iustice of the Court of common Pleas; and Lady Barbara Sidney the third
daughter, yet unmarried, 1618.

Et portoit, d'or a la pheon d'azur. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls of March, their
Arms, Wives, and Children.
ROger Lord Mortimer of Wigmore, (son and heir of Edmond Lord Mortimer of
Wigmore) was created the first Earl of the Marchesse of Wales, in the second
year of king Edward the third, at a Parliament held at Salisbury. Unto this
Roger, was committed the government of Edward the third, for that he was
generally accounted a man of singular virtue; and unto him was joined Edmond of
Woodstocke Earl of Kent, and Henry Plantagenet Earl of La^caster, as
assistants. A Parliament being held at Northampton, 1328, a dishonorable peace
and marriage was made, wherein the King (by the directions of his Mother, and
this Roger Mortimer) released to the Scots, their homage, fealty, and service
due to him for that kingdom; and delivered up to them also, the grand Charter
called Ragman; which under the hands and seals of their late King, and of the
Nobility of Scotland, testified their tenure and subjection to the Kings of
England. This Roger, in the fourth year of king Edward the third, was taken at
Nottingham Castle at midnight, in Queen Isabell the Kings Mothers chamber,
(with whom he had been over familiar) by William Lord Montague, and others, and
sent to the Tower of London, and condemned of high treason at Westminster, in
presence of the whole Parliament; and after drawn to the common Gallows, and
there hanged two days and two nights, and then taken down and buried in the
Grey-Fryars Church. He married Ioane, daughter and heir of Peter Iamuile, Lord
of Mede, Vaucolour, and Trime in Ireland, and had issue, Edmond Mortimer,
knighted at the Coronation of King Edward the third, with his Brother Sir Roger
Mortimer, and Geffrey Mortimer Lord of Cowich; John the fourth son of this
Roger, was slain at a Iusting at Shrewsbury; Katherine the eldest daughter,
was married to Thomas Beauchampe Earl of Warwick; Ioane married to James Lord
Audley; Agnes married to Laurence Hastings, Earl of Penbroke; Margaret married
to Thomas, son and heir of Maurice Lord Berkeley; Mauld married to Sir John
Charlton, Lord Powis; Blanch, wife to Peter Lord Grandison; and Beatrix the
seventh daughter, was married first to Edward, son and heir of Thomas of
Brotherton, Earl of Norfolk; and after to Thomas Brews.

Et portoit, bar d'or and d'azur, au chef palee les corners geronne a un
escuchon d'argent. ROger Mortimer, grandchild to Roger Mortimer, the first
Earl of March aforesaid, by his son Edmond, was restored in the 29. year of
king Edward the third, to the Earldome of March, and all other lands, honors,
and possessions, which his said Grandfather was possessed of; for that he was,
contrary to law (as the Lawyers then said) put to death, being never brought
to answer; (which course of Justice was used before, at the trial of the
Earls of Lancaster, Winchester, Gloucester, and Kent, by the advice of the said
Roger and Queen Isabell.) This Roger, was one of the first Founders of the
Order of the Garter, and married Phillip, daughter of William Mountague Earl
of Salisbury, and had issue, Roger Mortimer, that dyed without issue before his
Father, and Edmond Mortimer, that was the third Earl of March; Margaret
married to Robert Vere Earl of Oxford; and Margery married to John Lord
Audley. He dyed in Burgundy, at a Town called Roueray, in the three and
thirtieth year of King Edward the third, and his body being brought into
England, was buried by his Ancestors, at Wigmore.

Et portoit, bar d'or and d'azur, au chef palee les corners geronne a un
escuchon d'argent. EDmond Mortimer, second son and heir of Roger Mortimer,
the second Earl of March, (was after the death of his Father) the third Earl
of March, and Lord of Wigmore. He married Phillip, daughter and only heir of
Lionell of Antwerpe, Duke of Clarence, Earl of Wiltshire and Vlster, and Lord
of Conaught and Trime in Ireland, by whom he had issue, Roger Mortimer, the
fourth Earl of March, and Sir Edmond Mortimer, knight, that married the
daughter of Owen Glendour; Sir John Mortimer knight, the third son, was
beheaded for treason, the third of king Henry the sixth; Elizabeth married to
Henry Lord Percy, sur-named Hotspurre; Philip, first married to John Hastings,
Earl of Penbroke; and after to Richard Earl of Arundell; and lastly, to John
Lord S. John, and dyed without issue. This Edm^nd, rec^^ered from William
Mountague Earl of Salisbury, the Castle and honor of Denbeigh, which king
Edward the third had given before to Roger Mortimer Earl of March, this
Edmonds Grandfather. This Edmond, died at Cork in Ireland, the fifth of king
Richard the second, and was buried at Wigmore.

Et portoit, burelle de six pieces do'r and 'd'azur, au chef de la primier deux
paletts entte deux base equites de la second, sur le tout a un escuchon
d'argent. ROger Mortimer, after the death of Edmond, his Father, was the fourth
Earl of March of that sur-name, whom king Richard the second nominated for his
successor in the kingdom of England, 1387. being descended of the body of
Philip, only daughter and heir of Lionell Duke of Clarence, third son of
king Edward the third. He married Elianor, daughter of Thomas Holland Earl of
Kent, Lord Wake, and Duke of Surrey, and sister and co-heyre of Thomas her
brother, by whom he had issue, two sons and two daughters; Edmond the first
son, was the fifth Earl of March; Roger the second son dyed young; Anne was
married to Richard of Coningsbourgh Earl of Cambridge, son of Edmond of
Langley Duke of York; and Elianor married to Edward Courtney Earl of
Devonshire. He was writ and styled Earl of March and Vlster, Lord of Wigmore,
Trime, Clare, and Conaught; and was slain by the wild Irish, being then
Lieutenant of the Kings Forces in Ireland, in the two and twentieth year of
King Richard the second, and bare the Arms of his Father.

EDmond Mortimer, son and heir of Roger aforesaid, was after the death of
his Father, the fifth Earl of March and Vlster, and Lord of Wigmore, Trime,
Clare, and Conaught, and married Anne, daughter of Edmond Earl Stafford, and
dyed without issue, in the Castle of Trime in Ireland, the third of King Henry
the fixed, and was buried at Stoke near Clare, leaving Richard Duke of York,
his Nephew and heir to succeed him: Anne his widow was after married to John
Holland Earl of Huntington.

Les arms de Mortimer. RIchard Plantagenet, (son and heir of Richard of
Conesburgh Earl of Cambridge, by Anne his wife, sister and co-heyre of Edmond
Mortimer, the fifth Earl of March) after the death of his Father, and Edmond
Mortimer his Uncle, did write himself, Duke of York, Earl of Cambridge,
Vlster, March, and Rutland, Lord of Wigmore and Clare. He married Cecily,
daughter of Ralphe Neuill, first Earl of Westmerland, and had issue, Edward
Earl of March, (after king, by the name of king Edward the fourth) and others,
as in the title of York. This Richard, was slain at the battle of
Wakefield, 1460. and the 39. of king Henry the sixth.

Et portoit, France escartelle d'engleterre a bordure d'argent seem lions
rampant purpre. EDward Plantagenet, son and heir of Richard Duke of York
aforesaid, was after the death of his Father, Earl of March and Vlster, and
Lord of Wigmore and Clare; and lastly, king of England, by the name of King
Edward the fourth.

Et portoit, France escartelle d'engleterre a vnlambell d'argent, charge de
neuf torteaux. A CATALOGVE OF THE Marquesses Montague, their Arms, Wives, and
Children.
John Neuill, brother of Richard Neuil (sur-named the great) Earl of Warwick
and Salisbury, was in the first year of king Edward the fourth, created Lord
Mountague; and in the fourth year of the said Kings Reign, he was created
Earl of Northumberland at York; (at which time, Henry Percie Earl of
Northumberland lived in banishment attainted; but afterward obtaining the Kings
favor, he returned into England, and was restored to his Earldom of
Northumberland again, in the eight year of king Edward the fourth) And in the
tenth year of the said Kings Reign, (the said John having surrendered his
grant of the said Earldom) was created Marquis Mountague; and in the year
after, was slain at Gladmore Heath, at the battle of Barnet; and being
brought to London in one Coffin, with his brother the Earl of Warwick, was
set in S. Paul's Church in London, with their Faces bare, to be seen three
days, and then carried to the Priory of Bisham, and there both buried in one
grave. This John, married Isabell, daughter and heir of Sir Edmond
Engelesthorp knight, and had issue, George Neuill, created Duke of Bedford, the
tenth of king Edward the fourth; and five daughters, (who after the death of
the said George without issue, were his heirs) Anne the eldest, was married
to Sir William Stoner knight; Elizabeth, married to the Lord Scroope of Vpsale;
Margaret, married to Sir John Mortimer knight; and after to (...) Horn; Lucy,
was first married to Sir Thomas Fitz-Williams of Aldwarpe, Father of William
Fitz-Williams, Earl of Southampton; and after to Sir Anthony Brown knight;
and Isabel the 5. daughter, was married to Sir William Hudleston knight. Al
which five daughters had issue. This John, Marquess Mountague, and George Duke
of Bedford, his son, were by Act of Parliament, the 17. of Edward the 4.
degraded of all honorable Titles, in these words.

Where before this time, the King our Sovereign Lord, for the great zeal and
love he bare to John Neuill, late named Marquess Mountague, and other
considerations him moving, did erect and make George Neuill, the eldest son
of the said Marquess, to be Duke of Bedford; and at that time, for the great
love his said Highness bare to the said John Neuill, purposed and intended
to have given to the said George, for sustentation of the same dignity,
sufficient life-lode: And for the great offenses, unkindness, and mis-behauing
that the said John Neuill has done and committed to his said Highness, as
is openly known, he has not cause to depart any life-lode to the said
George. And for as much, as it is openly known, that the said George has not,
nor by inheritance may have any life-lode, to support the said Name, Estate,
and Dignity, or any name of Estate. And oft-times it is seen, that when any
Lord is called to high Estate, and has not life-lode conveniently to support
the said Dignity, it induces great poverty and indigence, and causes often times
great extortion, embracery, and maintenance to be had, to the great trouble of
all such countrtes, where such estate shall hap to be inhabited. Wherefore the
King, by the advice and assent of his Lords spiritual and temporal, and the
Commons of this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same,
or dained, established, and enacted, that from henceforth, the said Erection
and making of Duke, and all the names of Dignity, given to the said George, or
to the said John Neuill his Father, be from henceforth void, and of no
effect. And that the said George and his heirs, from henceforth be no Dukes,
nor Marquess. Earl, nor Baron, for no erection, or creation before made; but
of that name of Duke, and Marquess, Earl, and Baron, in him and his heirs
cease, and he void, and of none effect; the said Erection or Creation
notwithstanding. This have I thought good to mention here, that Noblemen and
others may be warned, how they sell and consume their ancient Livings and
Patrimonies, left them by their Ancestors; least wanting where-with-all to
maintain their Estates, the King degrade and disable them from bearing any
honorable Title, as he did these two Noblemen, the Father and the Son.

Et portoit, gueulles au Saulteur d'argen, au lambell gobonne d'argent and
d'azur. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earl of Mountgomery, his Arms, Wife, and Children.
PHilip Herbert, (second son of Henry Herbert Earl of Penbroke, and brother
of William, now Earl of Penbroke, 1618.) was made Knight of the Bath, at the
Coronation of King James; and on Satterday, being the fourth day of May, 1605.
he was created at Greenwich, first Baron of Sherland, and the same day, Earl
of Mountgomery; and lastly, he was made Knight of the Garter, 1608. He married
Susan, daughter of Edward Vere Earl of Oxford, and has issue, Anne Sophia.

Et portoit, per pale d'azur and de gueulles au trois lions rampant d'argent a
un bordur gobonny d'or and de gueulles, au cressant pur la difference. A
CATALOGVE OF THE Dukes and Earls of Northumberland, their Arms, Wives, and
Children.
COpso, was made Earl of Northumberland by William the Conqueror, and was
after slain by Osculph, the late disinherited Earl of Northumberland, as he
was entering into the Church of Newburne.

MOrchar, son of Algar Duke of Mercia, and brother to Edwyn (as witnesses
Ingulph. fol. 511.) was made earl of Northumberland by William Conqueror,
after the death of Copso. This Morchar (with his brother Edwyn and others)
misliking of the government of king William, fled the Realm, and returning
again, fortifyed the Isle of Elie, and seated themselves in a place called
Thorney. But after long siedge of that place, Morchar was taken prisoner, and
so kept all William Conquerors days, and dyed in prison in the second year of
William Ruphus. He had a sister named Lucia, first married unto Iuo Talboys, a
great Baron of Angeo; and after to Roger Romara, Lord of Bullingbroke, by whom
she had issue, William Romara Earl of Lincoln: and the third time she married
Randall Meschines, the third Earl of Chester, and had issue another Randall,
sur-named Gernonijs, the fourth Earl of Chester.

Et portoit, de sable a l'aigle d'or, membre and beque de gueulles.
Gospatricke, (son of Maldred, and Aldgith his wife, Sister of Syward the
great Earl of Northumberland) was after the deprivation of Earl Morchar, the
next Earl of Northumberland; and because he suffered Malcolme King of Scotland
with a power to enter England; was by the Conqueror deprived of this
Earldom, in the year, 1072. and after dyed in banishment. Of this
Gospatricke, did descend the Noble Families of Neuils of Midelham, Branspath,
and Raby.

Et portoit, de gueulles au Saulteur d'argent. VVAltheof (son of Syward the
great Earl of Northumberland, by Alfleda his wife, daughter of Aldred,
sometime Earl of Northumberland) was the next earl of Northumberland and
Huntington, after Gospatricke. This Waltheof, in the year, 1074. at Exningham
in Cambridgeshire, at the marriage of Raphe, Earl of the East Angles,
(Norfolk and Suffolk) with the daughter of William Fitz-Osbert, and sister of
Roger Earl of Hereford; conspired with the said Roger and Raphe, and many
others, to expel and drive Will: Conqueror out of England again. For which
conspiracy, this Waltheof was taken and beheaded at Winchester, and was buried
without the walls of the City, in a place where two highways meet; but
afterward his body was taken up again, and with great honor carried to
Crowland, and there buried, in the year, 1076. He married Judith, Niece to
William Conqueror, and daughter of Lambert Earl of Lens in Artoys, with whom
the said Conqueror did give in marriage, the Earldom of Huntington; he had
issue by her three daughters; Mauld the eldest, was married first to Simon S.
Lize, Earl of Northampton, and had issue, another Simon; after she married
David king of Scots, and had issue, Henry: Judith the second daughter, was
married to Ralphe de Tony, son of Roger Tony, Baron of Flamsted in
Hartfordshire, and had issue, Gohilda, wife to Robert de Newborough, younger
son of Henry Earl of Warwick; Alice the third daughter, was married to
Robert Fitz-Richard, Sewer to King Henry the first, son of Richard
Fitz-Gilbert, Lord of Tunbridge and Clare, and had issue, Walter, of whom is
descended the now Earl of Sussex, 1618.

Et portoit, d'argent au lion rampant d'azur au chef de gueulles. VVAlcher,
Bishop of Durham, borne in Loraine, bought of William Conqueror, the
Earldom of Northumberland, and for a time was Earl thereof, after the death
of Waltheof. He was a proud and an insolent Prelate, covetous and rich, and was
slain by the Commons at Goats-head, on the River of Tyne, 1079. for denying to
do them Justice, unless they would first pay unto him, four hundred pounds of
current money; as Matthew Paris, more at large sets down. I pray God we
have no such Bishops Iusticers in this our age; for the said Matthew further
says, That there were above a hundredth persons slain about this matter.

RObert Mowbray, an honorable Englishman, after the death of Walcher, obtained
of William Conqueror the earldom of Northumberland. And after, having slain
Malcolme king of Scots, and his son, near to Anwike, in the year, 1092.
demanded reward for the same; which being neglected, he was so moved, that
when king William Ruphus sent his Letters for him, he denied not only to come
to him, but combyned with diverse other Noblemen of the Realm, how to deprive
the said King of his Crown; which being revealed, he was driven to fly to the
Monastery of S. Owin, from whence he was taken by force, and carried to
prison, and after, by the Kings Commandment, was brought before his own
Castle of Bamborough, and there willed to have his eyes put out, unless his
Wife, and Moreall her kinesman (who were within the said Castle) would yield
up the same; which being surrendered, this Robert was sent to be imprisoned in
the Castle of Windesore, 1096. ( Houeden, fol. 267.) During which time, king
William Ruphus held the Earldom of Northumberland in his own hands, and
disinherited all the said Roberts Progeny. He was after shorn a Monk at S.
Albons, where he dyed, the seventh of king Henry the first, 1106. The most of
his honors and lands, were given to Lord Nigell de Albeney, Chamberlain to
King William Ruphus, for his good service, done at the battle of
Tenarch-bray, where he slew the horse of Robert Duke of Normandy, took him
prisoner, and brought him into England, and there delivered him to the king his
brother, who sent him to prison, to the Castle of Cairdiffe in South- Wales,
where he had both his eyes put out, and pined to death with sorrow, in the 35.
year of king Henry the first, and was buried at Gloucester.

Et portoit, gueulles au lion rampant d'argent. HEnry, son of David king of
Scots, begotten of Mauld, eldest daughter and co-heyre of Waltheof Earl of
Northumberland and Huntington, was by king Stephen, made Earl of
Northumberland; (as M. Camden cites out of Poly Chronicon of Durham, and that
William his son, did also write himself Earl of Northumberland) But I
rather think, that if they did assume that title of Honor, it was done more
upon their own wills, then by any just title or right they had to the same: but
see more of this, in the Earls of Huntington.

Et portoit, d'or a trois peuz ioynantz au point de gueulles. HVgh de Pudsey,
or Putiaco, (Nephew to king Stephen, as Glouer Somerset has) Bishop of Durham,
a very ambitious, proud, and covetous man, bought of king Richard the first,
the Earldom of Northumberland, for term of his life, and was girt with the
Sword of the Earldom (as then the custom was:) At the doing whereof, the
king used these words: Am not I a good craftesman, that have made a new Earl
of an old Bishop? And to make his ambition more manifest, he gave the king one
thousand Marks, to be made Chiefe-Iustice of England. But afterward,
perceiving the King to frown, and be angry with him, voluntarily did resign
the said Title and Earldom again to the King, and remained only Bishop,
all his life time after. This Stone Priest dyed in the year, 1195. leaving
issue, three bastard sons.

Et portoit, party per saulteur d'or and d'argent, a la croix patee d'azur.
HEnry Lord Percie, of Alnwick in Northumberland (son of Henry Lord Percy, and
of Mary his wife, sister of Henry Duke of Lancaster) was created the first
Earl of Northumberland of that sur-name, at the Coronation of king Richard the
second, 1377. and that day was Deputy for Margaret, Duchess of Norfolk, and
Countess Marschall of England, and did execute the Office of Earl Marshall.
This Henry, in the first year of king Henry the fourth, had given him the Isle
of Man, to be holden of the King by service, to bear the the Sword, which he
wore when he entered England. Also this Henry and Henry Hotspurre, his son,
fought the battle of Hallidowne Hill, against the Scots, 1402. and having the
victory, took these Earls prisoners; Mordake, Earl of Fiffe; Archibald,
Earl Duglasse; Thomas, Earl of Murrey; and Robert, Earl of Angus. And after
the battle of Shrewesbury, he was committed to the Tower of London, and being
from thence delivered, in the ninth year of king Henry the fourth, he, with
the Lord Bardolphe, came out of Scotland with a power against the King; and at
Bramham More was encountered by Thomas Rookeby, then Shireffe of Yorkshire,
where the said Earl was taken prisoner, the Lord Bardolphe wounded to death,
and brought to York, where they were both beheaded, in the year, 1408. He
married two wives, the first was Margaret, daughter of Ralphe Lord Neuill of
Raby, by whom he had issue, Henry sur-named Hotspur, slain (with Thomas Percie
Earl of Worcester, his Uncle) at the battle of Shrewsbury; Sir Thomas
Percie knight, Father of Henry Percy, Earl of Atholl in Scotland; Sir Ralphe
Percie third son, slain in battle by the Sarrazins; and Alan the fourth
son dyed young. This Henry's second wife, was Mauld, daughter of Thomas Lord
Lucy, and sister and heir of Anthony her brother, by whom he had no issue;
notwithstanding, she gave all her lands to her husband, conditionally, that he
and his heirs should for ever after, quarter and bear her Arms, next to his
own, and before the Percies Arms; which was granted, and to this day is
performed.

Et portoit, d'or, au lion rampant d'azur: escarelle Percy, qui est d'azur au
cinq fizelles en face d'or. HEnry Lord Percie (grandchild to Henry Lord
Percy, and first Earl of Northumberland, by his son Sir Henry Hotspur) was
restored and made the second Earl of Northumberland, the third of King Henry
the fifth. He was sent pledge into Scotland, for his Grandfather, who was
taken prisoner at the battle of Otterborne, the 12. of King Richard the
second, 1388. and there continued unto the year, 1414. Who after taking part
with King Henry the sixth, against Richard Duke of York, was slain at the
first battle of S. Albons, in the year, 1455. He married Elianor, daughter
of Ralphe Neuill, first Earl of Westmerland, and had issue, Henry the third
Earl of Northumberland; Thomas Lord Egremant, slain at the battle of
Northampton, the 39. of king Henry the sixth; William Percie, Bishop of Carlell;
Anne, married to Thomas Lord Hungerford; Katherine, wife to Edmond Gray Earl
of Kent; and Elizabeth was married to the Lord Clifford; and diverse other
children which dyed without issue.

Et portoit, d'or au lion rampant d'azur, escartelleacute; gueulles a trois
Luces hauriant d'argent, le tierce de Percy qui est d'azur cinq fizelles en
face d'or, le quart de la premier. HEnry Lord Percy, the third Earl of
Northumberland of that Family, taking part with King Henry the sixth, was slain
on Palme-Sunday, the 29. day of March, in the first year of king Edward the
fourth, between Touton and Saxton, with the Earls of Shrewsbury and
Devonshire, and the Lord Clifford. He married Elianor, daughter and heir of
Richard Lord Poynings, Brian, and Fitz-Payne, by whom he had issue, Henry the
fourth Earl of Northumberland; Elizabeth married to Henry Lord Scroope of
Bolton; Elianor married unto Reginald West, Lord Laware; and Margaret married
to Sir William Gascoine knight.

Et portoit, d'or au lion rampant d'azur, arm and lampasse d'gueulles;
escattelle Lucy, qui est, gueulles a trois Luces hauriant d'argent. John
Neuill, Lord Mountague, Brother to Richard Neuill Earl of Warwick and
Salisbury, was created Earl of Northumberland by Letters Patents, dated at
York, the 28. day of May, in the fourth year of king Edward the fourth, by
reason Henry Lord Percy, son and heir of Henry the third, Earl of
Northumberland, was then fled into Scotland, with King Henry the sixth, and for
a time remained there; yet after returning again, and obtaining the Kings
favor, was restored to the Earldom of Northumberland again; and this John
Neuill; surrendering his Grant of that Earldom, was created Marquess
Mountague, the eight of king Edward the fourth, as in the title of Mountague is
more at large.

Et portoit, de gueulles au Saultier d'argent, au lambell gobonne d'argent and
d'azur. HEnry Lord Percie (son and heir of Henry Percy the third Earl of
Northumberland, after the surrender of John, Marquess Mountague, of the
Earldom of Northumberland) was restored to his Fathers Earldom, in the
year, 1467 and was the fourth Earl of that name and Family, and Knight of the
Garter; who being with king Richard the third at the battle of Bosworth near
Leicester, against Henry Earl of Richmond, (where the said king was slain)
was taken prisoner; whom king Henry the seventh, after pardoned, and took to
favor, and made him of his privy Counsel. After all which, 1488. a tax being
granted by Parliament, of the tenth penny of all lands and goods; (to the aid
of the Duke of Britain) which those of the Bishopprick of Durham and Yorkshire
did refuse to pay; the king commanded this Earl Henry to distress, or
otherwise to levy the money; which being made known to the rude people, they
with great violence set upon the Earl, and furiously slew him, in a place
called Cockledge, by Thurske. 18. miles from York, in the 4. year of king
Henry the 7. and was buried in Beuerley Minster with his wife. He married
Mauld, daughter of William Herbert Earl of Penbroke, by whom he had issue,
Henry Lord Percy, the 5. Earl of Northumberland; Sir William Percy knight;
Alan Percy a Clarke; and Ioceline Percy; and three daughters; Elianor, wife to
Edward Stafford, Duke of Buckingham; Anne, married to William Fitz-Alan Earl
of Arundell; and Elizabeth, which died young.

Et portoit, d'or au lion rampant d'azur escartelle gueulles a trois Luces
hauriant d'argent. HEnry Lord Percy, after the death of his Father, was the
fifth Earl of Northumberland, Lord Poynings, Fitz Pain and Bryan, and knight
of the honorable Order of the Garter, and married Katherine, daughter and one
of the heirs of Sir Robert Spencer, knight, and of Elianor his wife, daughter
of Edmond Beauford, D. of Somerset, and sister and co-heire of Henry Beauford
and Edmond, Dukes of Somerset, her brothers; and had issue, Henry Percy, the 6.
Earl of Northumberland of that name; Sir Thomas Percy knight; Sir Ingelram
Percy knight, and Margaret, married to Henry Clifford, first Earl of
Cumberland. He died in the 18. year of king Henry the eight.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. HEnry Lord Percy, after the death of Henry
the fifth, his Father, was the sixth Earl of Northumberland of that surname, and
was made Knight of the Garter, in the two and twentieth year of king Henry the
eight; he was sent by the said King with a Commission under the great Seal of
England, to attache and arrest Cardinal Wolsey, and to carry and deliver him
prisoner to the Earl of Shrewsbury, at Sheffield Castle, which he did;
although the Cardinal proudly checked him, and told him, that he was a member
of the College of Cardinals in Rome; and that neither the King, nor any other
temporal Prince under Heaven, could or ought to intermedle with him, for any
cause or matter whatsoever.

This Henry, married Mary, daughter of George Talbot, Earl of Shrewesbury, and
dyed without issue, at Hackney near London, the thirtieth day of June, in the
29. year of king Henry the eight, and was there buried. (His second brother
Thomas being before executed, for taking Arms against King Henry the eight, in
the first difference about Religion.) He gave a great part of his Lands and
Inheritance to the said King, and others. After this Henry's death, the
Earldom of Northumberland lay vacant, until King Edward the sixth made John
Dudley, Viscount Lisle, Duke of Northumberland.

Et port it, d'or au lion rampant d'azur, escartelle de gueulles a trois Luces
hauriant d'argent. John Dudley knight, was first created Viscount Lisle, the
33. year of King Henry the eight; and in the first year of King Edward the
sixth, he was created Earl of Warwick; and the eleventh of October, in the
fifth year of the said Kings Reign, he was created Duke of Northumberland. He
married Jane, daughter and h^yre of Sir Edward Guilford knight, and had issue,
eight sons and five daughters, viz. Henry, who dyed at Bullen; John, Earl of
Warwick, who dyed without issue; Thomas dyed young; Ambrose Earl of Warwick,
who dyed without issue; Robert, Earl of Leicester, dyed also without any
lawful issue; Guilford Dudley beheaded, with the Lady Jane his wife; Henry
slain at S. Quintins; and Charles the youngest son, dyed a Child: Lady Mary
the eldest daughter, was married to Sir Henry Sidney, knight of the Garter, and
Lord President of Wales, Father of Robert, Baron of Penshurst, Viscount Lisle,
Earl of Leicester, and Knight of the Garter; Lady Margaret dyed young; Lady
Katherine third daughter, married Henry Hastings, Earl of Huntington; Lady
Temperance and Lady Katherine, dyed both young. This great Duke, on the 22. day
of August, in the first year of Queen Mary, was beheaded at the Tower Hill,
with Sir John Gates, and Sir Thomas Palmer, knights. John Cock, Lancaster
Herald, (some-time servant to this Duke) begged of Queen Mary, to bury the
head of his old Master, in the Tower of London; which was granted him with the
whole body, and performed accordingly. In remembranee whereof, the said
Lancaster, did (ever after) bear for his Creast, a Bears head, silver,
crowned gold.

Et portoit, d'or au lion rampant, a la queue nouce de vert, arm and lampasse
de gueulles. THomas Percy, (Nephew to Henry Percy, the sixth Earl of
Northumberland, by Thomas his brother, put to death by K. Henry the 8. as
aforesaid) after the death of John Duke of Northumber land, was by Queen Mary
restored in blood; and by Letters Patents, bearing date, 1557. created a new
Lord Percy, and the seventh Earl of Northumberland of that Family, to him and
the heirs male of his body; and for default thereof, to his brother Henry, and
the heirs male of his body. After. Queen Elizabeth made him knight of the
Garter, in the fifth year of her Reign; of which he was degraded, in the
year, 1569. for rebellion with Charles Earl of Westmerland, and afterward
attainted by Parliament, in Anno, 1571: and lastly, was beheaded at York, in
the year, 1572. He married Anne, daughter of Henry Somerset, Earl of
Worcester, and sister of William Earl of Worcester, and had issue, Thomas that
dyed young; Elizabeth, married to Richard Woodroofe of Yorkshire; Mary, wife to
Sir Thomas Gray of Northumberland, knight; Lucie, married to Sir Edward
Stanley, of Einsham in Oxfordshire, knight; a younger son of Edward Stanley
Earl of Derby; and Jane married to the Lord Henry Seymour, brother to the now
Earl of Hartford.

Et portoit, d'or an lion rampant d'azur, arm and lampasse de gueulles,
escartelle de gueul es a trois Luces hauriant d'argent. SIr Henry Percy knight,
(second brother of Thomas aforesaid) was after his said brothers death and
attaindure, by virtue of the former entayle and Grant, the eight Earl of
Northumberland, in the 16. year of Queen Elizabeth; and after, being accused
of treason, and imprisoned in the Tower of London, shot himself to death with
a Dag, charged with two Bullets, before either his cause was heard, or he
arraigned, in the year, 1585. He married Katherine, one of the daughters and
co-heyres of John Neuill Lord Latimer, by whom he had issue, Henry, now the 9.
Earl of Northumberland, 1618. Thomas that dyed young; William third son; Sir
Charles Percy knight; Richard Percy; Sir Alan Percy knight; Sir Ioceline Percy
knight; and George Percy Esquire: Anne Percy dyed young; and Lucy married to
Sir John Wotton knight.

Et portoit, d'or au lion rampant d'azur, escartelle Lucy, qui est, gueulles a
trois Luces hauriant d'argent. HEnry Lord Percy, son and heir of Henry
aforesaid, (after the death of his Father) was the ninth Earl of
Northumberland, Lord Poynings, Fitz-Payne and Bryan; he was made Knight of the
Noble Order of the Garter, by Q. Elizabeth, Anno, 1593. and of the privy
Counsel to King James. He married Dorothy, daughter of Walter Deuereux, Earl
of Essex (and widow of Sir Thomas Perrot knight) by whom he has issue, two
sons and two daughters; Sir Algernon Percy, Lord Percy, and knight of the
Bath, at the Creation of Prince Charles; and Henry Percy a second son; Lady
Dorothy Percy the eldest daughter, married to Sir Robert Sidney, Lord Lisle,
and Knight of the Bath, at the creation of Prince Henry; and Lady Luce the
second daughter, married James Lord Hayes, Viscount of Doncaster, 1618.

Et portoit, dor au lion rampant d'azur, escartelle gueulles a trois Luces
hauriant d'argent. A CATALOGVE OF THE Dukes and Earls of Norfolk, their
Arms, Wives, and Children.
RAphe de Waiet, a Britain borne, was by the gift of William the Conqueror,
the first Earl of the East Angles, (that is to say, Norfolk, Suffolk, and
Cambridgshire) and gaping after an alteration and change in the State, was
dispossessed of that Honor and Title, in the ninth year of the said Kings
Reign, for conspiring to expel him out of England; which was done at the
marriage of this Raphe, with Emme, the daughter of William Fitz-Osberne, Earl
of Hereford, and Marshall of England, and sister to William de Britolio Earl
of Iuory, and Roger Earl of Hereford. There was in this conspiracy, Waltheof
the great Earl of Northumberland, diverse Bishops, Abbots, and Barons: all
which, by the Archbishop Lanfrake, were made known to William Conqueror, he
being then in Normandy, which caused him with all speed to return into
England, and apprehending the said Waltheof, and Roger Earl of Hereford;
Waltheof was beheaded at Winchester, and Roger had his eyes put out, and was
kept in prison during his life. This Raphe de Waiet, keeping the Castle of
Norwich, against the loyalty of William the first, was driven out of England,
and went with his wife to ter^salem; leaving behind him one daughter named
Itta, who married Robert Earl of Leicester, in Anno, 1103.

HVgh Bigot, (son and heir of Roger Bigot, Sewer to King Henry the first,
and Adeliza his wife, daughter and co-heyre of Hugh Grentmesnell, Lord Steward
of England) a Noble Baron of this Realm, and Steward of the house to King
Henry the first, being present at the death of the said King, testified upon
his Oath, before the Arch-Bishoppe of Canterbury, and other the Nobility of
this Realm, that king Henry the first, willed upon his deathbed: that Stephen
his Nephew, and not Mauld the Empress (his daughter) should succeed him in the
kingdom of England. For which Oath, King Stephen in the first year of his
Reign, made this Hugh, Earl of Norfolk. (Tho: Walsingham Ypodigma Neustriae.
page 38.) He married Julian, daughter of Alberick de Vere, the Kings
Chamberlain, and had issue, Roger Bigot, after Earl of Norfolk, and William
a second son. He dyed in the 24. year of king Henry the second, 1177, and
was buried in the Priory of S. Bennets in Thetford.

Et portoit, d'or a la croix de gueulles. ROger Bigot, Earl of the East Angles
or Norfolk, the second of that sur-name, in the year, 1215. with diverse other
Noblemen of the Realm, did require of King John, to have the ancient Laws of
S. Edward the Confessor, renewed and confirmed unto them; which being denied,
they put themselves into Arms, and sent for Lewis (Philip) the French Kings
son, promising to make him King of England. At whose request he came, and
landed in the Isle of Thanet in Kent, the 21. day of May, 1216. and coming to
London, there had fealty sworn unto him by the said Noblemen. So that through
all England, was nothing but killing and firing, until it chanced, the
Viscount of Meyln, a Nobleman of France (which came with Lewis into England) to
fall very sick in the City of London; who feeling death to approach, called
unto him certain of the Barons of England, unto whom he uttered these words. I
am sorry (said he) Brethren, for your subversion and desolation, whereof you
are ignorant; For Lewis, and sixteen of the Earls and Barons with him, have
sworn, that if it be his chance to subdue England, and to be crowned King, he
would banish out of the Realm, all those Noblemen which now take his part, as
Traitors to their King. A little while after, King John dyed, and Henry his
son became King, and made an agreement with his Nobles, whereby Lewis was
feign to abandon and leave England, and go into France back again.

This Roger, married Isabell, daughter of Hamelyn Plantagenet, (base son of
Geffrey Plantagenet, Earl of Anioye) Earl Warren and Surrey, and had issue,
Hugh Bigot Earl of Norfolk, and others. He dyed, and was buried at Thetford.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. HVgh Bigot, son of Roger aforesaid, after
the death of his Father, was the third Earl of Norfolk of that surname, and
married Mauld, the eldest daughter of William Marshall, the elder Earl of
Penbroke, and Marshall of England, and one of the five sisters and co-heyres of
William Marshall and his four brothers, all Earls of Penbroke, and Marshals
of England, and had issue, three sons and one daughter; Roger the eldest
son, was after his Father, Earl of Norfolk, and Marshall of England: Hugh
the second son, was Chiefe-Iustice of England, and was slain at Lewis, in
the year, 1264. Raphe Bigot the third son, married Bertha, daughter of the
Lord Furniuall, and had issue, John and Isabell, who was first married to
Gilbert Lacie, of Meth in Ireland; and after to John Fitz-Geffrey a Baron; and
Isabell the daughter of this Hugh the Earl, was married to Hugh de Albeneio,
Earl of Arundell. The Petition of Marshals Lands, was made in the 31. year of
king Henry the third, whereof this Mauld had for her part. 1120. pounds per
annum, with the Office and Rod of Marshall of England, and the Manor and
Castle of Chepstow, or Strigull in Wales. She ouerliued her husband, and in the
said 31. of Henry the third, she gave the Office and Rod of the Marshalship to
Roger her eldest son, who was then Earl of Norfolk, and Marshall of
England; and as Matthew Paris has, this Hugh dyed at London, the ninth of king
Henry the third, 1225. And M. Milles has, page 504. That he has seen diverse
Charters of this Hughes, signed and sealed with a Seal of a Lion passant upon
the same. Which I greatly marvel at, considering, that both the said Hugh,
and Roger his Father, did use and bear in their Shields and Seals, a plain
Cross, which is graven in stone, and painted on the North-side of the
Cathedral (or Minster) at Westminster, in the time of king Henry the third,
with many other Noblemens Arms, who lived in that time. And further I speak
of my own knowledge, that never any of this Noble Family of Bigots, did ever
give other Coat of Arms, then Gold, a Cross Gueulles, before they married
with Marshals daughter, and were Marshals of England: At which time, they did
assume and take a Coat, used by William Marshall Earl of Penbroke and his
sons (who were Marshals of England) for the Office of Marshall; which was
party per pale Or, and Verte, a Lion rampant gueulles. And thus much have I
thought good here to mention, because I see in diverse Noblemens Arms, (who
are descended of the said Bigots) this devised Arms, in stead of the true and
right Coat of Bigot.

ROger Bigot, son and heir of Hugh and Mauld Marshall, was the 4. Earl of
Norfolk, and first Marshall of England of that Family. To this Roger, was
granted the Marshalship of England by Mauld his Mother, presently after the
death of Anselme Marshall Earl of Penbroke, (the fifth and youngest son of
William Marshall the elder, Earl of Penbroke, and Marshall of England, about
the 31. year of king Henry the third) And at the Coronation of Queen Elianor,
wife of king Henry the third, he made his claim, to execute the Office of high
Steward of England (which he claymed in right of Adeliza his great
Grandmother, daughter and co-heyre of Hugh Grentmesnell, high Steward of
England) Which was gain-saide by Simon Mountfort Earl of Leicester; for that
it was alleged by the said Simon, that at the Coronation of king John, there
was an agreement made between their Ancestors, viz. That Robert Earl of
Leicesters Auncestor, should pay and give unto Roger Bigots Auncestor, ten
knights Fees for the same; of which, there were but seven and a half paid.
Which variance, the King took into his own hands, and adjudged Simon
Mountfort to execute the Office of high Steward; and that Roger Bigot should
bring his Action for the other two Knights Fees and a half, remaining unpaid.

This Roger married Isabell, daughter of William king of Seots, and sister of
king Alexander; and dyed of a bruise, running at Tilt, without issue, Anno,
1269. Leaving Roger his Nephew (son of Hugh his Brother) to succeed him in
his Earldom.

Et portoit, party pale d'or, and de vert, au lion rampant de gueulles. ROger
Bigot, the fifth Earl of Norfolk of that Family, and Marshall of England,
Nephew to Roger the fourth Earl of Norfolk, by Hugh Bigot Chiefe-Iustice of
England his brother. This Roger Bigot, Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, and
Humfrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford and Constable of England, were commanded by
king Edward the first, to go with him into Aquitaine, to the aid of Guy Earl
of Flanders, (whom Charles the brother of Philip king of France, had at S.
Omers in France, a little before overcome in single combat) which they denied,
except he would put in use, and restore to his Subjects, the laws of Magna
Carta; which the said king refused to do; and going on his journey without
them, to the aid of the said Guy against the French King; at his return back
again (for punishment of these Noblemens contempt) first he caused Gilbert de
Clare Earl of Gloucester, to marry Ioane of Acres, the said Kings daughter,
without any dowry: And Humfrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford, to marry Elizabeth,
the widow of John Earl of Holland, another of the said Kings daughters, with
the like conditions. And that this Roger Bigot Earl of Norfolk, should
surrender and deliver up into the Kings hands, all his lands in England, Wales
and Ireland, with the Office of Marshall of England; reserving unto himself an
estate for term of life, with a thousand pound more increase, which the said
King would allow him; with this prouiso, that if the said Roger had issue
lawfully begotten, then he should without all contradiction, receive all from
the said King again, with the increase of 1000. pounds per annum from the
King. He married two wives, the first was Alynae, daughter of Philip Basset,
and widow of Hugh de Spencer, Justice of England. His second wife was A^ice,
daughter of John de Auenne, Earl of Heynault, and dyed without issue, in the
year, 1305. And by an Inquisition taken the fourth of December, the 35. of
king Edward the first, John Bigot was found to be his Brother and heir. After
the death of this Roger Bigot, Earl of Norfolk, King Edward the first, did
give the Office of the Marshalship of England, to Thomas of Brotherton his
second son; whom king Edward the second did create Earl of Norfolk.

Et portoit, party pale d'or and de vert, au lion rampant de gueulles. THomas
of Brotherton, second son of King Edward the first, by Margaret his second
wife, daughter of Philip the third King of France, after the death of Roger
Bigot, the fifth Earl of Norfolk of that name; was by king Edward the first
his Father, made Marshall of England; and in the ninth year of king Edward the
second, his half Brother, he was created Earl of Norfolk, and married
Katherine, daughter of Sir Roger Halys of Harwich knight, and had issue, Edward
and Margaret. Edward was after his Father, Earl of Norfolk and Suffolk, and
Marshall of England, and dyed the Kings Ward, the same year his Father dyed;
leaving Margaret his sister and heir, who was first married to John Lord
Segraue; and after to Sir Walter Many knight. By the Lord Segraue, she had
issue, Elizabeth and Anne; Elizabeth was married to John Lord Mowbray; and Anne
was Lady Abbess at Barking in Essex. By Sir Walter Many she had issue, Thomas
and Margaret; Thomas was in his youth drowned in a Well, at Detford in Kent;
and Margaret was married to John Lord Hastings, Earl of Penbroke, and Lord of
Aburgauenny. This Thomas dyed, and was buried in the Abbey of S. Edmondsbury in
Suffolk, in the year, 1338.

Et portoit, d'engleterre, au lambell d'argent. MArgaret, daughter and sole
heir of Thomas of Brotherton aforesaid, was (for the greatness of her birth,
her large reuennues and wealth) created Duchess of Norfolk, for term of
her life, in the 21. year of King Richard the 2. at whose Coronation, she
exhibited her Petition in these words. To the right honorable Lord, the King
of Castile and Legeons, Duke of Lancaster, and Steward of England. Humbly
beseeches (Margaret, daughter and heir of Thomas of Brotherton, late Earl of
Norfolk, and Marshall of England) to be accepted, to the Office of high
Marshall, now at the Coronation of our Sovereign Lord the King, after the
death of the said Thomas her Father, executing it by her Deputy, as Gilbert
Strongbowe, Earl of Pembroke, did at the Coronation of King Henry the second.
That is to say, to appease the debates in the Kings house, the day of his
Coronation, and to make deliverance of all lodgings, etc. Taking of every
Earl, Baron and Gentlemen, made Knights of the Bath that day, a Palfrey and
Saddle, etc. She married two Husbands, and had issue by them both, as before
is mentioned, and dyed the 24. of March, 1399. and was buried at the Friars
Minors in London.

Et portoit, lez Armoiries d'engleterre au lambell d'argent. THomas Lord
Mowbray; (son of John Lord Mowbray, and Elizabeth his wife, daughter and
heir of Margaret, Duchess of Norfolk, and John Lord Segraue her husband)
after the death of John Lord Mowbray, Earl of Nottingham, and Marshall of
England his Brother; was by King Richard the second, created Duke of Norfolk,
1397. and the first Earl Marshall of England (for before this time they were
but Lord Marshals.) This Thomas, with Henry of Bullingbroke, Earl of Derby,
and Duke of Hereford, was banished the Realm, in the 22. year of king Richard
the second, because he the said Henry, had complained unto this Thomas Lord
Mowbray, of the Kings evil government: of all which, this Thomas made the King
acquainted with, and thereupon, the king called Duke Henry before him,
demanding the truth thereof; which Henry stoutly denied the accusation, praying
to have the combat of his accuser. Thomas Mowbray maintained, what before he
had affirmed, and accepted the Challenge: Whereupon, he King granted their
requests, and signed a day for trial thereof. At which time, the King being
well advised by his Counsel, for-bid the said Combat, and banished Duke
Henry for ten years, and Thomas for all days of his life, who traveling into
Italy, and after to Venice, dyed there with grief, in the year, 1400. the
first of king Henry the fourth, and was there buried. He married two wives, the
first was Elizabeth, daughter of the Lord Strange, by whom he had no issue. His
second wife was Elizabeth, sister and one of the heirs of Thomas Fitz-Alan,
Earl of Arundell, by whom he had issue, Thomas Lord Mowbray, beheaded at
York, with Richard Scrope Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year, 1405. John
the second son, was Duke of Norfolk; Margaret the eldest daughter, was
married unto Sir Robert Howard Knight, Father of John Duke of Norfolk; Isabell
the second daughter, was first married unto Henry Ferrars of Grobie, and after
to Sir James Berkeley knight, Father of William, Marquess Berkeley.

Et portoit, gueulles au lion rampant d'argent, arm and lampasse d'azur. John
Lord Mowbray, second son of Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk (and younger
Brother of Thomas, beheaded at York, who was commonly called Earl Marshall,
and by no other Name or Title) was restored to the Earledomes of Nottingham and
Surrey, in the first year of king Henry the fifth, with the Office of Earl
Marshall. And in the fourth year of the said Kings Reign, at a Parliament
held at Leicester, the king was dubbed knight, by John Duke of Somerset, then
Regent of France, and this John Mowbray, restored to be Duke of Norfolk. He
married Katherine, daughter of Raphe Neuill, first Earl of Westmerland, and of
Ioane his wife, daughter of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, by whom he had
issue, John Mowbray Duke of Norfolk; and after dyed at his Manor of
Epleworth, in the Isle of Axholme, 1434. and was buried in the Charter House of
Carthusians there.

Et portoit, les arm es de son pere. John Lord Mowbray, son of John
aforesaid, was after the death of his Father, Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshall
and Nottingham, Lord Segraue, and of Gower. He married Elianor, daughter of
William Lord Bourchier, and sister of Henry Bourchier Earl of Essex, and had
issue, John Mowbray Duke of Norfolk. He dyed in the first year of king Edward
the fourth, 1461. and lies buried in the Abbey of Thetford.

Et portoit, de gueulles au lion rampant d'argent, arm and lampasse d'azur
John Lord Mowbray, son of John aforesaid, and Elianor Bourchier his wife,
was in the life time of his Father, created Earl Warren and Surrey, by king
Henry the sixth, and after his Fathers death, he was also Duke of Norfolk,
Earl Marshall of England, and Earl of Nottingham, Lord Segraue, and Bruise of
Gower. He married Elizabeth, daughter of John Talbot, first Earl of
Shrewsbury, and had issue, one only daughter his heir, named Anne, who was
married to Richard Duke of York, second son to king Edward the fourth, and
dyed without issue. This John dyed in the fifteenth year of King Edward the
fourth, 1475. at his Castle of Framingham, and was buried in the Abbey of
Thetford. His Inheritance was equally divided between the Howards and
Berkleyes, who were descended of Margaret and Isabell, daughters of Thomas
Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, before mentioned.

Et portoit, gueulles au lion rampant d'argent arm and lampasse d'azur.
RIchard Duke of York, second son of King Edward the fourth, married Anne,
daughter and only heir of John Lord Mowbray, the last Duke of Norfolk, and
Marshal of England of that name; in whose right he was Duke of Norfolk, and
Earl Marshall of England. This Richard, with his brother King Edward the fifth,
was, by the unnatural and cruel command of Richard Duke of Gloucester, their
Uncle, most barbarously murdered in the Tower of London, in the year, 1483.
leaving no issue.

Et portoit, France, escartelle d'engleterre, au lambell d'argent, chargee do you
neuf torteaux. John Howard knight, (son of Robert Howard knight, and of
Margaret his wife, daughter and co-heyre of Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk,
was first made Baron by King Edward the fourth, 1461. And after, by king
Richard the third, he was created Duke of Norfolk, the 28. of June, 1483. He
married two wives, the first was Katherine, daughter of William Lord Molins, by
whom he had issue, Thomas Howard Earl of Surrey, and Duke of Norfolk, and
four daughters; Anne the first daughter, was married to Edmond Gorge knight;
Isabell, married to Robert Mortimer of Essex, knight; Jane, married to John
Timperley Esquire; and Margaret was married to John Windham of Cowtherke in
Norfolk, knight. This John's second wife, was Margaret, daughter of Sir John
Chedworth knight, by whom he had issue, Katherine, married to John Bourchier
Lord Berners, who had issue, three daughters and heirs; Ioane, Margaret and
Mary. This John Duke of Norfolk, was slain at Bosworth field, in the aid of
King Richard the third, on Monday, the 22. of August, 1485.

Et portoit, de gueulles a la band enter six croix recroisettees, au pred
fiche d'argent. THomas Howard, son and heir of John Duke aforesaid, was
created Earl of Surrey, in the first year of King Richard the third, and Lord
Treasurer of England, in the sixteenth year of king Henry the seventh; and was
made Duke of Norfolk, at the Bishop of Canterburies house at Lambeth, 1514.
the fifth of king Henry the eight. And for an honor and augmentation to his
Arms, he had given him by the said King, in the middle of the Bend of his
ancient Arms, in a Schocheon gold, a demie Lion rampant, shot in the mouth
with an Arrow, within a double tressure gueulles. He married two wives, the
first was Elizabeth, daughter and sole heir of Sir Frederick Tilney knight,
and had issue, Thomas, after Duke of Norfolk; Edward slain at Breast, without
issue; Edmond Howard, who married Joyce, daughter of Richard Culpeper of Kent,
(and had issue, Katherine, wife to king Henry the eight) Elizabeth, wife to
Thomas Bullen Earl of Wiltshire; and Muriell, married to John Gray Viscount
Lisle. His second wife, was Agnes, daughter of Philip Tilney Esquire, by whom
he had issue also, William Howard Baron of Effingham, and Admiral of England,
Lord Chamberlain to Queen Elizabeth, Knight of the Garter, and Lord privy
Seal; Thomas Howard, that dyed in the Tower of London; Dorothy, married to
Edward Stanley, Earl of Derby; Anne, wife to John Vere Earl of Oxford;
Elizabeth, married to Henry Radcliffe Earl of Sussex; and Katherine, first
married to Sir Rice ap Thomas, Knight of the Garter; and after to Henry
Dawbeny, Earl of Bridgwater. This Thomas Duke of Norfolk, dyed in the
sixteenth year of the reign of king Henry the eight, and was buried in the
Monastery at Thetford, 1524.

Et portoit, de gueulles a la band a six croix recroisettees fitchez d'argent.
THomas Howard, third Duke of Norfolk of that surname, Earl of Surrey, and
Earl Marshall of England, Lord Mowhray, Segraue, and Bruise of Gower, etc. He
married two wives, the first was Anne, daughter to king Edward the fourth by
whom he had issue Thomas, who dyed young without issue, and was buried at
Lambeth. His second wife, was Elizabeth, daughter of Edward Stafford Duke of
Buckingham, by whom he had issue, Henry Howard Earl of Surrey, beheaded at
Tower Hill by London, 1546. in the life time of his Father (leaving issue by
Frances his wife, daughter of John Vere Earl of Oxford, Thomas, Henry and
Jane) Thomas Howard, second son, was Viscount Byndon; and Mary married to
Henry Fitz-Roy, Duke of Richmond, base son of king Henry the eight. This
Thomas dyed at Kenningham Hall, the first and second of King Philip and Queen
Mary.

Et portoit, les armoiries de son pere. THomas Howard (son of Henry Howard
Earl of Surrey beheaded, and grandchild of Thomas Howard, the third Duke of
Norfolk) was restored in blood by Queen Mary, and made the fourth Duke of
Norfolk, Earl of Surrey, and Earl Marshall of England, Lord Mowbray,
Segraue, and Bruise of Gower. Queen Elizabeth made him of her privy Counsel,
and knight of the honorable Order of the Garter. He married three wives; the
first was Mary, daughter and coheyre of Henry Fitz-Alan Earl of Arundell, by
whom he had issue, Philip Howard Earl of Arundell, that dyed in the Tower of
London. His second wife, was Margaret, daughter and sole heir of Thomas Lord
Audley, of Walden in Essex, by whom he had issue, Thomas, after Earl of
Suffolk, and Lord William Howard, and a daughter named Margaret, married to
Robert Sackuile Earl of Dorset. His third wife, was Elizabeth, daughter of Sir
Francis Leiborne knight, and widow of Thomas Lord Dacres of Gillesland, by
whom he had no issue. This Thomas, the fourth Duke of Norfolk, was after
attainted of high treason, and beheaded at the Tower Hill, the 4. of June,
1572. This Noble Duke, was a great Friend and Benifactor to the Officers of
Arms.

Et portoit, de gueulles, a la band a six croix recroisette es pied fiche
d'argent. A CATALOGVE OF THE Marquesses and Earls of Northampton, their Arms,
Wives, and Children.
VVAltheof, son of Syward the great, Earl of Northumberland, married Judith,
Niece to William Conqueror, and daughter of Lambert, Earl of Lens in Artoys,
(with whom the said Conqueror gave in marriage, the Earledomes of Huntington
and Northampton) by whom he had issue, three daughters his heirs; Mauld the
eldest, was married first to Simon S. Lize (who in his wives right was after
Earl of Northampton) and after she was married to David, son of Malcolme
king of Scots: Judith the second daughter, was married to Rafe de Toney, son
of Roger de Toney, Baron of Flamsted: Alice the third daughter, was married to
Robert Fitz-Richard, Sewer to King Henry the first. This Waltheof was beheaded
at Winchester, by commandment of William the first, in the year, 1075. and
his body first buried without the walls of the said Town, and afterward
removed, and interred in the Abbey of Crowland in Lincolneshire; as more at
large is set down in the Title of Earls of Northumberland.

Et portoit, d'argent au lion rampant d'azur, au chef de gueulles. SImon S.
Lize, a Norman borne, and son of one Randall le Rich, had the Earldom of
Northampton, and the Hundred of Falkley given him by king William Ruphus. He
married Mauld, the eldest daughter, and one of the heirs of Waltheof, Earl of
Northumberland, Huntington and Northampton, and had issue, as in the Title of
Earls of Huntington is more at large. He built the Castle of Northampton; and
he, with Mauld his wife, in the sixth year of king Henry the first, founded
the Abbey of S. Andrew in Northampton. This Simon, after going to the
Holy Land, to fight against the Sarrazans, at his coming homewards dyed in the
year, 1152. in the Priory called Charity, and there lies buried. After his
death, king Henry the first, gave his widow in marriage, to David, brother of
Alexander king of Scots. By which marriage, the said David obtained of King
Henry the first, to be Earl of Huntington, during the minority of young Simon
S. Lize, son of this Simon and Mauld.

Et portoit, party per pale endente d'argent and de gueulles. SImon S. Lize,
the second of that name, after the death of his Father, was Earl of
Northampton; and being very young at his Fathers death, was committed to the
custody of Earl David, who had married Mauld his Mother, who sent him over
Seas into Normandy, to be nurtured and brought up, where he served in the wars.
Mean time, Henry, son of Earl David, his half brother by the Mother,
enjoyed and carried the Title and Honor of Earl of Huntington. And although
this Simon did oftentimes solicit King Henry the first (by Petitions and
other means) to be restored to the said Earldom of Huntington, his Mothers
Inheritance; yet could he never obtain the same, so long as King Henry lived.
After whose death, and that Henry Earl of Huntington dyed also, in the life
time of David his Father, by whose means he had held the same; this Simon
obtained the said Earldom of Huntington, and enjoyed it quietly, with the
Earldom of Northampton, by the favor and good liking of King Stephen. He
married Isabell, daughter of Robert Bellomont, sur-named Crouch-backe, Earl of
Leicester, and Chiefe-Iustice of England, and had issue, Simon S. Lize the
third of that name, Earl of Northampton; Amicia and Hawis two daughters; and
dyed in the year, 1152.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. SImon S. Lize, the third of that name, and
the fourth Earl of Northampton and Huntington, had great suites with the
Scots; for king Henry the second, in the time of this Simons Wardship, did give
the Earldom of Huntington, to Malcolme king of Scots, son of Earl Henry
aforesaid; and after his death, William king of Scots, brother of the said
Malcome had the same, and resigned it to his younger brother David, who enjoyed
the same, until William king of Scots, and Robert Earl of Leicester, with
others, sided with king Henry the second, who then caused Richard de Lucy,
Chiefe-Iustice of England, and William Marshall Earl of Penbroke, to inuest
this Simon S. Lize into that Earldom, as the true heir; and by this means
did Simon come to have and enjoy the said Earldom of Huntington, by judgment
of the King and Peers of the kingdom, as of right belonging to him. He
married Alice, daughter and heir of Gilbert de Gaunt Earl of Lincoln, and
died without issue, in the year of our Lord, 1184.

Et portoit, party per pale endente d'argent and de gueulles. WIlliam de Bohun,
fourth son of Humfrey de Bohun, the eight Earl of Hereford and Essex, and
Constable of England, was created Earl of Northampton, in the 12. year of
king Edward the third, and Deputy for his Brother Humfrey, for the Office of
Constable of England, the said Humfrey being old, and unfit to use the same.
He married Elizabeth, daughter of Bartholmew de Badelismere, Baron of Leeds
Castle in Kent, and had issue, Humfrey de Bohun, the last of that Family and
Name, Earl of Hereford, Essex, and Northampton, and Constable of England
(after the death of his Father and Uncle) and Elizabeth, married to Richard
Fitz-Alan, Earl of Arundell and Surrey. This William dyed before his elder
brother Humfrey de Bohun the 9. Earl of Hereford, Essex, and Constable of
England, in the year, 1359. and was buried at Walden in Essex.

Et portoit, d'azur, fur le band d'argent, trois muletz de sable, enter deux
cottices and six lions rampant d'or. HVmfrey de Bohun, the last of that name,
son and heir of William Earl of Northampton his Father, and Nephew and
heir of Humfrey de Bohun the 9. Earl of Hereford, Essex, and Constable of
England. In all which Titles and Honors, he succeeded both his Father and
Uncle, and married Ioane, daughter of Richard Fitz-Alan Earl of Arundell, and
had issue, only two daughters his heirs; Elianor the eldest, was married to
Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of Gloucester (by whom the Title of Northampton did
descend to the Family of Staffords) Mary the second daughter, was married to
Henry of Bullingbroke; who (in her right) was created Duke of Hereford, and
after king of England, by the name of king Henry the fourth. This Humfrey dyed
in the 35. year of king Edward the third, and was buried by his Wife, at
Walden in Essex.

The Dukes of Buckingham, from the 23. year of king Henry the sixth, until the
thirteenth of king Henry the eight, did write and style themselves Earls of
Northampton and Hereford; because they were descended of the eldest daughter
and heir of Humfrey de Bohun, the tenth and last Earl of that Name and Family.

Et portois, d'azur, a la band d'argent, enter deux cottices and six lions
rampant d'ot. William Parre, Knight of the Garter, (son of Sir Thomas Par of
Kirby Kendall knight) was created Baron of Kendall, the 9. of March, in the 30.
year of King Henry the 8. And in the 36. of the said kings Reign, he was
created Earl of Essex, in regard he had married Anne, the daughter and heir
of Henry Bourchier Earl of Essex. And lastly, in the first year of King
Edward the sixth, he was created Marquess of Northampton, and writ in his
Style, Earl of Essex, Vicegerant, great Chamberlain of England, Keeper of the
privy Seal, Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Justice of the Forests and
Chases to the River of Trent Northward. He married three wives, the first was
Anne, daughter and only heir of Henry Bourchier Earl of Essex, from whom he
was divorced. His second wife, was Elizabeth, daughter of George Brook Lord
Cobham. And his third wife was Helen, daughter of George Suaueburgh, a Swedian
borne, but had no issue by any of them. He dyed in the year, 1571. and was
buried at Warwick, leaving Anne his sister, married to William Herbert Earl
of Penbroke, his heir.

Et portoit, d'argent, deux bars d'azur a la bordure engreslee de sable.
HEnry Howard Esquire, second son of Henry Earl of Surrey, beheaded in Anno,
1546, and brother of Thomas Howard, the last Duke of Norfolk of that name, was
restored in blood by Queen Mary; and by king James created Baron of Marnehill,
at the Tower of London, the 13. day of March, 1603, and the same day and time,
he was also created Earl of Northampton, etc. and died at his house by
Charing-Crosse, in the year, 1614. His body was conueighed to Dover Castle,
and there buried without any solemnity.

Et portoit, les armoiries de Howard a vec la cressant. William Lord Compton,
knight of the Bath, (son of Henry Compton knight, who was made Baron Compton
by writ, the eight of May, 1572.) was created Earl of Northampton by king
James, at Salisbury, the second day of August, 1618. He married Elizabeth,
daughter and only heir of Sir John Spencer knight, sometime Alderman and
Mayor of London, and had issue, Spencer Lord Compton, knight of the Bath, at
the Creation of Charles Prince of Wales, 1616.

A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls of NOTTINGHAM, their Arms, Wives, and Children.
RObert de Ferrars (son of William Earl Ferrars, and of Margaret his wife,
daughter of William Peuerell Lord of Nottingham, disinherited by king Henry the
second, 1155. for consenting to the poisoning of Randall Earl of Chester) was
made the first Earl of Nottingham, in the life time of his Father and Mother.
He gave lands to the church of S. Oswalds, by the name of Robert Earl of
Nottingham; and after died without issue, and was buried in the Abbey of Lenton.

Et portoit, vaire d'or and de gueulles. John Lord Mowbray, son and heir of
John Lord Mowbray of Axholme, and Elizabeth his wife, daughter and heir of
John Lord Segraue, and Margaret his wife, daughter and heir of Thomas of
Brotherton; was created Earl of Nottingham, at the Coronation of king Richard
the second, 1377. and after dyed at London without issue, 1381. being but 18.
years of age, his Mother then being living. After whose death, king Richard
bestowed the said Earldom of Nottingham upon Thomas Mowbray, this John's
younger brother, who was after created Duke of Norfolk. This John was buried in
the White-Fryars (or Carmelites Friars) in London, the sixth year of King
Richard the second.

Et portoit, de gueulles au lion rampant d'argent, arm and lampasse d'azur.
THomas Lord Mowbray, younger Brother of John Lord Mowbray aforesaid, was after
his brothers death, made Earl of Nottingham, the sixth of Richard the second,
and by a Charter bearing date the 12. day of January, the 9. of King Richard
the second, he had given him the name and honor of Earl Marshall of England,
to him and the heirs Male of his body. (Before which time they were but Lord
Marshals) And after in the 21. of the said Kings Reign, he was created Duke of
Norfolk, and permitted to bear the Arms of S. Edward the Confessor, impaled
with the Arms of the Marshalshippe of England, viz. Per pale d'or and vert an
lion rampant Gueulles. After al which favors, king Richard the second banished
this Thomas, with Henry of Lancaster Duke of Hereford; Upon which, he took
such exceeding grief, that he dyed at Venice, and was buried there, in the
Abbey of S. George, in the first year of king Henry the fourth. He married
Elizabeth, sister and one of the co-heyres of Thomas Fitz-Alan Earl of
Arundell, and had issue, Thomas and John, both Earls of Nottingham and Dukes
of Norfolk; Isabell married to Sir James Berkeley knight; and Margaret,
married to Sir Robert Howard knight. He writ in his style, Thomas Duke of
Norfolk, Earl of Nottingham, and Earl Marshall of England, Lord Mowbray,
Segraue, Bruise of Gower and Stuteuile.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. THomas Mowbray (after the death of Thomas
his Father in banishment at Venice) was Lord Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, Earl
of Nottingham, and Earl Marshall of England. He married Lady Constance,
daughter of John Holland, Earl of Huntington, and Duke of Excester, but by her
had no issue. He was after accused and found guilty of high treason, and for
the same was beheaded, with Richard Scrope Archbishop of York, in the sixth
year of king Henry the 4. and his body was buried at York.

Et portoit, de gueulles, au lion rampant d'argent arm and lampasse d'azur.
John Lord Mowbray (second brother of Thomas Mowbray beheaded at York) was
Earl of Nottingham, and Earl Marshall of England; and in the fourth year of
king Henry the sixth, he was created Duke of Norfolk. He married Katherine,
daughter of Raphe Neuill, first Earl of Westmerland, and had issue, John Lord
Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, Earl of Nottingham, and Earl Marshall of England,
Lord Segraue, and Bruise of Gower, etc. and dyed at his Manor of Epleworth, in
the Isle of Axholme, and was buried in the Abbey or House of Carthusians there,
in the year, 1432.

Et portoit, les armoiries de son friar. John Lord Mowbray, son of John
aforesaid, was after the death of his Father, Duke of Norfolk, Earl of
Nottingham and Earl Marshall of England, Lord Segraue, and Bruise of Gower. He
married Elianor, daughter of William Lord Bourchier, and sister of Henry
Bourchier Earl of Essex, by whom he had issue, John Earl Warren and Surrey,
and after Duke of Norfolk, and dyed in the first year of king Edward the
fourth, 1461. and lies buried at Thetford.

Et portoit, de gueulles au lion rampant d'argent, arm and lampasse d'azur.
John Lord Mowbray, son and heir of John and Elianor Bourchier) in the life
time of his Father, was created Earl Warren and Surrey, by king Henry the
sixth; and after the death of his Father, he was Duke of Norfolk, Earl of
Nottingham, and Earl Marshall of England, Lord Segraue, and of Gower. He
married Elizabeth, daughter of John Talbot, first Earl of Shrewsbury of that
name, and had issue, one only daughter and heir named Anne, married to
Richard Duke of York, second son of king Edward the fourth, who dyed both
without issue, leaving all the Mowbrayes lands and livings, to be divided
between the two Families of Howards and Berkleys. He dyed at Framingham
Castle, in the year, 1475. and was buried with his Ancestors at Thetford.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. WIlliam Lord Berkley, of Berkley Castle in
Glocestershire, son of James Lord Berkley, and of Isabell his wife, daughter
of Thomas Lord Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, by Elizabeth his wife, sister and one
of the heirs of Thomas Fitz-Alan Earl of Arundell; was created Viscount
Berkley, the 21. of king Edward the fourth: And in the first year of King
Richard the third, he was made Earl of Nottingham, and Earl Marshall of
England. And in the fourth year of king Henry the seventh, he was created
Marquess Berkley, and married Anne, daughter of John Fynes, Lord Dacres of the
South, and dyed without issue, the seventh of King Henry the seventh, and was
buried in the Augustine Friars in London, giving to the said King, most part
of his Lands.

Et portoit, de gueulles au Cheuron accompaigne de dix croix formies d'argent.
HEnry Fitz-Roy, base son of King Henry the eight, begotten of the Lady
Talboys, daughter of Sir John Blount Knight, was created Earl of Nottingham,
in the 17. year of his Fathers Reign; and after in the year, 1525. he was
created Duke of Richmond and Somerset at Bridewell; and at the same time he was
made Lieutenant General from Trent Northwards, and Lord Warden of the East,
West, and middle Marchesse toward Scotland. He married Mary, daughter of
Thomas Howard, second Duke of Norfolk, and dyed without issue, at S. James
house by Charing-Crosse, the 28. of king Henry the eight, and was buried at
Thetford in Norfolk.

Et portoit, escartelle France and d'engleterre, au bordur escartelle ermyn and
gobonne d'argent and d'azur au baston finestre d'argent, sur le tout, au
eschutcheon escartelle de gueulles and vaire d'or and de vert a lion rampant
d'argent, au le chef d'azur a Castle enter deus test du cert cabushed
d'argent. CHarles Baron Howard of Effingham, and Lord Admiral of England, Son
of William L. Howard of Effingham, was created Earl of Nottingham, at
White Hall, the 23. of October, 1597, by Queen Elizabeth. He married
Katherine, daughter of Henry Carry, Baron of Hunsdon, and L. Chamberlain of the
house to the said Queen, by whom he had issue, William Howard Baron of
Effingham; and Charles Lord Howard of Effingham; Elizabeth, married to Sir
Robert Southwell knight; Francis, married first to the Earl of Kildare, and
after to Henry Lord Cobham; Margaret the third daughter, was married to Sir
Richard Lusun of Staffordshire knight. This Charles married to his second wife,
Margaret, daughter of James Stewart Earl of Murrey, and had issue, James a
son.

Et portoit, les arms de Howard, sur le tout au Molette de sable. A CATALOGVE
OF THE Earls of Oxford, with their Arms, Wives, and Children.
AVbrey de Vere, (son of Aubrey de Vere, Chamberlain to King Henry the
first, Portgraue of London, and Chiefe-Iustice under king Henry the first,
slain by the Commons in London, in the year, 1140. descended from the Earls
of Guisnes; and that sur-name from Vere, a Town in Zeland, (as M. Camden has
others in Normandy) was by king Henry the second, and Mauld the Empress his
Mother, restored first to the Chamberlainship of England, and the Portgraueship
of London (which he had lost before in the civil wars) and after had given
him, the choice of four Earledomes in England, viz. Oxford, Huntington,
Cambridgeshire, and Wiltes, with this condition, that if David of Scotland did
challenge the Earledomes of Huntington and Cambridge, he should not have either
of them; and for that the said David did challenge Huntington and Cambridge, as
his due and right inheritance, the said Aubrey made his choice to take Oxford:
In which Earldom, when the said Henry the second came to the Crown, he by
his Charter did confirm and make the said Aubrey, Earl of Oxford. This Aubrey
married Adelizia, daughter of Henry of Essex, Baron of Raleigh, the kings
Constable, by whom he had issue, Aubrey and Robert Vere, both Earls of Oxford
one after another; and a daughter named Rohesia, first Countess of Salisbury,
and after wife to Geffrey Magnauile Earl of Essex; and lastly she married
Paganus de Beauchamp, Baron of Bedford: She founded the Church, and built the
Town of Royston. This Aubrey the first Earl of Oxford, dyed in the year,
1194. the sixth of king Richard the first.

Et portoit, escartelle, de gueulles and d'or, le premier canton, charge d'une
Molette d'argent. AVbrey de Vere, son of Aubrey aforesaid, was after the
death of his Father, the second Earl of Oxford, and Lord high Chamberlain of
England. This Aubrey did confirm the gift of 7. liberatis terre, which Aubrey
his Father did give to the Canons of S. Edith (or Esith) in Essex, and married
Adelizia, daughter of Roger Bigot Earl of Norfolk, by whom he had no issue.
He dyed in the year, 1214.

Et portoit, les armoiries de son pere. RObert Vere the third Earl of Oxford,
and great Chamberlain of England, brother of Aubrey the second aforesaid,
paid a fine of one thousand Marks to King John, in the 16. year of his
reign, for the seizure of those lands which lately were of the inheritance of
Earl Aubrey his elder brother, and thereby was seized of the Castles of
Heuening ham and Caneuil, with their appurtenances, and had also given him the
Wardship of William Fitz-Otho, to bestow in marriage with his Niece.
Notwithstanding all which favors, he took part with the Barons, who maintained
Lewis the French Kings son against king Henry the third, in the year, 1215.
He married Isabell, daughter and heir of Hugh Lord Bulbec, of Bulbec Castle in
Buckinghamshire, and of Swefham Bulbec in Cambridgshire, and Founder of Wiburne
Abbey in Bedfordshire; and had issue, Hugh de Vere Earl of Oxford, and Sir
Henry Vere knight; of whom the Lord Mordant and others are descended. He had
issue also, one daughter named Isabell, married to Sir John Courtney knight,
great Grandfather of Sir Hugh Courtney, first Earl of Devonshire of that
name. She founded the Preaching Friars in Oxford, and lies there buried in
Anno, 1245. This Robert also founded the Priory of Hatfield Brodoke, where he
lies buried crosse-legged, in the year, 1221. with this Epitaph.

Sir Robert Vere the first, and third Earl of Oxford, lies here. God if he
please, have mercy of his soul. Whosoever shall pray for his soul, shall
obtain forty days pardon. His Arms depicted upon his Shield or Pauice, is
gold, a quarter of France Seem, charged with a Molet Argent.

HVgh de Vere, son and heir of Robert aforesaid, was restored and made Earl
of Oxford, and Lord great Cha^berlaine of England, in the year, 1233. and
married Hawis, daughter of Sayre de Quincy, Earl of Winchester, and had issue,
Robert de Vere, after Earl of Oxford, Aubrey, and Richard; Margaret, married
to Hugh de Cressi, with whom her Father gave in marriage, the Manor of
Keteringham, with the appurtenance ( Robert Lord Quincy, and Lord William
Blande being Witnesses to the said Charter sanz date.) Mauld second daughter,
and Isabell Vere the third daughter. This Hugh dyed in the year, 1263. and was
buried at Colne, the 48. of King Henry the third.

Et portoit, de gueulles, escartelle d'or; le premier brise de un molette
d'argen^. RObert de Vere, the second of that christen name, son and heir of
Hugh aforesaid, was the fifth Earl of Oxford of that sur-name, Lord Bulbec, and
great Chamberlain of England; who siding with the Barons in the civil
dissentions against king Henry the third, was taken prisoner by Prince Edward
the kings son, in a battle near Kenelworth, in the year, 1265. He married
Alice, daughter and heir of Gilbert Lord Samford, and Chamberlain to Queen
Elianor, and had issue, Robert Vere Earl of Oxford; Hugh de Vere, second
son, who married Dionisia, daughter and heir of William Montchensey, Lord of
Swanescamp knight, and dyed without issue; and Alphonsus de Vere knight, third
son, who dyed before his other two elder brothers, and was buried at S.
Albons, the second of king Edward the third. Ioane the eldest daughter, married
William de Warren, son of John Earl Warren and Surrey; Lora the second
daughter, was wife to Reginald Argentein, with whom, her Brother Robert (as
Milles has, page 682.) did give in marriage, the Manor of Ketlingham in
Norfolk. This Robert died in the year, 1295 and was buried at Colne, in the
24. year of king Edward the first.

Et portoit, les arms de son pete. RObert de Vere, the third of that name,
son and heir of Robert the second, was after the death of his Father, the
sixth Earl of Oxford, Lord Bulbec, Samford, and great Chamberlain of England,
and was called The good Earl of Oxford. He was sent by king Edward the first
into Aquitaine, with an Army to relieve his people against the French. He
married Margaret, daughter of Roger Lord Mortimer, and sister of Roger, first
Earl of March, and dyed without issue, in the year, 1331. and was buried at
Colne in Essex.

Et portoit, gueulles escartelle d'or, le premier beise de un molette d'argent.
John de Vere, son of Sir Alphons de Vere knight, and Nephew and heir of
Robert and Hugh his Uncles, whom he succeeded, and was the seventh Earl of
Oxford, Lord Bulbec, Samford, and great Chamberlain of England. He married
Mauld, daughter of Bartholmew Badelismer, Baron of Leeds in Kent; and sister
and one of the heirs of Giles Lord Badelismer her brother, by whom he had
issue, three sons and two daughters, viz. Thomas and Aubrey, both Earls of
Oxford; and John Vere third son, dyed without issue. Margaret the eldest
daughter, was first married to Henry Lord Beaumont, and after to Sir John
Deuereux knight; Isabell the second daughter, was first married to Sir John
Courtney, Grandfather of Hugh, the first Earl of Devonshire of that Family;
and after to Sir Oliver Dynham knight. This John Earl of Oxford dyed in the
33. year of king Edward the third, 1358.

Et portoit, de gueulles escattelle d'or, le prin^ier brise de un Molette
d'argent. THom as de Vere, son and heir of John aforesaid, after the death
of his Father, was the eight Earl of Oxford, Lord Bulbec, Samford, and Lord
great Chamberlain of England, and married Matilda, daughter and heir of Sir
Raphe Vfford knight, Lord Chiefe-Iustice of England, under King Edward the
third, and had issue, Robert de Vere Earl of Oxford, Marquess of Dublin, and
Duke of Ireland, and after died at Bentley in Essex, the 18. day of September,
the 45. of King Edward the third.

Et portoit, les Arms de son pere. RObert de Vere, the fourth of that name,
and 9. Earl of Oxford, at eight years of age, was Lord Bulbec, Samford, and
great Chamberlain of England; and to augment his honor, king Richard the
second, in the 9. year of his reign, created him Marquess of Dublyn, and
gave him a thousand Marks lands by the year, with the Castle of Flynt in
Wales; also he gave to him the son and heir of Charles de Bloys, the^ a
prisoner; for whose redemption he had 20000. pounds; and in the 10. year of
the said Kings reign, he was made Duke of Ireland. After all which, the King
granted him by Letters Patents, to hold the kingdom and Sovereignty of
Ireland, and to bear for his Arms, Azure, three Crowns gold, within a
bordure argent, quartered before his own Coat. He was much hated of the
Nobility, for abusing the Kings ears to the hurt of the Sat. He married
Philip, daughter of Ingelram de Guisnes, Lord of Coucie and Earl of Bedford,
by Isabell his wife, daughter of king Edward the third, whom he divorced, and
took to wife Lantegronia, a mean woman, that came with the Queen out of
Bohemia, but had no issue by either of them. At last he was banished England by
the Barons, and went into France, where about five years after, being a
hunting, he was slain by a wild Boar. King Richard hearing thereof, out of
his love caused his body to be brought into England, and to be apparelled in
Princely Ornaments and Robes, and put about his neck a chain of gold, and
Rings upon his fingers, and so was buried in the Priory of Earls Colne in
Essex, 1392. The king being thereat, did wear blackes.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. AVbrey de Vere, after the banishment and
death of Robert Duke of Ireland his Nephew, was the tenth Earl of Oxford, Lord
Bulbec and Samford, 1393. But the Chamberlainship of England (says Milles)
which his Ancestors did hold in Fee, he surrendered unto king Richard the
second, who bestowed the same upon John Holland Duke of Excester, his half
brother by the Mother. He married Alice, daughter of John Lord Fitz-Walter, of
Woodham Walter in Essex, and had issue, Richard Earl of Oxford, and John that
dyed without issue, the ninth of Henry the fifth; Alice a daughter, was married
to Sir John Fitz-Lewis knight. This Aubrey dyed in the first year of king
Henry the fourth, and was buried in the Priory of Earls Colne in Essex, in the
year, 1400.

Et portoit, gueulles, escartelle d'or, le premier brise de un Molette
d'argent. RIchard de Vere, (twenty four years old at the death of his Father
Aubrey) was the eleventh Earl of Oxford, Lord Bulbec and Samford; and in the
third year of King Henry the fifth, he was made Knight of the Garter. He
married Alice, daughter and one of the heirs of Sir Richard Sergeaulx knight,
and widow of Guy S. Albon, by whom he had issue, John Earl of Oxford, and
Sir Robert Vere knight, who married Margaret, daughter of Sir Hugh Courtney of
Hacham knight, (and heir to her Mother Phillip, one of the daughters and
heirs of Sir Warren Archdeacon knight) and had issue John, who married Alice,
daughter and heir of Walter Kilrington, alias Colbroke, by whom he had issue,
John de Vere Earl of Oxford. This Richard dyed in the 4. year of King Henry
the fifth.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. John de Vere, the second of that name,
son and heir of Richard aforesaid, was after the death of his Father, the
12. Earl of Oxford, Lord Bulbec and Samford. He married Elizabeth, daughter
and heir of Sir John Howard knight, and had issue, Aubrey de Vere, John de
Vere Earl of Oxford; George Vere knight, that dyed before his Brother; Richard
and Thomas knights; Mary, a Nun at Barking in Essex; Ioane, married to Sir
William Norris of Yatterden knight; and Elizabeth was married to William
Bourchier, son and heir of Henry Bourchier Earl of Essex. This John, was
one of the Noblemen that withstood and gain-saide the Lords spiritual, for
place and precedence in Parliament, in King Henry the sixth time; which
controversy is entered on the backside of the Parliament Roll thus.
Memorandum, the Lords spiritual alleged in that Parliament, that for so much
as they were spiritual Barons, they ought to have of right the precedent place
of the Lords Temporal; For (said they) it was well known, how far things
spiritual exceed temporal. To which, the Barons temporal answered, That
whatsoever right or privilege they had or could challenge, it came from them,
and their Ancestors, and their almsdeeds, who had been the worthy Founders
and Benefactors of the said Lords spiritual: and further said, That it was
an unseemly thing, for Masters to be inferiors to their Servants. Besides, the
Lords temporal further affirmed, That they were descended of Honorable and
Noble Families, and so were not the spiritual Barons; Which matter being well
understood and indifferently weighed, the Lords Temporal prevailed, and had
place and precedence given them. This John, with Aubrey his eldest son, Sir
Thomas Tudenham knight, William Tirrell and John Montgomery Esquires, were
attainted, and at several times beheaded at Tower Hill near London, in the
year, 1462. John and his son Aubrey, were buried in the Augustine Friars in
London, the first of king Edward the fourth.

Et portoit, de gueulles escartelle d'or, le primier brise de un molette
d'argent. John de Vere, second son of John Earl of Oxford, beheaded with his
eldest son Aubrey, was after his Father and Brothers death, the 13. Earl of
Oxford, Lord Bulbec Samford and Scales, great Chamberlain and Admiral of
England; who not long after the battle and overthrow of Barnet, 1471. fled
into Cornwall to S. Michaels Mount, where he was taken by King Edward the
fourth, and sent prisoner to the Castle of Hames beyond the Seas, where he
continued until the first year of king Henry the seventh, with whom he came
into England, and fought the battle at Bosworth-Field, where King Richard was
slain. He married two wives, the first was Margaret, daughter of Richard Neuill
Earl of Salisbury, by whom he had issue, John that dyed in the Tower of London
young, in the time of his Fathers banishment. His second wife was Elizabeth,
daughter of Richard Scrope knight, the widow of William Lord Beaumont, by whom
he had no issue. He dyed without issue, in the fourth year of King Henry the
eight, and was buried at Colne in Essex, leaving John de Vere, son of George
his Brother, to succeed him in the Earldom of Oxford, etc.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. John de Vere, the fourth of that name,
son and heir of Sir George Vere knight, and Nephew and heir of John, the
thirteenth Earl of Oxford, succeeded his Uncle John, and was the fourteenth
Earl of Oxford, Lord Bulbec, Samford and Scales, Lord great Chamberlain of
England, and Knight of the Garter. This John was commonly called Little John of
Camps: He married Anne, daughter of Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, and
Treasurer of England, and dyed without issue, in the eighteenth year of King
Henry the eight, the 14. of July, 1526. and was buried at Colne, leaving John
de Vere, his great Uncle Roberts Grandchild to succeed him.

Et portoit, de gueulles, escartelle d'or, le primier brise de un molette
d'argent. John de Vere, the fifth of that name, (son of John Vere, Son of
Robert Vere, second brother of John Earl of Oxford, beheaded with his son
Aubrey, in the year, 1462.) was the fifteenth Earl of Oxford, Lord Bulbec,
Samford and Scales, and great Chamberlain of England. He married Elizabeth,
daughter and heir of Edward Trussell of Staffordshire, knight Banneret, and
had issue, John de Vere the sixth of that name, Earl of Oxford; Aubrey de Vere
second son, who married the daughter of Spring of Lanham in Suffolk, and had
issue Hugh: Geffrey Vere third son (Father of John Vere of Kirby Hall; Sir
Francis Vere knight, the great Leader in the Low Countries; and Sir Horatio
Vere Knight) Elizabeth, married to Thomas Lord Darcie of Chich; Anne, wife to
Edmond Lord Sheffield; and Francis married to Henry Howard Earl of Surrey,
beheaded the 38. of King Henry the 8. This John dyed at Heueningham Castle, the
19. of March, in the 31. year of King Henry the eight, 1539.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. John de Vere, the sixth of that christen
name, son of John the fifth, was after the death of his Father, the sixteenth
Earl of Oxford, Lord Bulbec, Samford, and great Chamberlain of England. He
married two wives, the first was Dorothy, the daughter of Raphe Neuill Earl of
Westmerland, by whom he had issue, Katherine married to Edward Lord Windsore of
Bradenham; and Faith that dyed without issue. His second wife was Margaret,
daughter of John Golding, and sister of Sir Thomas Golding knight, by whom he
had issue, Edward Earl of Oxford; and Mary, married to Peregrine Berty, Lord
Willoughby of Eresbie. This John dyed in the fourth year of Queen Elizabeth,
and was buried at Heueningham, the third of August, 1561.

Et portoit, de gueulles, escartelle d'or, le primier charge a un molette
d'argent. EDward Vere, son and heir of John, was after the death of his
Father, the 17. Earl of Oxford, Lord Bulbec, Samford, and Lord great
Chamberlain of England. He had two wines, the first was Anne, daughter to
William Cecill Baron of Burghley, and Lord high Treasurer of England, by whom
he had issue three daughters; Elizabeth, married to William Stanley Earl of
Derby, and Lord Strange, in Anno, 1594. Bridget, wife to Francis Lord Norris of
Ricot; and Susan married to Philip Herbert Earl of Montgomery. This Edwards
second wife was Anne, daughter of Thomas Trentham of Rocester in Staffordshire
Esquire, and one of the Maids of Honor to Queen Elizabeth, by whom he had
issue, Henry Vere the 19 Earl of Oxford now living, 1618. This Edward dyed the
24. of June, 1604. and was buried at Hackney.

Et portoit, les armoiries de son pere. HEnry Vere, son and heir of Edward
Vere Earl of Oxford, by his second wife, was after the death of his Father,
the 18. Earl of Oxford, Lord Bulbec, Samford, and Lord great Chamberlain of
England now living, 1618.

Et portoit, gueulles escartelle d'or, le primier charge a un Molette d'argent.
A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls of Penbroke, their Arms, Wives, and Children.
GIlbert, sur-named Strongbowe, (of drawing of a Strong Bow,) second son of
Gilbert Earl of Clare in Suffolk, and Lord of Tunbridge in Kent, and
grandchild of Richard Fitz-Gilbert (Sewer to William Conqueror) and Rohesia
his wife, daughter of Walter Gifford, Earl of Longeuile in Normandy; was
created Earl of Penbroke, in the 4. year of King Stephen; he was also
Marshall of the Kings Palace, and Lord of Chepstow, Strighull, Tudenham,
Wolaston, Aluerdeston, and half the Country of Liege. He was heir of Roger
and Walter Fitz-Richard his Uncles; which Walter was a great Baron, and Lord of
Caer-went in Monmouthshire, and Founder of Tinterne Abbey in Wales, 1131. He
married Elizabeth, sister of Walleran Earl of Mellent, and Robert Earl of
Leicester (twin brothers) and had issue, Richard Strongbow Earl of Penbroke,
and Basil, married to Raymond, son of William Fitzgerald of Ireland. This
Gilbert dyed in the 14. year of King Stephen, and was buried by his Uncle
Walter Fitz-Richard, in the Abbey of Tinterne.

Et portoit, d'or, trois cheurons de gueulles, au lambell de cinq points
d'azur. RIchard of Clare, son of Gilbert sur-named Strongbow, of whom it is
said, that this Richard standing upright, with the Palms of his hands would
touch his knees; he was after his Father, Earl of Penbroke, L. of Strighull,
Chepstow and Caer-went, and Lord Marshall. Dermoc, Mac-Murough, son of
Patricke, King of Leinster in Ireland; whose Subjects rebelling against him,
prayed this Richards aid, who being a most valorous Captain, granted his
request, and went with sufficient strength, and conquered all Leinster. In
recompense whereof, this Dermoc gave his daughter Eua unto him in marriage,
with all the Country of Leinster, (which contained weshford, Kildare, Kilkenny,
Ossory and Carlogh) Al which Lands he enjoyed with the good liking of King
Henry the second, eight whole years. He had issue, one only daughter his
heir, named Isabell, who being 14. years Ward to King Henry the second, was
given in marriage to Willliam Marshall the elder, Earl of Penbroke. This
Richard dyed, and was buried at Kilkenny, in Anno, 1176, and afterward his
body was taken up again, and buried at Dublyn in Ireland.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. William the Kings Marshall, son of John,
and grandchilde of Gilbert, was in right of his wife Isabell, daughter and
heir of Richard Strongbow aforesaid, created Earl of Penbroke, by King John,
on the day of his Coronation, 1199. and had given him the Marshalship of
England. King Richard the first, in the first year of his Reign, 1189. gave
this Isabell in marriage, to this William Marshall, she being then his Ward, by
whom he had issue five sons; William, Richard, Gilbert, Walter and Anselme,
all Earls of Penbroke, and Marshals of England, and dyed without issue. He
had also five daughters, who were married as follows. Matild the eldest, was
married to Hugh Bigot Earl of Norfolk, with whom he had in marriage, the
Marshalship of England, and Hemsted Marshall in Barkshire, by which the said
Office is held: Ioane the second daughter, was married to Warin de Montchensey,
Lord of Swanescamp: Isabell the third daughter, was first married to Gilbert de
Clare Earl of Gloucester, and after to Richard Plantagenet Earl of Cornwall,
younger son of King John: Sibill the fourth daughter, married William Ferrars
Earl of Derby; and Eua the fifth daughter, was married to William Bruise Lord of
Brecknock. This William, after the death of King John, had the government of
King Henry the third, being but ten years of age, until the said William
dyed, which was in the year, 1219. and was buried in the Temple in London, the
16. of March, the fourth of king Henry the third. This Williams Father did
bear for his Arms, Gueulles a la band fizelle d'or; (as his Seal does
witness) But after he and his sons came to be Marshals, they used for their
Arms, D'or party de vert, au lion rampant de gueulles sur le tout, arm and
lampasse d'azur.

WIlliam Marshall the younger, son and heir of William Marshall the elder,
was the fourth Earl of Penbroke, and Marshall of England, Lord of Strighull,
Chepstow, Caer-went, Leigh (or Liege) Weshford, Kildare, Kilkenny, Ossorie and
Carlogh: and married two wives; the first was Alice, daughter and heir of
Baldwin de Betun, Earl of Albemarle and Holdernesse (by Auis his wife,
daughter and heir of William le Gross Earl of Albemarle.) His second wife
was Elianor, daughter of king John, and sister of king Henry the third. He dyed
without issue, the 6. of April, 1231. the 15. of king Henry the third, and was
buried by his Father, in the Temple of London, leaving Richard his brother to
succeed him.

Et portoit, les armoiries de son pere. RIchard Marshall, second son of
William Marshall the elder, who after the death of William his Brother, the 5.
Earl of Penbroke, and Marshall of England, Lord of Longeuile in France,
Strighull, Chepstow, and Caerwent, etc. did give to the Church of S. Mary's of
Them, certain Woods in Crendon, to pray for his own soul, and Geruasia his
Wife; (and as Matthew Paris has) when king Henry the third did, upon the
suggestion of Peter Bishop of Winchester, remove all his homebred Subjects
from their Offices in his Court, and prefer certain strangers of Poictiers
in their rooms; this Richard not liking thereof, came boldly unto the King, in
the presence of many the Nobility and others, and told him, that by ill
counsel he had sent for strangers into the Land, to the great hurt of his
kingdom and subjects, to the impeachment of the Laws and Liberties of this
Realm. For redress whereof, he vowed he would sight so long as he had any
life; and thereupon joined league with Luellyn Prince of Wales and others. But
whilst the King was busied in leuying an Army, to send against him and
Luellyn, word was brought to this Richard, that Morice Fitzgerald and other
Irish, had sacked his Countries and Lands in Ireland. Upon the hearing whereof,
he hasted thither with fifteen Knights, to encounter with his enemies; and
joined battle with them upon Satterday the first of April, 1234. and fought
eleven hours, until his horse was slain under him. And he then falling to
the ground one of the Irish perceiving his back part ill armed, lifted up his
habergeo^, and thrust a knife into his back up to the haft, giving him his
deadly wound, and then brought him to a Castle of his own named Kilkenny,
(which the said Maurice Fitzgerald had taken a little before from him) where
he dyed fifteen days after withoutissue, having been Earl but three years.
He was buried in the Quier of the Friars Minories at Kilkenny, the 18. of King
Henry the third.

Et portoit, les arms de son friar. GIlbert Marshall, third Son of William
Marshall the elder, after the death of Richard his brother, was restored to
King Henry the thirds favor and grace, and to all his brothers Lands and
Honors, both in England and Ireland; and for the same did his homage in the
same year, 1234. and was Earl of Penbroke and Marshall of England, Lord of
Longeuile in France, Linester in Ireland, and of Chepstow and Strighull in
Wales, etc. He married Margaret, daughter of William King of Scots, but had no
issue. He miscarried at a Turnament held at Hartford, by endeavoring to stay his
horse from his swift running, who being cast out of his Saddle, the horse gave
him such a blow on the breast, with his head backward, that he died thereof the
same day, in the Abbey of Hartford near Ware, in the year 1242. His body
being conveyed to London, was buried by his Father in the Temple.

Et portoit, d'or party de vert au lion rampant de gueulles sur le tout, arm
and lampasse d'azur. WAlter Marshall, fourth son of William Marshall the
elder, with whom King Henry the third (after the death of his Brother Gilbert
Marshall) was greatly displeased, denying him those Honors and Seigneuries
belonging unto him from his Ancestors, saying: That this Walters eldest
Brother William, did rescue Lewis the French Kings Son being in England, that
he was not taken prisoner. Secondly, that his Brother Richard was his enemy,
and was slain in open field against him. And thirdly, that his brother Gilbert
that dyed last, had all his dignities restored to him by the Kings favor; and
that (contrary to the said Kings Commandment) he went to the Til^ing at
Hartford, which was held to the Kings disgrace. But afterward, the King being
well pacified, this Walter was admitted to be Earl of Penbroke and Marshall of
England, and to have all other the honors and lands his brothers held and
enjoyed before. He married Margaret, daughter and co-heyre of Robert Lord
Quincy (son and heir of Sater de Quincy Earl of Winchester) widow of ^ohn
Lacie Earl of Lincoln by whom he had no issue. He dyed at Goderich Castle by
Monmouth, the fourth of December, 1245. and was buried at Tynterne Abbey
without issue, in the 30. year of King Henry the third.

Et portoit, les arms de son friar. ANselme Marshall, the fifth son of
William Marshall the elder, was at the time of his Brother Walters death, Dean
of Salisbury, and after admitted to be Earl of ^enbroke, and Marshall of
England. He married Mauld, daughter of Humfrey de Bohun, Earl of Hereford and
Constable of England, and dyed without issue, the 22. of December, being the
18. day after the death of his Brother Walter; leaving his rich Patrimony and
Inheritance, to be divided amongst his five sisters and heirs before
mentioned. I find this Earldom of Penbroke in ancient time, to be a County
Palatine, and had all Jurisdiction Regal. And that the Earl had under him
there, Justices of his own, a Shireiffe, Steward, Chancellor, Chamberlain,
Coroner, Escheter, and diverse other Officers, necessary for a Regal
Jurisdiction, all made and appointed by himself He had S^ssions, and County
Courts Monthly, in which County Courts were tried all Real Pleas whatsoever,
by original Writ, under the Seal and Name of the said Earl; all fynes were
levied, and recoueries passed, and all Writs made in the Earls name, (and not
in the Kings) He had power to pardon all offenses, and had his Chancery, court
of Common Pleas, and Exchequer, holden within his Castle of Penbroke; whereunto
all the Inhabitants of that Country resorted, for justice and trial of all
their causes. He erected Towns, and incorporated them with many large and
ample liberties. He had all manner of forfeitures and escheats whatsoever. He
had within his County, 9. Castles of his own, and 12. Seigneuries or Manors,
which were parcel of his County. The Jurisdiction royal of this Earldom,
remained and was permitted in the Earls themselves, from the time of the
Norman Conquest, until the 27. year of King Henry the 8. Whereas all other
Earls of this Realm, had lost their Jurisdictions many hundred years before,
and had but the bare names of their Earledomes. Also the said Earls of
Penbroke, by Office at the Coronations of the Kings of England, were to carry a
pair of gilt Spurs. To end; this County is called Penbrokshire, of the Town
so named; for the word Pen (in Welsh) signifies the head or chief part of a
thing; and Bro, signifies a Vale or plain soil, fertile and fit to bear
Corn, etc.

Et portoit, d'or party de vert, au lion rampant de gueulles, sur le tout, arm
and lampasse d'azur. WIlliam de Valence) so sur-named of the place where he was
borne) son of Hugh le Brun, Earl of the Marchesse of Aquitaine, and half
brother by the Mother, to King Henry the third; was created Earl of Penbroke,
in the year, 1247. He married Ioane, daughter and heir of Warin Lord
Montchency, and Ioane his wife, second sister and coheyre of Anselme Marshall
Earl of Penbroke, by whom he had issue, Aymer de Valence Earl of Penbroke,
and John that dyed a child; and four daughters, viz. Isabell, married to John
Lord Hastings of Aburgauenny (one of the Competitors for the Crown of
Scotland) Ioane the second daughter was married unto John Lord Common of
Badzenoth (son of John Lord Common and Mary his wife, daughter of John
Balliol) Agnes the third daughter, was first married to Maurice Fitzgerald;
and after to Henry Ballioll, brother of Alexander Ballioll Lord of Chilham, and
dyed without issue; Margaret was the 4. daughter. This William de Valence and
Ioane his wife, gave to the Town of Tembie the first Charter of incorporating
them; licensing the^ to choose every year Port-Reifes: He granted likewise to
the Burgesses, free common yearly upon al his grounds and Meadows, from the
time of mowing, unto the purification of Mary; which to this day they enjoy.
This William dyed in the year, 1296. and was buried in a magnificent Toombe,
on the South Side of the Abbey at Westminster, the 25. year of King Edward the
first.

Et portoit, burelle d'argent and d'azur de dix pieces, a l'otle de Marlettes
de gueulles. AYmer de Valence, son and heir of William de Valence aforesaid,
and Ioane his wife, daughter of Warin Montchensey Lord of Swanscampe, was after
the death of his Father, Earl of Penbroke and Weshford, and Lord of
Montigniac; he was Lord Governor of the Realm of Scotland, under king Edward
the first, during the controversy between John Ballioll and Robert Bruise. He
married three wives, the first was Beatrix, daughter of Raphe de Nele Constable
of France. The second was the daughter of the Earl of Bar; and the third was
Mary, daughter of Guy de Chastillion, Earl of S. Paul, but had no issue by
any of them. He dyed in France, in the year, 1323, and his inheritance (for
want of heirs of his body) was divided between his sisters aforesaid; and
Laurence Hastings, grand child to Isabell his eldest sister, succeeded him in
the Earldom of Penbroke and Weshford.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. LAurence Lord Hastings, Weshford and
Aburgauenny, (Son of John Lord Hastings, and Grandchild of another John and
Isabell, eldest sister and co-heyre of Aymer de Valence Earl of Penbroke) was
by Letters Patents, dated at Mont-Martyn, the 30. day of October, the 13. of
king Edward the third, created Earl of Penbroke, who being very young; the
King gave his Wardship to the Lady Isabell de Burgo, Lady of Clare, who was
Custos of Penbroke, during the said Laurences minority. He had two wives, the
first was the earl of S. Paul's daughter, by whom he had no issue. His second
wife was Agnes, daughter of Roger Mortuomary Lord of Wigmore, and first Earl
of March, by whom he had issue, John Lord Hastings, who was but two years old
at the death of his Father, 1361. the 36. of King Edward the third.

Et portoit, d'or a la Maunch de gueulles. John Lord Hastings, (son of
Laurenc aforesaid) was after the death of his Father, Earl of Penbroke; and
being but 27. years of age, was sent by King Edward the third, to remove the
siedge at the City of Rochell in France, where by the way as he was going, he
was encountered upon the Sea by Henry the Usurper of Castile, and taken prisoner
with 160. others, who were carried into Spain; where after two years
imprisonment there, he was sold to a Nobleman of France, with whom having
agreed for his ransom, at his departure, was poisoned at a banquet, and died
in France, the 16. of April, in the year, 1375. (his ransom money being
come to Callis to redeem him) He married two wives, the first was Margaret,
daughter of King Edward the third, by whom he had no issue. His second wife was
Anne, daughter and heir of Sir Walter Manny knight of the Garter, by whom he
had issue, John Lord Hastings and Earl of Penbroke, three years old at the
death of his Father.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. John Lord Hastings, (son of John Earl of
Penbroke, by Anne Manny his wife) after the death of his Father, was Earl of
Penbroke, Lord Hastings, Weshford, and Abergauenny. And because he was very
young, king Edward the third made William Lord Beauchamp. Custos of the County
of Penbroke. And after, being with King Richard the second at Woodstock, at a
Christmas, in running at a turnament, was slain by his good Friend Sir John S.
John, in the year, 1389. after he had been Earl 14. years. He married
Philip, daughter of Edmond Mortimer the third Earl of March, but had no issue.
He was buried in the Friars Minorites, within Newgate in London: And his
inheritance went to his Cousin Sir Edward Hastings knight; who, for some
displeasure taken against him by the King, was committed to the Fleet, where he
dyed without issue. After whose death, King Richard seized all his livings into
his hands; although afterward Reginald Gray of Ruthin made claim to the same,
as next heir; and at the Coronation of King Henry the fourth, carried the gilt
Spurs, which belonged of right for the Earl of Penbroke to do. It is said,
that since Aymer de Valence Earl of Penbroke (who was one of the Peers that
condemned Thomas Earl of Lancaster) to this John, none of the Earls of
Penbroke did live to see their sons, so untimely did they dye. King Richard
the second, in the year, 1397. did give the Earldom of Penbroke, to his
Queen Isabell, and under her, Thomas Percy Earl of Worcester and Lord of
Hauerford, was made Custos of the Earldome; which they enjoyed until king
Henry the fourth obtained the Crown, who took the same then into his own
hands.

Et portoit, d'or, a la Maunch de gueulles. HVmfrey Plantagenet, (fourth son
of king Henry the 4.) was by king Henry the fifth his brother, at a Parliament
held at Leicester, the second year of his Reign, created Earl of Penbroke,
and shortly after Duke of Gloucester. He writ in his style; Humfrey, son and
brother to Kings, Duke of Gloucester, Earl of Henault, Holland, Zeland and
Penbroke, Lord of Frisia, great Chamberlain of England, and Defender of the
Realm. This was that Duke Humfrey, who always standing for the Commons, being
bountiful to the poor, and seeing Justice duly executed, was commonly
called, The good Duke of Gloucester. (I wish there were many such Duke Humfreys
now living.) This great Duke and Protector, for withstanding the insolent
proceedings of Queen Margaret, wife to King Henry the fixed; at length (by her
means) was strangled to death at S. Edmondsbury in Suffolk, in the 25. year
of King Henry the sixth, and lies buried in the Abbey at S. Albons. He married
two wives, the first was Iaqueline, daughter and heir of William Duke of
Bauare; and the second wife was Elianor, sister of Thomas Lord Cobham of
Starborough, but had no issue by either. He had a base daughter named Antigone,
married unto Henry Gray Earl of Tankeruile, and Lord Powis.

Et portoit, France, escartelle d'engleterre, au bordur d'argent. William de
la Pole, Lord Wingfield, etc. was created Earl of Penbroke, by Letters
Patents, bearing date at S. Edmonds-bury, the third of March, 1446. the 25. of
king Henry the sixth; which Title and Dignity he enjoyed not long; for at the
next Parliament after, 1450. he was banished England, and in his flying, was
taken and beheaded; and his body being carried to Wingfield College in
Suffolk, was there buried: After whose death, the Earldom of Penbroke
reuerted again to the Crown, where it remained two years. This William
married Alice, daughter and heir of Thomas Chaucer, of Newelme in Oxfordshire
Esquire; as in the Title of Suffolk is more at large.

Et portoit, d'azur a la face and trois testes de Leopards d'or. Jasper of
Hatfield, knight of the Garter, (son of Owen Tuder and Queen Katherine,
daughter of Charles the sixth, French King, and widow of king Henry the fifth,
of England) was created Earl of Penbroke, by King Henry the sixth his half
Brother, in the year, 1452. But after, when King Edward the fourth expulsed
king Henry the sixth, this Jasper was attainted, and William Lord Herbert
created Earl of Penbroke in his place, in the year, 1462. In whose Letters
Patents mention is made, that he had the said Earldom given him, in
consideration he had expelled the Rebel Jasper. After that this William
Herbert was slain at Banbury, his son William succeeded him in the said
Earldom of Penbroke. And after, when King Henry the sixth was restored again
(by the Earl of Warwick) this Jasper was also restored to be Earl of
Penbroke, in the year, 1470. But in April following, 1471. Jasper was taken
prisoner at Barnet Field, and put from the Earldom of Penbroke again: which
Earldom being surrendered by the second William Lord Herbert, to King Edward
the fourth, he gave it to Prince Edward his son who enjoyed it during his
life. Afterward King Richard the third held the same all his life time; who
being slain by king Henry the seventh, 1485. this Jasper was again (the third
time) restored to the Earldom of Penbroke, and in the year, 1486. he was
crcated Duke of Bedford. Some have, that this Jasper married Katherine,
daughter of Richard Wooduile Earl Rivers, the widow of Henry Stafford Duke of
Buckingham; but howsoever, he dyed without any lawful issue, the 11. of King
Henry the seventh; leaving a base daughter, named Hellen, married to William
Gardener of London.

Et portoit, France escartelle d'engleterre, a la bordur d'azur seem de
Merlottes d'or. WIlliam Herbert, Lord of Ragland Castle in Monmothshire,
descended from Henry Fitz-Herbert, Chamberlain to King Henry the first, and
Alice Corbet his wife, (Concubine to the said King, and of whom he begot
Reginald earl of Cornwall.) This William was Knight of the Garter, and after
the attaindor of Jasper of Hatfield, was created Earl of Penbroke, in the 8.
year of king Edward the fourth; and being sent by the said King to encounter
Richard Neuill Earl of Warwick, and George Duke of Clarence, (who intended
the setting up again of King Henry the sixth) was at Banbury field 1469. taken
prisoner and beheaded the ninth of King Edward the fourth, and buried at
Tinterne Abbey: the said King Edward being also taken prisoner by the Earl of
Warwick at the same time. He married Anne, sister of Sir Walter Deuereux
knight, Lord Ferrars of Chartley, and had issue. William Lord Herbert of Gower,
(and after his Father, Earl of Penbroke) Sir Walter Herbert, and Sir George
Herbert of S. Iulians, and six daughters; Cicely was Baroness of Grestoke;
Mauld was married to Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland; Katherine, wife to
George Gray Earl of Kent; Anne was married to the Lord Powis; Isabell was
married to Sir Thomas Cooksey Knight; and Margaret the sixth daughter, was first
married to Thomas Talbot Viscount Lisle, and after to Sir Henry Bodringham
knight. This William Earl of Penbroke had issue by Mauld, daughter and heir
of Adam ap Howell Grant, his Paramore, Richard Herbert of Ewyas, Father of Sir
George Herbert of Swansey knight, and of William Herbert Earl of Penbroke.

Et portoit, party per pale, d'azur and de gueulles, au trois lions tampant
d'argent. WIlliam Lord Herbert of Gower, (son and heir of William Earl of
Penbroke, beheaded at Banbury aforesaid) was after his Father, Earl of
Penbroke, which earldom he surrendered to King Edward the fourth, and in lieu
thereof, the said King created him Earl of Huntington, by his Letters Patents
bearing date at Oburne, the fourth of July, in the 19. year of King Edward the
fourth; who at that time gave the said Earldom of Penbroke to his son
Prince Edward. This William married Mary, the fifth sister and co-heyre of
Richard Wooduile, Earl Rivers, and had issue one only daughter his heir,
named Elizabeth, married to Charles Somerset Earl of Worcester. This William
dyed in the 6. year of King Henry the seventh.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. EDward Plantagenet, son and heir of King
Edward the fourth, was in the 19. year of his Fathers reign (upon the
surrender of William Herbert of the Earldom of Penbroke) created Earl of
Penbroke, at the Kings Manor of East Hampsted. This Prince Edward was after
King, by the name of King Edward the fifth, and lived not long after; who being
dead, King Richard the third held the said Earldom of Penbroke all his life
time. After whose death, Jasper Tuder was restored again to that Earldom,
and held it to his death, in the year, 1495. And then did King Henry the
seventh give the same Earldom to Prince Henry his son, who held and enjoyed
it, until he was King, and long after, and passed all things within the said
County, under the Seal of the said Earldom, and by the name of Earl of
Penbroke, (and not as King, nor under the great Seal of England) and so it
continued, until the 27. year of his Reign, that Wales was reduced to sheere
ground, and the authority royal of all Lordships Marchesse in Wales, was
dissolved by Act of Parliament, and resumed into the Kings hands; at which
time, the great and large authority and jurisdiction Royal, of the Earldom
of Penbroke (being always before a County Palatine) was dissolved; and the
Earls that have been sithence, have only had but the Name and Dignity, as
other Earls of England; where before that time, they were as absolute Princes
of themselves.

Et portoit, France escartelle d'engleterre, au lambell d'argent. ANne Bollen,
eldest daughter and co-heyre of Thomas Bollen, Viscount Rochford, and Earl of
Wiltshire; was created Marchioness of Penbroke at Windesore Castle, on Sunday
the first of September, 1532. the 24. of King Henry the eight, at which time,
the said King delivered unto her two several Letters Patents; one of her said
Creation, the other of the gift of a thousand pounds a year to maintain her
Estate. Afterward, the 25. of January, 1533. King Henry married the said Anne,
Marchioness of Penbroke, and by her had issue, the renowned and most famous
Princess Queen Elizabeth, who reigned Queen, forty four years, and died
the 24. of March, 1602. and lies honorably buried in the Abbey at
Westminster. This Queen was beheaded within the Tower of London, the 19. of
May, 1536. and her body with the head, was buried in the Quier of the Chapel
of the Tower.

Et portoit, d'argent au Cheuron enter trois testes de Beufs coupe sable.
WIlliam Herbert, son of Richard Herbert of Ewyas Esquire, and grandchilde to
William Herbert Earl of Penbroke, beheaded at Banbury, was of the privy
Chamber to King Henry the eight, and one of his Excecutors; he was made Master
of the Horse, and Knight of the Garter, the third of King Edward the sixth; and
in the fifth year of the said kings Reign, he was created Lord Herbert of
Caerdiffe, and Earl of Penbroke; he was also of the privy Counsel to king
Edward the 6. twice Lord President of the Counsel established in the Marchesse
of Wales, Lieutenant general, joined with the Lord Russell and the Lord Gray,
for suppressing the Rebels in the West Countries, and against Sir Thomas Wyat,
and General of all the English Forces at S. Quintins; twice Governor of
Callis, of the privy Counsel also to Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth, and
grand Master of the Household to the late Queen Elizabeth. He married two
wives, the first was Anne, daughter of Thomas Parre, Baron of Kendall, and
sister and co-heyre of William Parre Marquess of Northampton, Earl of Essex,
Lord Parre, Ros of Kendall, Fitzhugh, Marmyon, and S. Quintine; by whom he
had issue, Henry Lord Herbert, after Earl of Penbroke; Sir Edward Herbert of
Red-Castle knight; and Lady Anne, married to Francis Lord Talbot, Son and heir
of George the sixth Earl of Shrewsbury. This William, married to his second
wife, Anne, daughter of George Talbot, the fourth Earl of Shrewsbury, but by
her had no issue. He dyed at Hampton Court, the 18. of April, and was buried
in S. Paul's Church in London, in the year, 1570. being the 73. year of his
age.

Et portoit, party per pale d'azur and de gueulles au lions rampant d'argent, a
la bordur gobonne d'or and gueulles, sur la gueulles bezants. HEnry Herbert,
Earl of Penbroke, Lord Herbert of Caerdiffe in Wales, Knight of the honorable
Order of the Garter, Lord President of the Counsel of the Marchesse of Wales;
married two Wives; Katherine the first wife, was daughter of George Talbot, the
sixth Earl of Shrewsbury, by whom he had no issue. His second wife was Mary,
daughter of Sir Henry Sidney, knight of the Garter, and of the privy Counsel
to Queen Elizabeth, Lord Deputy of Ireland, and President of the Counsel of
the Marchesse of Wales, and sister to Robert Sidney, Viscount Lisle and Earl
of Leicester, Knight of the Garter, and Chamberlain to Queen Anne, by whom he
had issue, William Lord Herbert of Caerdiffe, and after his Father, Earl of
Penbroke; Philip Herbert second son, created Earl of Montgomery; and Lady
Anne, that dyed young unmarried at Cambridge, and was there buried, 1601.

Et portoit, per pale d'azur and de gueulles, au trois lions rampant d'argent,
a un bordur gobonny d'or and de gueulles. WIlliam Herbert, son and heir of
Henry aforesaid, was after the death of his Father, Earl of Penbroke, Lord
Herbert of Caerdiffe in Wales, Fitzhugh, Marmion, and S. Quintine, Lord
Chamberlain to King James, Knight of the honorable Order of the Garter, one of
his Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel, and one of the Comissioners for
the Office of Earl Marshall of England. He married Mary, eldest daughter and
co-heyre of Gilbert Lord Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, but as yet has no issue,
1618.

Et portoit, per pale d'azur and de gueulles, au trois lions rampant d'argent,
a un bordur gobonny d'or and de gueulles. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls of Rutland,
their Arms, Wives, and Children.
EDward Plantagenet, Son and heir of Edmond of Langley Duke of York, fifth
son of King Edward the third; was in the life time of his Father, at a
Parliament held at London, the 14. of King Richard the second, created Earl
of Rutland, and of Cork in Ireland. And in the 21. year of the said Kings
Reign, he was created Duke of Albemarle; from which, in the first year of
King Henry the fourth, he was by Parliament deposed. Notwithstanding, after
the death of his Father, 1401. he was Duke of York, Lord high Constable and
Admiral of England, Lord of Tyndall, and Knight of the Garter. He married (at
Fotheringhay in Northamptonshire) Philip, third daughter and co-heyre of John
de Mohun, Lord of Dunster Castle in Somersetshire, by whom he had no issue. He
was after slain at the battle of Agin Court-Field, the third of King Henry
the fifth, 1415. and was buried at Fotheringhay, leaving Richard his brother to
succeed him.

Et portoit, France semee escartelle d'engleterre, au lambell d'argent brife de
neuf torteaux. RIchard Plantagenet, son and heir of Richard Coningsborough
Earl of Cambridge, second brother of Edward aforesaid, after the death of his
Uncle Edward without issue, was restored to be Duke of York, Earl of
Cambridge and Rutland, and Lord of Tyndall, in the fourth year of King Henry
the sixth; he was also Earl of March and Vlster, Lord of Wigmore and Clare, in
right of Anne his Mother, sister and heir of Edmond Mortimer Earl of March,
etc. He married Cecily, youngest daughter of Raphe Neuill, first Earl of
Westmerland, by whom he had issue, (as in the title of York) He was slain at
the battle of Wakefield, by Queen Margaret, in the 38. year of King Henry
the sixth, and was buried at Fotheringhay in Northamptonshire.

Et portoit, France semee, escartelle d'engleterre, au bordur d'argent charge
de lions rampant purpre. EDmond Plantagenet son and heir of Richard Duke of
York aforesaid, was the third Earl of Rutland in the life time of his Father;
who being with his said Father at the battle of Wakefield, 1460. the 39. of
king Henry the 6. and but 12. years old, fell down upon his knees desiring
mercy; was cruelly stabbed to the heart, by John Lord Clifford of Westmerland,
who did swear, that (by that act) he would be revenged for Thomas his Fathers
death. After he was thus murdered, he was first buried at Pomfret, and from
thence removed, and brought to Fotheringhay Castle, and there buried by his
Father.

Et portoit, France escartelle d'engleterre, au lambell de cinque points
d'argent, chargee a deux 2 lions gueulles and neuf torteaux. Escartelle a vec
Vlster and Mortymer. THomas Manors, Knight of the Garter, Lord Ros of
Hamelake, Beluoir, and Trusbut, (son and heir of George Manors Lord Ros,
and Anne his wife, daughter and heir of Sir Thomas S. Leoger knight, and Anne
Duchess of Excester his wife; which Anne was sister of king Edward the
fourth) was created Earl of Rutland by king Henry the 8. at his Palace of
Bridewell in London, by Letters Patents, bearing date the 18. of June, the 17.
of the said Kings Reign. King Henry the 8. did also augment unto his ancient
Arms, (in regard that he was descended of the sister of King Edward the
fourth) gold, two bars azure; a chief quarterly azur and gueulles; on the
first two Flour-de-lucesgold; in the second, a lion passant gardant of the
first, the third as the second, the fourth as the first. He married Elianor,
daughter of Sir William Paston of Norfolk knight, by whom he had issue, five
sons and six daughters; Henry Manors the eldest son, was after his
Father, Earl of Rutland; Sir John Manors knight; Sir Roger Manors knight;
Sir Thomas Manors knight; and Oliver was the fifth Son. Gertrude, married to
George Talbot, sixth Earl of Shrewsbury; Anne, married to Henry Neuill, fifth
Earl of Westmerland; Frances, wife to Henry Neuill, Lord of Aburgauenny, and
Mother to the Lady Vane of Kent; Katherine, wife to Henry Capell Esquire;
Elizabeth, married to Sir John Savage knight; and Isabell the sixth daughter
dyed young. This Thomas, dyed in the 35. year of king Henry the eight, and
lies buried at Bosworth in Leicestershire.

HEnry Manors, Knight of the Garter, (son and heir of Thomas aforesaid) was
the second Earl of Rutland of this Family, Lord Ros of Hamelake, Beluoir and
Trusbut; He married two wives; the first was Margaret, daughter of Raphe
Neuill, fourth Earl of Westmerland, by whom he had issue, Edward Manors,
third Earl of Rutland of this Family; and John the fourth Earl of Rutland;
and a daughter named Elizabeth, who was married to Sir William Courtney of
Powderham knight, Elianor married to John Bourchier Earl of Bath. His second
wife was Bridget, daughter of John Lord Hussy of Lincolnshire, the widow of
Sir Richard Morison knight, but by her had no issue; she was after married to
Francis Russell Earl of Bedford. He dyed in the fifth year of Queen
Elizabeth, and was buried at Botesworth, 1563.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. EDward Manors, Knight of the Garter,
(son and heir of Henry) was after the death of his Father, the third Earl
of Rutland of this Family, Lord Ros of Hamelake, Beluoir and Trusbut, and
chief Commissioner, appointed by Queen Elizabeth, to continue the league
between her and James the sixth, King of Scotland, (now our most dread and
Sovereign Lord and King, 1618.) there being joined with him, the Lord Euers,
Thomas Randolph Esquire, and others. He married Isabell, daughter of Sir Thomas
Holcroft, of the Vale Royal in Cheshire knight, by whom he had issue, one
only daughter and heir named Elizabeth, married to William Cecill Lord
Burghley, son and heir of Thomas Earl of Excester, by whom he had issue,
William Lord Ros, that died beyond the seas in Italy, without issue, 1618. This
Edward dyed in the 29. year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and lies
buried at Botesworth.

Et portoit, d'or, deux burelles d'azur, au chef escartelle d'azur and de
gueulles, en le premier deux fleur-de-lizes d'or, a la second au lion passant
gardant d'or. John Manors, (brother and heir male of Edward aforesaid) was
the fourth Earl of Rutland of that Family, Lord Ros of Hamelake, Beluoir and
Trusbut; and married Elizabeth, daughter of Francis Charlton, of Apley in
Shropshire, by who^ he had issue, Edward that dyed an Infant; Roger, that was
Earl of Rutland; Francis, Earl of Rutland; Sir George Manors Knight, and
Oliver; Bridget, wife to Sir Robert Tirwhit of Lincolnshire Knight; Frances,
married to William Lord Willoughby of Parham; Elizabeth, married to Emanuell
Lord Scroope of Bolton. This John dyed in the year, 1587.

Et portoit, les arms de son friar. ROger Manors, son and heir of John
aforesaid, was after the death of his Father, the fifth Earl of Rutland, Lord
Ros of Hamelake, Beluoir and Trusbut; and married Elizabeth, daughter and heir
of that worthy and renowned Sir Philip Sidney knight, slain at Zutphen in
Gelderland, the 17. of October, 1586. and dyed without issue, in the year,
1600. leaving Francis Manors his brother, to succeed him.

Et portoit, d'or a deux burelles d'azur, au chef escartelle d'azur and de
gueulles, en la premier deux fleur de-liz d'or, a la second au leopard passant
d'or. FRancis Manors, second son of John Earl of Rutland, and brother and
heir of Roger, the fifth Earl of Rutland of this Family; was the sixth Earl of
Rutland, Lord Ros of Hamelake, Beluoir and Trusbut, and Knight of the Noble
Order of the Garter, 1618. He married two wives, the first was Mary, daughter
and one of the co-heyres of Sir Henry Knyuet of the West Country, and had
issue, Katherine. His second wife is Cecily, daughter of Sir John Tufton
knight, (and widow of Edward Hungerford) by whom he had issue, Henry Lord Ros
that dyed a child, and Francis Lord Ros of Hamelake, now living, 1618.

Et portoit, d'or a deux burelles d'azur, au chef escartelle d'azur and de
gueulles, en la premier deux fleur-de-liz d'or, a la second au leopard passant
d'or. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls Rivers, their Arms, Wives, and Children.
RIchard Widdeuill, Baron of Wimington, married Iaquet, daughter of Peter of
Luxenburgh, Earl of S. Paul, the widow of John Duke of Bedford, Regent of
France; for which marriage, he was fined to pay to King Henry the sixth, the
sum of one thousand pounds, because he did the same without the said Kings
priuity and consent; yet afterward obtaining the said Kings favor, he was
elect Knight of the Garter, the 4. of August, and enstalled the 30. of October,
Anno, 28. of Henry the sixth; and on the 26. of May, the 4. of King Edward the
fourth, he was created Earl Rivers, and made high Constable of England. He had
issue by the said Iaquet, seven Sons and six daughters, viz. Anthony
Widdeuill, Earl Rivers after his Father; Lewis dyed young; John dyed young
also; John the fourth son, was slain with his Father at Edgcote-field;
Lyonell fifth son, was Bishop of Salisbury, (and Father to Stephen Gardener
Bishop of Winchester, by his Concubine) Edward sixth son; Richard the seventh
son, was Earl Rivers after Anthony his elder brother: Elizabeth the eldest
daughter, was first married to Sir John Gray of Groby knight; and after to King
Edward the fourth; Margaret was married to Thomas Fitz-Alan Earl of Arundell;
Anne the third daughter, was first married to William Bourchier, son of Henry
Earl of Essex; and after to George Gray Earl of Kent; and thirdly, to Sir
Edward Wingfield knight; Iaquet was married to John Lord Strange of Knocking;
Mary, was wife to William, Herbert Earl of Huntington; and Katherine the sixth
daughter, was first married to Henry Stafford, second Duke of Buckingham; and
after to Jasper of Hatfield, D. of Bedford. This Richard, with John his son,
were taken out of the Manor of Grafton, by Robin of Riddesdale, Captain of
the lewd people of Northamptonshire, and catried to Northampton, and there
beheaded, without any Legal proceeding, in the year, 1469.

Et portoit, d'argent, a la face and quanton de gueulles. ANthony Wideuile, was
after the death of Richard his Father, Earl Rivers and Lord Scales, in right
of his wife Elizabeth, daughter and heir of Thomas Lord Scales, of Nucels in
Hartfordshire. He was made Knight of the Garter, in the fifth year of King
Edward the fourth; and in the first year of King Edward the fifth, by the
procurement of Richard Duke of Gloucester (then Lord Protector) was sent to
Pomfret, and there beheaded, without any just or lawful cause laid against
him) the 13. of June, 1483. This Anthony had issue only a base daughter named
Margaret, who was married to Sir Robert Poynes knight.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. RIchard Wideuile, after the death of
Anthony his brother, without lawful issue, was Earl Rivers, Lord Scales of
Nucels, and Grafton, and dyed without issue, in the seventh year of King Henry
the seventh; leaving his six sisters his heirs, who were married as aforesaid.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls of Shrewsbury,
their Arms, Wives, and Children.
ROger de Montegummery, Earl of Belismo in Normandy, son of Hugh de
Montegummery, and of Sibell his wife, fifth daughter of Herfastus the Dane,
(brother of Gonora wife to Richard the first Duke of Normandy of that Name)
came into England with William the Conqueror, who gave him the Earledomes of
Shrewsbury and Arundell. He married Maberia, daughter of William Taluaise, and
sister and heir of Arnold de Belismo, and had issue, five sons and four
daughters, (as William Gemiticensis has) Hugh Earl of Shrewsbury, slain at
Anglesey in Wales, 1097, without issue; Robert was also Earl of Shrewsbury and
Arundell; Roger the third son, was Earl of Poitow, and Lord of the Honor of
Lancaster in England, by the gift of William Ruphus; Philip the fourth son,
and Arnold the fifth son was Castle-keeper of Penbroke, who with his Brother
Robert, was banished England. The four daughters were, Emma; Matild, married
to Robert Earl of Moretaigne; Mabill the third daughter; and Sibill was the
fourth daughter, who was married to Robert Fitz-Hamon, Lord of Glamorgan,
Founder of Tewkesbury Abbey in England, and Lord of Torigney in Normandy. This
Roger was left by William Conqueror, to be Governor to his son William
Ruphus, and was slain at Caerdiffe in South- Wales, and buried at Shrewsbury,
in the Abbey which before he had founded.

HVgh de Montegummery, (son of Roger aforesaid) was after the death of his
Father, Earl of Shrewsbury and Arundell. He, with Hugh Earl of Chester, took
the Isle of Man by force and strong hand, 1098. At which time, Magnus King of
Norway, and grandchilde to Olaue, after he had joined to his Empire, the
Islands of Orcades and Menauia; came with a few Ships to the Isle of Man; whom
this Hugh being willing to resist on the shore, was stricken in the right eye
with an Arrow, of which hurt, the eight day after, he dyed without issue, and
was buried by his Father, in the Abbey of Shrewsbury. Upon whose Toomb, (M.
Milles says) his Portraiture is made of stone, with his legs acrosse, (as in
old times was used) and upon his Shield Azure, a lion rampant gold, with a
border, as before is specified in the Title of Earls of Arundell.

RObert de Montegummery, second son of Roger aforesaid, and brother and heir
of Hugh, was the third Earl of Shrewsbury and Arundell, and married the
daughter and heir of Guy Earl of Pontiue in Normandy. He was a man very
outragiously given, and most cruel to his own Children and Hostages, whose
eyes (with his own hands) he plucked out. He held and fortified the Castles
of Shrewsbury, Arundell, Tickhill, Bruge, and Carrocoue in England, against
king Henry the first, which after was his undoing. For thereupon the King
proclaimed him Traitor, and shortly after, all his Towns and Castles being
yielded up unto the said King, he was banished England, with his Brother
Arnold, in the year, 1103. the fourth year of the said Kings Reign. But
afterward this Robert, with Robert Duke of Normandy, the Kings eldest brother,
were taken prisoners at the Battle of Tenarsbray, and were brought into
England, where they had both their eyes put out, and kept prisoners in the
Castle of Caerdiffe in South- Wales, where they miserably ended their days.
This Robert had issue, William sur-named Taluaise Earl of Sage, who married
Ela, daughter of Hely, brother of Geffrey Earl of Aniou, widow of the Duke of
Burgundy: John his second son, had all his Lands in Normandy and Main: his
eldest daughter married Iuhell, son of Walter de Meduana; and Ela was first
married to William, the third Earl Warren in England; and after to Patricke
Earl of Salisbury.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. John Lord Talbot, Strange of Blakmer,
Furniuall and Verdon, Governor of Anioye and Main, (son of Richard Talbot,
Baron Talbot of Castle Goderic, and brother and heir male of Gilbert Lord
Talbot) was created Earl of Shrewsbury by Letters Patents, bearing date at
Windsore, the 20. day of May, in the 19. year of king Henry the sixth. And by
another Letters Patents, dated at Westminster, the 17. of July, the 24. of king
Henry the sixth, he was made Earl of W^shford, and Steward of England, and
after Marshall of France; and being sent to succor them of Bordeaux, took the
Town, and placed therein a Garrison; and proceeding further into the Country,
to relieve the Town of Castellon in Aquitaine, which the English had
recovered; (the French having on all sides begirt the same) at which time, a
great battle being then fought, this John was with the shot of a Piece there
slain, the 7. of July, 1453. the 32. of King Henry the sixth. He married two
wives, the first was Mauld, daughter and only heir of Thomas Neuill, Lord
Furniuall, by whom he had issue, John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury; Sir
Christopher Talbot, and Sir Humfrey Talbot knights. His second wife was
Margaret, eldest daughter and co heir of Richard Beauchampe Earl of Warwick,
by whom he had issue, John Talbot Viscount Lisle, unto whom his Father gave the
Lordship of Panswike, Whaddon, Morton, Wotton, Schirborne, Polycot, and other
Lands in Shropshire; Sir Humfrey Tablot knight, slain in Mont-Sinay;
Elizabeth, wife to John Mowbray Duke of Norfolk; and Elianor married to Thomas
Butler, of Sudely Castle in Glocestershire. This John being slain as
aforesaid, with John Viscount Lisle his son, his body was buried in a Toombe
at Roane in Normandy, whereon this Epitaphe is written. Here lies the right
Noble Knight, John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, Earl of Weshford, Waterford and
Valence, Lord Talbot of Goodrich and Orchenfield, Lord Strange of Blakmer, Lord
Verdon of Acton, Lord Cromwell of Wingfield, Lord Louetofte of Worsop, Lord
Furniuall of Sheffeild, Lord Faulconbridge, Knight of the Noble Order of S.
George, S. Michaell, and the golden Fleece, great Marshall to King Henry the
sixth, of his Realm of France, who died in the Battle of Bordeaux, 1453. Hoc
bare for his Arms, Gueulles au lion rampant d'or, a labordure endente de
mesme. Which Arms were Rice ap Griffiths, Prince of South Wales, whose
daughter named Wentlian, was married to Gilbert Talbot (in King Henry the
thirds time) Auncestor of this John.

John Talbot, second Earl of Shrewsbury of that Name and Family, was after the
death of John his Father, also Lord Talbot, Strange of Blakmer, Furniuall,
Verdon, and Knight of the Garter. He married Elizabeth, daughter of James
Butler, Earl of Ormond in Ireland, and had issue, John Talbot the third Earl
of Shrewsbury; Sir James Talbot knight, who dyed the 11. of King Edward the
fourth; Sir Gilbert Talbot of Grafton, knight Banneret, and Captain of Callis
third Son; Christopher Talbot fourth son, was Archdeacon of Chester; and
George was the fifth Son; Anne the eldest daughter, was married to Sir Henry
Vernon of the Peake in Derbyshire; and Margaret was the second daughter. This
John was slain in a battle at Northampton the tenth of July, 1460. the 39.
year of King Henry the sixth, whose part he took, (and in which battle the
said King himself was taken prisoner) and was after buried in the Priory at
Worsop.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. John Talbot, son and heir of John the
second, was after the death of his Father, the third Earl of Shrewsbury,
Weshford and Waterford, Lord Talbot, Furniuall, Verdon, and Strange of Blakmer,
and married Katherine, daughter of Humfrey Stafford Duke of Buckingham, Earl
Stafford, Hereford, and Northampton, by whom he had issue, George Talbot the
fourth Earl of Shrewsbury; and Thomas that dyed without issue; Anne a
daughter, was married to Thomas Butler the last Baron of Sudley, who dyed
without issue. This John dyed at Couentry, in the year of our Lord, 1473. the
4. kalends of July; and his body was buried in our Lady Chapel at Worsop.

Et portoit, de gueulles au lion rampant d'or, a la bordure endent de mesme.
GEorge Talbot, the fourth Earl of Shrewsbury, upon whose Toombe at Sheffield,
he is styled Earl of Shrewsbury, Weshford and Waterford, Lord Talbot,
Furniuall, Verdon, and Strange of Blakmer, and Knight of the honorable Order
of the Garter. This George, being but twenty years of age, was at the battle
of Stoke, where he fought manfully, in the behalf of King Henry the seventh,
who made him Knight of the Order of the Garter; and after he was made Steward
of the house to King Henry the eight, and General of the Army at the siedge of
Turwin. 1513. He married two wives, the first was Anne, daughter of William
Lord Hastings, Chamberlain to king Edward the fourth, by whom he had issue,
Henry Lord Talbot, that dyed without issue, and was buried at Calke Priory;
Francis Lord Talbot, and Earl of Shrewsbury after his Father; John, and John,
both borne, and buried at Ashby de la Zouche; William Talbot fifth son, borne
at Sheffield; Richard Talbot sixth son, borne at Chelsey: and five daughters;
Margaret, married to Henry Clifford Earl of Cumberland; Anne and Dorothy, both
borne at Wingfield; Mary, wife to Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland; and
Elizabeth the fifth daughter, was married unto William Lord Dacres of
Gillesland. This Georges second wife, was Elizabeth, daughter and one of the
heirs of Richard Walden, of Erith in Kent knight; of whom he begot John, that
dyed young, and Anne, married to Peter Compton, son and heir of Sir William
Compton knight; and after to William Herbert Earl of Penbroke. This George
dyed at Wingfield, the 26. of July, 1538. and was honorably buried by his
first wife, at Sheffield.

Et portoit, de gueulles au lion rampant d'or, a la bordure endente de me^me.
FRancis Talbot, son and heir of George, was borne in the Castle of
Sheffield, in the year, 1500. the 16. of king Henry the seventh, and was the
fifth Earl of Shrewsbury, Lord Talbot, Furniuall, Verdon, and Strange of
Blakemer, and knight of the Garter. He married two wives, the first was Mary,
daughter of Thomas Lord Dacres of Gillesland, by whom he had issue, George Lord
Talbot, and sixth Earl of Shrewsbury; Thomas Talbot that dyed at Sheffield
without issue, the 25. of king Henry the eight; and Anne, first married to John
Lord Bray, and after to Thomas Lord Wharton, and dyed without issue. His second
wife was Grace, daughter of Robert Shackerley of Derbishire Esquire. He dyed
the 21. of September, the second of Queen Elizabeth, and was buried at
Sheffield, in the year, 15^9.

Et portoit, les armoities de son pere. GEorge Talbot, sixth Earl of
Shrewsbury, Lord Talbot, Furniuall, Verdon, and Strange of Blakmer, son and
heir of Francis aforesaid, was made Knight of the Garter, in the third year
of Queen Elizabeth; and at the arraignment of Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk,
Lord Steward of England, and presently after Earl Marshall of England. He
married two wives, the first was Gertrude, daughter of Thomas Manors Earl of
Rutland, by whom he had issue, Francis Lord Talbot, that dyed before his Father
without issue; Gilbert second son, was after his Father, Earl of Shrewsbury,
and dyed without issue male; Edward the third son, was after his Brother
Gilbert, also Earl of Shrewsbury, and dyed without issue; Henry Talbot the
fourth son. Katherine Talbot the eldest daughter, was married to Henry Lord
Herbert, after Earl of Penbroke, but had no issue; Mary the second daughter,
was married to George Sauell, son of Henry Sauell of Barraby in Lincolnshire;
and Grace the third daughter, was married to Sir Henry Cauendish knight, son
and heir of William Cauendish of Chattesworth knight. This George his second
wife was Elizabeth, daughter of John Hardwike, of Hardwike in Derbishire
Esquire, by whom he had no issue. He dyed on Wednesday, the 18. of November, in
the Castle of Sheffield, and was buried the 13. of January, at Sheffield, 1590.

Et portoit, de gueulles, au lion rampant d'or, a la bordure endente de me sme.
GIlbert Talbot, the seventh Earl of Shrewsbury of this Family, Lord Talbot,
Furniuall, Verdon, and Strange of Blakmer, succeeded his Father George, and
married Mary, daughter of Sir William Cauendish of Chatsworth, and had issue,
three daughters his heirs; Mary the eldest, was married to William Lord
Herbert of Caerdiffe in Wales, and Earl of Penbroke; Elizabeth, married to Sir
Henry Gray Lord of Ruthin, son and heir of Charles now Earl of Kent, 1618.
Alithea the third daughter, was married to Thomas Howard, now Earl of
Arundell, 1618. This Gilbert dyed at his house in Broad-streete in London, and
was conuayed to Sheffield, and there most honorably buried, being Knight and
Companion of the Noble Order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most
honorable privy Counsel, 1618.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. EDward Talbot, second son of George, and
brother and heir male of Gilbert aforesaid, was the eight Earl of Shrewsbury,
Lord Talbot, Furniuall, Verdon, and Strange of Blackmer. He married Ioane,
eldest daughter and co-heyre of Cuthbert Lord Ogle, by whom he left no issue.
He dyed in London, and his body was privately buried at Westminster, 1618.

GEorge Talbot, son and heir of John Talbot of Grafton Esquire, by Ratherine
his wife, daughter of Sir William Peter, of Ingerston in Essex Knight, heir
male of Sir Gilbert Talbot of Grafton, knight of the Garter and Bannaret,
second son of John Lord Talbot, second Earl of Shrewsbury; after the death
of Gilbert and Edward, Earls of Shrewsbury aforesaid, without issue male; was
by King James, 1618. admitted the ninth Earl of Shrewsbury, Lord Talbot,
Furniuall, Verdon, and Strange of Blackmer.

Et portoit, de gueulles ^u lion rampant d'or a la bordure endente de mesme. A
CATALOGVE OF THE Earls of Salisbury, their Arms, Wives, and Children.
PAtricke de Eureux, (son of Walter de Eureux, Earl of Rosemer, and Sibill
his wife, Founders of the Monastery of Bradenstoke, 1093.) was Steward of the
house to Mauld the Empress, by whose means the Earldom of Salisbury was
confirmed unto him, in the 28. year of king Henry the second. He married Ela,
the widow of William, the third Earl Warren and Surrey, daughter of William
Taluaise, Earl of Pontine, grandchild to Roger Mountgomery, by his son
Robert de Mountgomery Earl of Shrewsbury, by who^ he had issue, William
Fitz-Patricke Earl of Salisbury and Rosemer, Patricke and Philip, Cannons at
Bradenstock. This Patricke was a Witness to the Charter of pacification of the
troubles between King Stephen, and Henry Duke of Normandy, 1152, and after was
slain in Aquitaine, by Guy de Lusignan, in coming as a Pilgrim from S. James
de Compostella, and as the Priory Book of Lacok has, the 6. Kalend of April,
1168, and was buried at S. Hillaries, the 15. of king Henry the second; (Doctor
Powell in his description of Wales, Fol. 154, says, that about the year,
1094. Roger Montgomery, William Fitz-Eustace, and Arnold Harecourt, were slain
near Caerdiffe in Wales; and Walter de Eureux Earl of Salisbury, and Hugh
Gurney were hurt, and after dyed in Normandy) Which Walter was Father of this
Patricke, which M. Camden denies to be Earl.

Et portoit, d'azur six lions rampant d'or, 3, 2, 1. arm and lampasse de
gueulle. William de Eureux, son and heir of Patricke, was the next Earl of
Salisbury and Rosemer after his Father. He married Eleanor, daughter of Tirell
de Mainers, by whom he had issue, two daughters his heirs; Ella the eldest,
was married to William sur-named Longspee, base son of king Henry the second,
begotten of the fair Lady Rosamond Clifford; Mabell the second daughter, was
married to Lord Nigell de Mowbray, with the Manor of Banested in Surrey. This
William (as Lacok Priory Book has) dyed the 15. Kalend of May, in the year,
1196. and was buried at Bradenstoke.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. William sur named Longspee, (by reason of
a long Sword which he used) base son of king Henry the second, (begotten of
the fair Lady Rosamond Clifford, his Concubine) was Earl of Rosemer, and by
king Richard the first his half brother, was created Earl of Salisbury. This
William Longspee, was the last that writ in their Styles, Earls of Rosemer;
for after that Philip King of France had gotten Normandy, Guyan, Poictiers, and
Britain, about the 6. year of king John; all such Noblemen of England, as had
either Earledomes or Baronnies in those Countries, left to write or entitle
themselves of the same. He married Ella, eldest daughter and co-heyre of
William Fitz-Patricke, Earl of Salisbury aforesaid, and had issue, William
Longspee, from whom king Henry the third did take both the title of Earl, as
also the Castle of Salisbury, and who after dyed in a battle against the
Infidels, in the year 1250. Stephen Longspee Chiefe-Iustice of Ireland, second
son, (unto whom William his Brother gave the Manor of Wamberge. This Stephen
had to wife, Emmelyne Countess of Vlster, daughter and heir of Walter
Ridelesford, Baron of Bray in Ireland. Nicholas Longspee the third son, was
Bishop of Salisbury, and dyed, 1296. Richard Longspee was a Cannon at
Bradenstoke: Isabell the eldest daughter, was married to William Lord Vescy;
Ella, married to Thomas, sixth Earl of Warwick; and after to Philip Lord
Basset; and Idona the third daughter, was married to William Beauchampe Baron
of Bedford. This William Earl of Salisbury, was Constable of Douer-Castle, and
sailing with Richard Earl of Cornwall his Nephew, and Philip de Albeney into
Gascoigne, the tenth of Henry the third, recovered Poictiers, which before was
lost by king John; and in their return again into England, hardly escaped
shipwreck, being strangely cast upon the Cornish shores, and dyed in the same
year 1226. and lies buried in the Cathedral Church at Salisbury, in a fair
Toomb. After whose death, Ella his Wife and Countess, professed her self a
Nun, in the religious house at Lacok in Wiltshire, which was of her
Foundation, and was the first Abbess thereof. Afterward she forsook her
Abbatesse, in the year 1257. and dyed in the year 1261. This William lies
buried with these Arms upon his shield, D'azur six lions rampant d'or, 3,2,1.
which were the Arms of William Fitz-Patricke, his wives Father.

WIlliam Lord Montacute, (Son of Simon Monte-acute, Baron of Shipton
Monte-acute) was created Earl of Salisbury, in the (...) year of king Edward
the third, and had given him the Castle and Barony of Denbigh; and in the 17.
year of the said Kings Reign, he was crowned King of the Isle of Man, and had
given to him and his heirs, a thousand Marks land by the year, (for taking
of Roger Lord Mortimer prisoner, at Nottingham Castle, who had been too
familiar with the kings Mother.) This William, when king Edward the third went
to claim his right to the Crown of France, against Philip de Valois, 1138,
was taken prisoner, and carried to Paris, and after ransomed by the exchange of
the Earl of Morret, who was then prisoner in England. At this expedition, king
Edward prayed the aid of the Flemings, who excused themselves, by an oath and
bond of a Million of gold, which they had taken and made, in the Popes Chamber,
that they should always help and aid the King of France, and fight under his
Standard and Arms; whereupon, by the advice of Jacques D' Artiuille of Gaunt,
king Edward did quarter the Arms of France before his own of England, and
proclaimed himself King of France, by reason whereof, the Flemings held
themselves discharged both of oath and bond, and so did aid and help king
Edward. This William married Katherine, daughter and one of the coheyres of
William Lord Grantson, a Burgonyan borne, and a great Baron in England; by whom
he had issue, two sons and four daughters; William the eldest, was after his
Father, Earl of Salisbury; Sir John Montague knight, married Margaret,
daughter and heir of Sir Thomas Mounthermer knight, (son of Raphe
Mounthermer Earl of Gloucester) and dyed before his brother William, in the 13.
year of king Richard the second. Sibill the eldest daughter, was married to
Edmond Earl of Arundell, for his third wife: Philip the second daughter, was
married to Roger Mortimer Earl of March; Elizabeth the third daughter, was
married to Gyles Lord Badelismer, and dyed without issue; Agnes the 4.
daughter. This William founded the Abbey of Bristlesham Montague, and dyed at a
Iusts and Turney at Windsore, in the year, 1343, and was buried in the
White-Fryers in London.

Et portoit, d'argent au trois Lozengies en face de gueulles. William Lord
Mountacute (son and heir of William Earl of Salisbury aforesaid) after the
death of his Father, was the second Earl of Salisbury, Lord of Denbigh, and of
the Isle of Man, of that name; which honor of Denbigh, was recovered from him,
by Edmond Mortimer Earl of March. He was one of the Founders of the Noble
Order of the Garter, and Governor of Callis, under king Richard the second,
1380. He sold the Isle of Man, to William Lord Scroope, Treasurer of England,
and Earl of Wiltshire; who being after beheaded, king Henry the fourth, gave
the Isle of Man, to Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland, to hold of him and his
Successors, kings of England, by the service of bearing the sword at the
Coronation. He married Elizabeth, daughter and one of the co-heyres of John
Lord Mohun, of Dunster Castle in Somersetshire, and had issue, William his
only son and heir, slain at Tilt at Windsore, by William his Father, the
6. of Richard the second. This William the Father, dyed in the 20. year of
king Richard the second, leaving John his Nephew (son of John his Brother) to
succeed him, 1396.

Et portoit, les arms de son sonpere. John Mountacute Knight, son and heir
of Sir John Mountacute knight, and Nephew and heir of William Earl of
Salisbury his Uncle, was the third Earl of Salisbury of that name, and was one
of the Noblemen which conspired the death of king Henry the fourth, at a Iusts
held at Oxford; but being disclosed, diverse of them were put to death; and
this John and Thomas Holland Earl of Kent, flying unto Circester, were by the
rude Townes-men there, brought into the Marketplace, and there had their heads
smitten off, the first year of King Henry the fourth. He married Mauld,
daughter and heir of Sir Adam Francis of London, knight, and widow of Sir
Alan Boxhull knight, Lieutenant of the Tower, and had issue, Thomas Mountacute
Earl of Salisbury, and Richard that dyed without issue, and three daughters;
Anne the eldest, was first married to Sir Richard Hanckford, after to Sir John
Fitz-Lewis knight; and thirdly, to John Holland Earl of Huntington, and Duke
of Excester; Margaret the second daughter, was married to William Lord Ferrars
of Groby; and Elizabeth the third daughter, was married to Robert Lord
Willoughby of Eresbie.

Et portoit, d'argent, au trois Lozengies en face de gueulles. THomas
Montacute, Son of John Earl of Salisbury, slain by the Commons at Circester,
was restored to be Earl of Salisbury, in the tenth year of king Henry the
fourth; and after in the sixth year of king Henry the sixth, he was made Knight
of the Garter; and in the year, 1423. he raised the siedge of Crauant in
Burgoigne, where he, with the loss of 21. hundred men, slew eight thousand of
the enemies. After he was substituted Vice-Regent of the Countries of France,
Bry and Champaigne, and Sir John Fastoffe Deputy in the Duchy of Normandy. And
in the sixth year of king Henry the sixth, he, with William de la Pole Earl of
Suffolk, and John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, besiedged the City of Orliance
in France, where he and Sir Thomas Gargraue knight, looking out of a high
Window, in a Tower at the Bridge end, to view the Town, was shot with a
Bullet from the enemy, which brake the Window, and drove the shiuers thereof
into his Face and Head; upon which wound, he dyed within eight days after.
Whose body being brought into England, was honorably buried by his Ancestors,
at Bisham Abbey in Barkshire, 1428. He married Eleonor, daughter of Thomas
Holland Earl of Kent, and sister and one of the heirs of Edmond Earl of
Kent; and had issue, one only daughter and heir named Alice, married to
Richard Neuill, a younger son of Raphe Neuill, first Earl of Westmerland.
This Thomas had a base son named John.

Et portoit, d'argent, au trois Louzengies en face de gueulles. RIchard Neuill,
third son of Raphe Neuill, first Earl of Westmerland, (by Ioane his second
wife, daughter of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster) was made Earl of Salisbury,
after the death of Thomas Montague his wives Father, and Knight of the Garter,
in the 15. year of king Henry the sixth, and Lord Chancellor, in the 32. year
of the said kings reign. He took part with Richard Duke of York, against king
Henry the sixth, and was taken prisoner by Queen Margaret, at the battle of
Wakefield, and beheaded at Pomfret, and his head sent upon the end of a Spear
to York: in which battle, was Richard Duke of York also slain, 1460. This
Richard Neuill, married Eleanor, daughter and heir of Thomas Montague Earl of
Salisbury, and had issue, four sons and six daughters; Richard the eldest
son, was after restored and made Earl of Salisbury, and after Earl of
Warwick; John the second son, was created Marquess Mountague; Thomas the
third son, married the widow of the Lord Willoughby, and dyed without issue;
George the fourth son, was Archbishop of York, and Lord Chancellor of
England. Ioane the eldest daughter, was married to William Pitz-Alan, Earl of
Arundell; Cecily the second daughter, was married unto Henry Beauchamp Duke of
Warwick; Alice the third daughter, was married to Henry Lord Fitzhugh, Baron
of Rauenswath; Eleanor the fourth daughter, was married to Thomas Stanley,
first Earl of Derby of that name; Katherine the fifth daughter, was wife to
William Bonuill Lord Harington; and Margaret the sixth daughter, was married to
John Vere Earl of Oxford. This Richards body, was first buried in the Priory
at Pontfret, and after removed to Bisham Abbey, near Windesore in Barkshire.

Et portoit, gueulles au Saukeur d'argent, au lambell gobonne d'argent and
d'azur. RIchard Neuill, son and heir of Richard Neuill Earl of Salisbury
aforesaid, was restored to be Earl of Salisbury; and in right of his wife, he
was Earl of Warwick; he was also great Chamberlain and high Admiral of
England, Lord Warden of the North Marches toward Scotland, and of the
Cinque Ports, Captain of Callis, high Steward of the Duchy of Lancaster, and
knight of the Noble Order of the Garter. This famous and great Earl of
Warwick, did set up and pull down Kings at his pleasure. First he set up king
Edward the 4. and put down king Henry the 6. and after some breach and
unkindness between them, this Richard took Henry the 6. out of prison, where he
had bin ten years, and placed him again in his Regal Throne, forcing Edward
to fly into Flanders, to seek aid of the D. of Burgundy his brother in law.
But Edward returning again, did encounter with this great Earl, and his
brother John Marquess Montacute, at Barnet field, where they were both slain,
in the year, 1471. This Earl Rich. married Anne, daughter of Richard Beauchamp
Earl of Warwick, and sister and heir of Henry Duke of Warwick, by whom he
had issue, two daughters his heirs; Isabell the eldest, was married to George
Plantagenet Duke of Clarence; and Anne the second daughter, was first married
to Prince Edward, and after to Richard Duke of Gloucester, after king, by the
name of Richard the third.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. GEorge Plantagenet, borne at Dublin in
Ireland, third son of Richard Duke of York, and brother of king Edward the
fourth, was created Duke of Clarence, in the year, 1461. And by Letters
Patents dated at Westminster, the twenty five of March, the 12. of King Edward
the fourth, he was created Earl of Salisbury and Warwick. This George married
Isabell, sister and co-heyre of Henry Duke of Warwick, and had issue, Edward
Earl of Warwick, who from his childe-hoode was kept in the Tower of London,
and in the end beheaded by king Henry the seventh, leaving no issue; and
Margaret, the daughter of the said George, married Sir Richard Pole knight, and
was beheaded after her brother, in the 33. year of king Henry the eight. This
George was secretly murdered in the Tower of London, in the year, 1477 and was
buried at Tuekesbury.

Et portoit, France escartelle d'engleterre, au lambell d'argent au trois
cantons de gueulles. EDward, only son of King Richard the third, and Queen
Anne his wife, was borne in the Castle of Middleham, near Richmond, in the
County of York, 1473, who being not four years of age, was created Earl of
Salisbury, the 17. year of the Reign of king Edward the fourth. And on the
twenty four day of August, 1483, he being then about ten years old, was by
his Father created Prince of Wales, and dyed before his Father.

Et portoit, les arms d'engleterre au lambell d'argent. MArgaret Plantagenet,
daughter of George Duke of Clarence, and sister and heir of Edward Earl of
Warwick, beheaded as aforesaid, was created Countess of Salisbury, by king
Henry the eight, in the fifth year of his Reign, and in the 31. year of the
said kings Reign, she was attainted by Parliament, of high treason, together
with Gertrude, wife of Henry Courtney, Marquess of Excester, Reginald Pole her
son, Sir Adrian Fortescue and others; and after was beheaded in the Tower of
London, the 33. of king Henry the 8. She was married to Sir Richard Pole
knight, (borne in Wales) and had issue, Henry Pole Lord Mountague beheaded;
Reginald Pole Cardinal; Geffrey Pole third son; Arthur Pole fourth son;
and Vrsula, married to Henry Lord Siafford, son and heir of Edward Duke of
Buckingham.

Et portoit, France and d'englere tree escartelle au lambell d'ermyn trois
cantons de gueulles. RObert Cecill knight, (second son of William Cecill,
Baron of Burghley, Lord high Treasurer of England, and Knight of the Garter, by
his second wife Mildred) was first created at the Tower of London, the 13. of
May, 1603. Baron Cecill of Essenden in Rutlandshire. And at White Hall the 20.
day of August, 1604. he was created Viscount Cranborne in Dorsetshire; and
lastly at Greenwich, the fourth of May, 1605, he was created Earl of Salisbury
by King James. He was also Master of the Court of Wards, Chancellor of the
University of Cambridge, Lord high Treasurer of England, and Knight of the
Order of the Garter. He married Elizabeth, daughter of William Brook Lord
Cobham, and had issue, William Cicell Earl of Salisbury, 1618. and a daughter
named Francis, married to Henry Lord Clifford, son and heir of Francis Earl
of Cumberland. He dyed at Marlborough, on Sunday, the 24. of May 1612.

Et portrit, burellee de dis d'argent and d'azur. sur le tout six eschuchons,
3, 2, 1. sable, charge de six lions rampant a la premier, au Cressand pur le
difference. William Cecill, Baron Cecill of Essenden, Viscount Cranburne, and
Earl of Salisbury, 1618. married Katherine, youngest daughter of Thomas Howard
Earl of Suffolk, and Lord high Treasurer of England, and had issue, James
that dyed young, and Frances a daughter.

A CATALOGVE OF THE Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls of Suffolk, their Arms,
Wives, and Children.
RObert de Vfford knight, Son of Sir Robert Vfford knight, Steward of the
household to King Edward the second, and of his wife Cecily, daughter and
co-heire of Robert de Valonijs Lord of Orford, was created Earl of Suffolk,
in the eleventh year of king Edward the third, 1335, as also Knight of the
Garter; he was Lord of Eay and Framlingham in Suffolk. Before this Robert, did
the Family of Bigots hold Norfolk and Suffolk together as one County. This
Robert, and William Mountague Earl of Salisbury, were Generals of king Edward
the thirds Army in Flanders, when he went to make his claim to the Crown of
France, descended to him by his Mother, and kept from him by Philip de Valois
the Usurper, 1338. He served under the black Prince, at the battle of
Poictow, where John the French King was taken prisoner, 1359, and married
Margaret, daughter of Sir John Norwich, of Mettingham Castle in Suffolk, and
Aunt and heir of John her Nephew, (by Walter her Brother) by whom he had
issue, William Vfford Earl of Suffolk, and three daughters; Cecily, married
to John Lord Willoughby; Katherine, married to Robert Lord Scales; and
Margaret, married to William Lord Ferrers of Groby. He dyed in the 43. year of
King Edward the third.

Et portoit, de sable au croix engresse d'or. WIlliam de Vfford, son and
heir of Robert aforesaid, was the second Earl of Suffolk of that surname, L.
of Eye and Framlingham, he married Isabell, daughter of Thomas Beauchampe Earl
of Warwick, and had issue, Thomas, William and Edward, who dyed all without
issue. This William Earl of Suffolk, dyed suddenly in the Parliament house
at Westminster, the 15. day of February, 1382. leaving his three sisters his
heirs, who were married as aforesaid.

Les arms de son pere. MIchaell de la Pole knight, son and heir of Sir
William de la Pole Knight Banneret, and Katherine his wife, daughter of Sir
John Norwich knight, and grandchild to another Sir William Pole knight;
(which Father and Grandfather of this Michaell, does disprove our late
Writers, who sets him down to be of base Parentage and birth) He was Lord
Wingfield, and Lord Chancellor of England; and by King Richard the second, he
was created Earl of Suffolk, in the year, 1385. and had given him a thousand
Marks by the year, out of the Kings Treasury. But when King Richard began to
decline, by reason of the discord of the Nobility, the honor of this Michaell
(being newly raised) decreased also. For by a public Decree, he was banished
England, the 12. year of king Richard, as a great corrupter of the King; in
which banishment, he dyed with grief at Paris, 1389 and was after buried at
Hull. He married Isabell, daughter of Sir John Wingfield knight, and sister and
heir of Sir Thomas Wingfield, of Wingfield Castle in Suffolk knight, and had
issue, five sons; Thomas de la Pole, borne 1366. William, borne 1367.
Michaell, borne 1368. Richard, borne 1369, and John borne, 1373. He had issue,
three daughters; Margaret, married to William Lord Ferrers of Groby; Elizabeth
and Anne.

Et portoit, d'azur a la face enter trois testes de leopards d'or. MIchaell de
la Pole, Lord Wingfield, son of Michaell aforesaid, was restored to be Earl
of Suffolk, after his Father in banishment, the 22. of king Richard the
second, and married Katherine, daughter of Hugh Earl Stafford, and had issue,
six sons and five daughters, viz. Michaell de la Pole, Earl of Suffolk;
William second son, was after the death of Michaell his elder brother, Earl,
Marquess and Duke of Suffolk; Thomas was a Clarke; Sir John de la Pole
knight, Captain of the Town of Auerenges in Normandy; Miles de la Pole, and
Alexander: Isabell the eldest daughter, was married to William Lord Morley;
Katherine, was Abbess of Berking; Elizabeth dyed young; Philip the fourth
daughter, was wife to the Lord Burnell; and Margaret married John de Foys,
Earl of Kendall in England, son of Gaston de Foys, Earl of Longeuile in
France. This Michaell dyed of the Flix; at the siedge of Hareflew, 1414.

Et portoit, les armoiries de son pere. MIchaell de la Pole, the third of that
name, Lord Wingfield, and Earl of Suffolk, was slain at the battle of
Egen-Court, with Edward Plantagenet Duke of York, the 25. of October, 1414,
leaving no issue of his body, and was buried at Butley.

Et portoit, d'azur a la face enter tro^ testes de leopards d'or. WIlliam de la
Pole, Lord Wingfield and Earl of Suffolk, (second son of Michaell the second
Earl of Suffolk of that Family) after the death of Michaell Earl of Suffolk
his elder brother, without issue, (being Captain of the Castle and City of
Auerenges in Normandy, was in the 22. of king Henry the sixth, created Marquess
of Suffolk, and in the 25. year of the said kings reign, he was made Earl
of Penbroke; and lastly Duke of Suffolk, in the 26. of Henry the sixth. After
all which honors given him, in the year 1449, he was banished England for five
years, for being too familiar with Queen Margaret, privy and consenting to
the yielding and loss of Anioy and Main, (as also to appease the murmuring of
the people, for the murdering of the Duke of Gloucester:) and as he was taking
of Ship to paste for France, he was surprised and taken on the sea, by a Ship
of war, called the Nicholas, belonging to the Duke of Excester, then
Constable of the Tower of London, and there presently beheaded, and his body
cast into the Sea, which was after found and taken up again at Dover, and
brought to the College at Wingfield in Suffolk, and there honorably buried.
He married Alice, daughter and heir of Sir Thomas Chaucer knight, son of Sir
Geffrey Chaucer the Poet, by whom he had issue, John Duke of Suffolk, and
William.

Et portoit, d'azur a la face enter trois testes de leopards d'or. John de la
Pole, son and heir of William aforesaid, being the fifth of this Family, was
after the death of his Father, Duke of Suffolk. He was Founder of the house of
the Carthusians at Kingston on Hull, where the house of the said Poles as yet
remains like a Palace. He married Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Plantagenet
Duke of York, and sister of king Edward the fourth, and had issue, John de la
Pole, created Earl of Lincoln, the seventh of king Edward the fourth, who
having no issue of his body, was slain at Stokefield, with Martyn Swarth, who
unjustly had taken up Arms against King Henry the seventh, in the year 1487,
the second of the said Kings Reign. Edmond the second son, was Earl of
Suffolk; Humfrey was a Clarke; Edward the fourth son was Archdeacon of
Richmond; and Richard the fifth son was slain at Pauia in Italy, at a battle
foughten in the year, 1525. Katherine the eldest daughter, was married to
William Lord Sturton; Anne the second daughter, was a Nun at Sion; Dorothy
was the third daughter; and Elizabeth the 4. daughter, was married to Henry
Louell Lord Morley. This John dyed in the year 1491. and was buried at
Wingfield, of which he was Lord and Owner.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. EDmond de la Pole, second son and heir
of John de la Pole Duke of Suffolk, by Elizabeth his wife, sister of king
Edward the fourth, was the last Earl of Suffolk of that Family, (a bold,
stout, and courageous man, but very intemperate in his anger) This Edmond upon
a time killed a mean man, which fact King Henry the seventh pardoned,
notwithstanding he took it so ill, that he was arraigned for the same. As he
shortly after (without the Kings license) went into Flanders to his Aunt
Margaret, Duchess of Burgonay, but after returning back again: he excused
himself so, as he obtained the kings favor; and not long after, while Prince
Arthurs marriage with Katherine of Spain, and the peoples heads were occupied
with delights; he, with his Brother Richard departed the second time into
Flanders, against the Kings will and knowledge, where he remained as an exile,
hearing that some of his Friends were put to death, and others committed to
perpetual imprisonment. He wandered up and down, both in France and Germany;
but finding no place of rest or safety, at last, yielding himself into the
hands of Philip, Duke of Burgundy and Flanders, was at length brought into
England, and beheaded at Tower Hill for treason, in the year 1513. being the
fifth of king Henry the eight. He married Margaret, daughter of Richard Lord
Scrope, and had issue, Anne a Nun in the Minnories at London.

Et portoit, d'azur a la face enter trois testes de leopards d'or. CHarles
Brandon, (Son of Sir William Brandon knight) was knight of the Garter, and
Master of the Horse to K. Henry the 8. and by him created Viscount Lisle, in
the year 1513, and after Duke of Suffolk in the same year. In which year,
there was a solemn triumph, at Tilt and Turney proclaimed in France by the
Dolphin: to which, this Charles, with the Marquis Dorset, and many other Noble
Lords and Gentlemen, went with the Kings license. And in the first days
triumph, the Marquis Dorset bare himself so valiantly against Monsieur Grue
(an Almanois) that with his Spear, he wounded him very dangerously in the
head. And Duke Charles at the Turney, overthrew his adversary, bearing both man
and horse to the ground. This Duke Charles had four wives, the first was
Margaret, daughter of John Neuill, Marquess Montague, (widow of Sir John
Mortimer knight) by whom he had no issue. The second was Anne, daughter of Sir
Anthony Brown knight, Governor of Callis, by whom he had issue (before
marriage) a base daughter named Anne, married to Edward Gray Lord Powis; and
another daughter after marriage, named Mary, married unto Thomas Stanley Lord
Montegle. His third wife was Mary, Queen of France, widow of Lewis the 12.
and second sister to King Henry the eight, by whom he had issue, Henry Brandon
Earl of Lincoln, that died before his Father, without issue, and two
daughters; Francis, married to Henry Gray, Marquess Dorset, and after Duke of
Suffolk; and Eleanor the second daughter, was married to Henry Clifford Earl
of Cumberland. The fourth wife was Katherine, daughter and one of the heirs of
William Lord Willoughby of Eresbie, by whom he had issue, two sons, Henry
Brandon Duke of Suffolk, and Charles, who dyed young, both in one day of the
sweating sickness, at Bugden the Bishop of Lincolnes house, the 14. of July,
1551. This valiant Charles Duke of Suffolk, departed this life at Guilford,
the 24. of August, 1544. the 36. of king Henry the eight, and was buried very
honorably with a Hearse at Windesore.

Et portoit, bur^lle d'argent and de gueulles de dix pieces, a la lion rampant
d'or, coronne per pale d'argent and de gueulles. HEnry Gray, Marquess Dorset,
and Baron Ferrers of Groby, Huntington, Wooduill, and Asheley, Justice of the
Forests and Chases by South, the River of Trent, and knight of the Garter; was
after the death of Henry Brandon Duke of Suffolk and Charles his brother,
created Duke of Suffolk, the eleventh of October, the fifth of king Edward the
sixth. He married Lady Francis, daughter of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, by
Mary the French Queen, Dowager of France; and had issue three daughters: Jane
the eldest, was married to the Lord Guilford Dudley, son of John Duke of
Northumberland, who were both beheaded without issue. Katherine the second
daughter, was married to Henry Lord Herbert, from whom (against her will) she
was divorced. Mary, married to Martyn Kayes of Kent Esquire, and dyed without
issue. This Henry Gray Duke of Suffolk, was beheaded at Tower Hill, the 23. of
February, in the first year of Queen Mary, 1554.

Et portoit, burelle de six d'argent and d'azur trois torteaux a lambell
d'ermyn. THomas Lord Howard, second son of Thomas Howard late Duke of
Norfolk, and of Margaret his second Wife, daughter and only heir of Thomas
Lord Andley of Walden, Lord Chancellor of England; was by Summons of writ to
the Parliament, made Lord Howard of Walden: he was Lord Chamberlain to Queen
Elizabeth, and King James, and knight of the Garter; and after created Earl of
Suffolk at Hampton Court, on Thursday the 21. of July, 1603. and lastly made
Lord Treasurer of England. He married Katherine, eldest daughter and one of the
co-heyres of Sir Henry Knyuet, of Chorlton in Wiltshire knight, by whom he had
issue, Theophilus Lord Walden; Sir Thomas Howard, knight of the Bath; Henry
Howard, Charles Howard, Robert Howard, William Howard, and Sir Edward Howard,
all knights of the Bath; John the 7. son dyed young; Elizabeth the eldest
daughter, was married to William Lord Knolles of Greyes, and Viscount
Wallingford; Francis second daughter, wife to Robert Carre Earl of Somerset;
and Katherine the third daughter, was married to William Cecill now Earl of
Salisbury, 1618. Margaret the fourth daughter dyed young, and was buried at
Walden in Essex.

Et portoit, gueulles a la band enter six croix au pied fiche d'argent a
croissant sable pur la difference. A CATALOGVE OF THE Dukes and Earls of
Somerset, their Arms, Wives, and Children.
William de Mohun, (or Moun) the 3. of that name from the Norman Conquest,
(grandchild to William de Moun, surnamed Sapell, Lord of Dunster Castle in
Somersetshire, by his son William) was made Earl of Somerset by King Henry
the first; and by that name and title, did found the Priory and Convent of S.
Mary's of Brinton, and gave to the Cannons Regular of the same, diverse Lands
for their maintenance. To which his Charter, are witnesses, William de Moyn his
Son, Henry Iuwe, William de Brinton, Hugh de Punchardon and others. This
William (as Matthew Paris has) in the year 1138. did keep and fortefie his
Castle of Dunster, against K. Stephen; and William Talbot kept the Castle of
Hereford; William Louell the Castle of Ludlow; and William Fitz-Alan the Castle
of Salopesbury, on the part of Mauld the Empress, and Henry Duke of Normandy
her son. This William de Moun Earl of Somerset, married Luce, daughter of
(...) and had issue, William de Mohun Lord of Dunster and Oodecombe, Muneth and
Culueton in Somersetshire.

Et portoit, guculles, au Manch mal tail d'ermyn le maine propre tenant a la
flour de liz d'or. REginald de Mohun Lord of Dunster, (son and heir of
Reginald de Mohun Lord of Dunster, grandchild of William de Mohun Earl of
Somerset, by his son William) was the second, and last Earl of Somerses of
that Family, and did by that Name and Title give his Manor of Aexministre,
with the appurtenances, to found the Abbey of Newham; To which his gift are
witnesses, Richard Earl of Cornwall, the Kings brother, Simon Earl of
Leicester, Henry Earl of Oxford, John Fitz-Geffrey, Ran-Fitz-Hubert, Hugh
Tracy, Hugh Peuerell of Ermington, William Malherbe knights and others. Prima
pars Patent. Anno, 14, Edw. 3, m. 33. He married Isabell, daughter of William
Earl Ferrars and Derby, and coheyre of her Mother Sibell, sister and co-heyre
of Anselme Marshall, Earl of Penbroke, by whom he had issue, John de Mohun
Lord of Dunster, etc. This Reginald lost his Title of Earl, in siding with the
Barons against king Henry the third, and dyed in the 43. year of the said
Kings Reign, and was buried in the Abbey of Newham.

Et portoit les armoiries de son pere, gueulles, au Manch mail tail d'ermyn,
le maine propre tenant a la flour de liz d'or. John sur-named Beaufort (of
Beaufort in France, which came to the house of Lancaster, by Blanch of Arthois,
wife to Edmond first Earl of Lancaster) son of John of Gaunt D. of
Lancaster, begotten of Ratherine Swinford before marriage; who with his
brothers and sisters, were made legitimate by Act of Parliament, in the 21.
year of king Richard the second, and in the year, 1396. he was made Earl of
Somerset, and the year after, Marquess Dorset; from which king Henry the
fourth deprived him; leaving him only Earl of Somerset. He married Margaret,
daughter of Thomas Holland Earl of Kent, and sister and co-heyre of Edmond
Earl of Kent, by whom he had issue, Henry Earl of Somerset, that dyed young
without issue, and John, who by king Henry the fifth, was created the first Duke
of Somerset, and had issue, one only daughter named Margaret, Mother to king
Henry the seventh; Edmond the third son, succeeded his Brother John in the
Dukedom of Somerset, and was slain at the first battle of S. Albons. Ioane
the eldest daughter of this John Beaufort, was married to James the first king
of Scots; and Margaret the second daughter, was married to Thomas Courtney
Earl of Deuon. He dyed in the eleventh year of king Henry the fourth, and was
buried on the North side of Thomas Beckets Shrine at Canterbury.

Et portoit, France seem, escartelle d'engleterre, au bordur gobonne d'argent
and d'azur. John Beaufort, son of John Earl of Somerset, and grandchilde to
John of Gaunt (after the death of his Father, and his elder Brother Henry Earl
of Somerset) was created the first Duke of Somerset, in the 21. year of king
Henry the 6. He was taken prisoner before by the Duke of Orliance, at
Bangie-Bridge in France, the ninth of the said Kings Reign, and delivered
upon ransom. He married Margaret, daughter of Sir John Beauchampe of Bletso
knight, and sister and heir of John her Brother, by whom he had issue, one
only daughter and heir named Margaret, who by Edmond of Hadham Earl of
Richmond her husband, had issue king Henry the seventh. ( Milles, page 398.
says) Edmond Beauford brother of this John, succeeded him in his Dukedom of
Somerset, which was thought to be a great prejudice to Margaret, this John's
daughter and heir, if according to the old custom, when the male issue
fails, the titles, honors and dignities should not depend upon the pleasure
of the King, to distribute the same to who he pleases. The which, in a word I
answer thus, That if King Henry the fifth did give the Dukedom of Somerset to
John, the Father of this Margaret and his heirs male (as he did) and as
commonly all Kings use to do, when they give the like honors: (This John
dying without issue male) what wrong does the King to any, in giving his own,
to whom and where he pleases? and to speak truly, I have not seen but one
Letters Patents otherwise, which was by King Henry the sixth, 1458. to James
Butler, who had the Earldom of Ormond to him and his heirs male, and the
Earldom of Wiltshire to him and his heirs general. And this I hope shall be
sufficient, to prove that King Henry the sixth did no wrong to this Margaret, in
giving her Fathers title of honor to his brother, nay, had he given it to a
mere stranger, it had been justifiable. This John dyed in the 24. year of
king Henry the sixth, and lies buried in Winborne Minster in Dorsetshire.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. EDmond Beaufort, Earl Moriton in Normandy,
and Lord of Chirke and Chirkland, in the Marchesse of Wales, (brother of John
Duke of Somerset aforesaid, and grandchild of John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster) was after the death of his elder brother without issue male, created
first Marquess Dorset, 1444. and in the 25. year of king Henry the sixth, he
was made Duke of Somerset; and after, he with Henry Earl of Northumberland,
Humfrey Earl Stafford, and Thomas L. Clifford, were slain at the battle of
S. Albons, on the part of king Henry the sixth, 1455. and the king himself
taken prisoner and brought to London. This Edmonds death greatly grieved K.
Hen. because in him he had put all his trust and confidence; and for that also,
such a Chiefetain as he, who had long gouernd in Normandy, and bin Rege^t of
France, and for his Countries sake, had so valiantly borne himself against the
French, should now be slain at home by his own countrymen. He married Elianor,
daughter and one of the heirs of Richard Beauchamp earl of Warwick, and had
issue, four sons and five daughters, viz. Henry the eldest son, was after
his Father, Duke of Somerset, and was beheaded in the year, 1463. Edmond the
second son, was also Duke of Somerset after his Brother; John the third
son, was slain at the battle of Teukesbury without issue, 1470, and Thomas
the 4. son, dyed without issue. Elianor the eldest daughter, was first
married to James Butler Earl of Wiltshire, and after to Sir Robert Spencer
knight; Ioane the second daughter, was first married to the Lord Hoth of
Ireland, and after to Sir Richard Fry knight; Anne the third daughter, was
married to Sir William Paston knight; Margaret the fourth daughter, was first
married to Humfrey Earl Stafford, and after to Sir Richard Darell knight; and
Elizabeth married unto Sir Henry Lewis knight. This Edmonds body was buried at
S. Albons, in the Abbey there.

Et portoit, France escartelle d'engleterre, a un bordur gobonne d'argent and
d'azur. Henry Beaufort, son and heir of Edmond aforesaid, was after the
death of his Father, Duke of Somerset, Marquess Dorset, Earl Moriton, Lord of
Chirke and Chirkland, and Lieutenant of Callis. He, by assaults took the
Castle of S. Auian in Main, and slew therein 300. Scots, and hanged all the
French he found therein. He most disloyally fell from king Henry the sixth, to
Edward of York, who then had gotten the Crown; but when king Henry had
obtained succor of the Scots, and was entered the Bishopprick of Durham, this
Duke Henry revolted from Edward, and came to king Henry again; and sighting
the battle at Exham, was with William Talboys, the Lord Ros, Molyns, and
Hungerford, Sir Henry Neuill, Sir Thomas Wentworth, and Sir Richard Tunstall,
unluckily taken prisoner, by John Marquess Mountague, and there beheaded, in
the year 1462. He had issue, a base son named Charles Somerset, (begotten of
Ioane Hill his Concubine) who was after created Earl of Worcester, of whom the
now Earl of Worcester is descended.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. EDmond Beaufort, brother and heir of Henry
Duke of Somerset aforesaid, and second son of Edmond Duke of Somerset, slain
at S. Albons, was the last Duke of Somerset of this Name and Family, who taking
part with the house of Lancaster, was with Prince Edward (son of king Henry
the sixth) taken prisoner at the battle of Tuekesbury, by King Edward the
fourth, 1471. and within two days after beheaded there, without issue, leaving
his five sisters his heirs before mentioned.

Et portoit, France escartelle d'engleterre a la bordur gobonne d'argent and
d'azur. EDmond, third son of King Henry the seventh, was born at Greenwich in
Kent, 1495. and was created Duke of Somerset; and after dyed at Bishops
Hatfield in Hertforashire, in the year 1499, being not full five years old,
and was buried in the Abbey at Westminster.

HEnry Fitz-Roy, knight of the Garter, and base son to king Henry the eight
(begotten of the Lady Talboys, daughter of Sir John Blount knight) being a
child of six years old, was by his Father in the 17. year of his reign,
created Duke of Somerset and Richmond at Bridewell, and married Mary, daughter
of Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, but by her had no issue. He dyed at S. James
house by Charing-Crosse, being but 16. years of age, and was honorably buried
at Thetford in Norfolk, the 27. of king Henry the eight, 1535. (as Grafton
has) Others has, that he lies buried at Framingham in Norfolk. He bare for
his Arms,

Escartelle France and d'engleterre, a bordur escartelle ermyn and compone
d'argent and d'azur, abatun sinestre d'argent, a un escutcheon de pretense
escartelle gueulles and varrey d'or and vert, sur la tout, au lion rampant
d'argent, au chef d'azur un Chastel enter deux testes du cerf d'argent. EDward
Seymour, knight of the Garter, was created Viscount Beauchamp in the Whitson
week, 1536. and Earl of Hertford, the 18, of October, 1537. and lastly Duke
of Somerset, the 17. of February, 1547. the first of king Edward the sixth. He
was Lord Protector both of the Kings person and Kingdoms, and to lead to war
(as well by Sea as by Land) all the Kings Armies, as Lord Lieutenant General;
he was also Lord high Treasurer and Earl Marshall of England, and Governor of
the Isles of Gernesey and Iersey. He married two wives, the first was Katherine,
daughter and co-heyre of Sir William Foliot, of Woodland in Dorsetshire knight,
and had issue, Lord Edward Seymour of Berye Pomery in Devonshire; and John
second Son. His second wife was Anne, daughter of Edward Stanhop Esquire, by
who^ he had issue, Edward Seymour, now Earl of Hertford, 1618. Lord Henry and
Edward; Anne the eldest daughter, was married to John Dudley, Earl of
Warwick; Jane was the second daughter; Mary the third daughter, was married to
Andrew Rogers; Katherine the fourth daughter; and Elizabeth the fifth daughter,
was married to Sir Richard Knightley knight. This Edward was arraigned at
Westminster Hall (the first of December, the fifth of king Edward the sixth) of
high treason, and was found guilty of Felony; for which, the 22. of January
after, he was beheaded at the Tower Hill.

Et portoit, de gueulles a deux Ailes de l'agle en leuure d'or. RObert Carr, a
man greatly favored and honored by King James, who first created him Baron of
Branspath, and after Viscount Rochester, at White Hall on Monday, the 25. day
of March, 1611. and lastly Earl of Somerset, in the year 1614. And for a
further favor, the said King made him Lord Chamberlain of his Household,
Knight of the Garter, and one of his honorable privy Counsel. He married
Francis, second daughter of Thomas Howard Earl of Suffolk, and Lord high
Treasurer of England, by whom he had issue, a daughter named Anne.

This Robert and his wife (being suspected to be of the counsel, and
consenting to the poisoning of Sir Thomas Ouerbury knight, (sometime his
familiar friend and favorite) were both called in question, endited and
arraigned at Westminster Hall, in May 1616, and there by the Peers were found
guilty, and had judgment to dye for the same.

Et portoit, de gueulles au cheuron d'argent, charge de trois estoilles de
sable, brise de un leopard passant d'or, du primier canton de l'escu. A
CATALOGVE OF THE Dukes and Earls of Stafford, their Arms, Wives, and Children.
RAphe Lord Stafford, Steward of Gascoigne, descended lyneally as heir male of
the body of Heruy Bagot, and Millescent his wife, sister and heir of Robert
Lord Stafford, in king John's time. This Raphe was created Earl Stafford in the
25. year of king Edward the third; and married Margaret, daughter and heir of
Hugh Lord Audley Earl of Gloucester, and had issue, Hugh Earl Stafford, and
Sir Richard Stafford knight, and three daughters; Beatrix the eldest, was first
married to Maurice, Earl of Desmond in Ireland; and after to Thomas Lord Ros
of Hamlake; Ioane the second daughter, married John Charlton Lord Powes, and
Margaret the third daughter, was married to John Stafford, Patron of the Church
of Bromhall in Staffordshire. This Raphe dyed in the 45. of king Edward the
third, 1370. and was buried in the Priory of Tunbridge, by his wife Margaret.

Et portoit, d'or au cheuron de gueulles. HVgh Lord Stafford, son of Raphe
Earl Stafford, after the death of his Father, was the second Earl Stafford,
and married Philip, daughter of Thomas Beauchamp the elder, Earl of Warwick,
and had issue, Thomas, William and Edmond, al three Earls of Stafford; and
Raphe slain by John Holland; and four daughters, Margaret, wife to Raphe
Neuill Earl of Westmerland; Katherine, married to Michaell de la Pole, Earl
of Suffolk; Ioane the third daughter, married Thomas Holland Earl of Kent;
and the fourth daughter, was married to John Lord Ferrars of Chartley. This
Hugh dyed in his return from Jerusalem, in the Isle of Rhodes, in the tenth
year of king Richard the second, and was buried by his wife, in the Abbey of
Stone in Staffordshire.

Et portoit, d'or, au cheuron de gueulles. THomas Lord Stafford, son and
heir of Hugh aforesaid, was the third Earl Stafford, and died without issue,
in the fourteen year of king Richard the second, and was buried by his Father
and Mother, in the Abbey of Stone, leaving William and Edmond his brothers, to
succeed him in the Earldom of Stafford. But William dying without issue,
Edmond the third son succeeded Earl.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. EDmond Stafford, third son of Hugh Earl
Stafford, and brother and heir of Thomas and William his brothers, was (after
their deaths) the fifth Earl Stafford, and Lord of Tunbridge. He married Anne,
daughter of Thomas of Woodstocke, Earl of Buckingham, and Duke of Gloucester,
and sister and only heir of Humfrey her brother; by whom he had issue,
Humfrey Earl Stafford, and first Duke of Buckingham; and Philip that dyed
young; Anne, first married to Edmond Mortimer Earl of March and Vlster, (but
by him had no issue) after she married John Holland Earl of Huntington, and
had issue, Henry Duke of Excester. This Edmond, with Thomas Percy Earl of
Worcester, and Henry Percy his Nephew, was slain at the battle of
Shrewsbury, in the fourth year of king Henry the fourth, and was buried at
Stafford, in S. Augustines Friars.

Et portoir, d'or au cheuron de gueulles. HVmfrey Stafford, son of Edmond,
was the sixth Earl Stafford, whom king Henry the sixth in the 23. year of his
Reign, created the first Duke of Buckingham, and gave him place and precedence
before all other Dukes of England. He writ in his Style; Humfrey, Duke of
Buckingham, Earl Stafford, Hereford and Northampton, Lord of Brecknock and
Holdernesse. This Humfrey in the eight year of king Henry the fifth, did his
homage at Roan, for the Earldom of Perch; and at the same time, Arthur Duke
of Britain did the like for the Earldom of Yurye. He married Anne, daughter
of Raphe Neuill first Earl of Westmerland, and had issue, Humfrey Earl
Stafford, who married Margaret, sister and co-heyre of Edmond Beaufort, Duke of
Somerset, and was wounded with an Arrow, at the first battle at S. Alb^^s,
the 33. of Henry the sixth, of which wound he dyed the year after, in the life
time of his Father, 1455. John the second son, was created Earl of
Wiltshire; and Richard the third son, was slain with the fall from a horse;
George and William were twins, and dyed both young: Anne the eldest daughter,
was first married to Aubrey de Ver, son and heir of John Earl of Oxford,
and had no issue; After she married Sir Thomas Cobham knight, son of Reginald
Lord Cobbam of Sterborough, and had issue; Anne the second daughter, was first
married to William Lord Bardolph, and after to Sir William Kniuet knight; and
Katherine the third daughter, married John Lord Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury.
This Humfrey was slain at the battle of Northampton, in the 38. year of
king Henry the 6. and his body buried in the Gray Friars in Northampton. He
bare for his Arms, France and England quarterly, within a bordure argent;
which was the Arms of Thomas of Woodstocke, his Grandfather by his Mother.

HEnry Lord Stafford, (son and heir of Humfrey Stafford, by Margaret his
wife, sister and co-heire of Edmond Beaufort Duke of Somerset) grandchilde of
Humfrey Stafford the first Duke of Buckingham, and Anne Neuill his wife; was
after the death of his said Grandfather, the second Duke of Buckingham, Earl
Stafford, Hereford and Northampton, Lord of Brecknock, Kimbalton and Tunbridge,
and Knight of the Garter; who falling in dislike with king Richard the third,
labored the return of Henry Earl of Richmond out of France. Diverse Authors
diversely report the cause thereof; but one amongst the rest says, that Humfrey
the tenth Earl of Hereford, Northampton, and Essex, and Constable of England,
in king Richard the seconds time, had two daughters his heirs; Elianor the
eldest, married to Thomas of Woodstocke Duke of Gloucester; and Mary the second
daughter, married to Henry Earl of Derby (after King, by the name of Henry the
4.) whose issue being spent and ended in Prince Edward, son of king Henry the
6, this Henry Stafford Duke of Buckingham, made claim to that part of Humfrey
de Bohuns Lands, which before were conveyed to Mary the second daughter (they
being then in the Crown) for that this Duke Henry was then the only heir
both of Elianor and Mary. At which claim and demand, King Richard the third
was greatly offended, and said; Will you (Duke Henry) challenge the right of
king Henry the fourth, by which he wrongfully held the Crown, and so make way
unto it? Which speech of the king, went so near to the Dukes heart, that ever
after, he sought and plotted, how he might work the return of Henry earl of
Richmond out of France, and to deprive king Richard of his Crown. And to
effect the same, he raised diverse forces, and entered into Arms; which King
Richard hearing of, levied a greater, and went to Salisbury to meet him; but
the Dukes Army being too weak, he was forced to fly for succor to the house
of Humfrey Banister his servant near Shrewsbury, who for hope of gain,
betrayed him to John Mitton Shireffe of Shropshire, who took and conuayed him
to Salisbury, where without any arraignment or lawful trial, he was beheaded
the second of November, 1483. This Duke Henry married Katherine, sister and one
of the heirs of Richard Wooduill Earl Rivers, and had issue, Edward Earl
Stafford, and Duke of Buckingham, Henry Earl of Wiltshire, and Humfrey that
died young. He had also two daughters, Elizabeth married to Robert Radcliffe,
Lord Fitz-Walter and Earl of Sussex; and Anne, first married to Sir Walter
Herbert knight, and after to George Lord Hastings Earl of Huntington.

Et portoit, France and d'engleterre escartelle, an bordur d'argent. EDward
Stafford, son and heir of Duke Henry aforesaid, was after the death of his
Father restored, the first of king Henry the seventh, to all his Fathers
honors, dignities and possessions, which king Richard the third took from
him; and was Duke of Buckingham, Earl Stafford, Hereford and Northampton, and
Constable of England. He married Elianor, daughter of Henry Percy Earl of
Northumberland, by whom he had issue, Henry Lord Stafford (for after the death
of this Edward, the Family of Staffords never attained other title of honor,
then only of Barons) He had issue also three daughters; Elizabeth the eldest,
was married to Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, and Lord high Treasurer of
England; Katherine the second daughter, was married to Raphe Neuill fourth
Earl of Westmerland; and Mary the third daughter, married George Neuile Lord
of Abergauenny. This Edward, was a Prince of high spirit, and very ambitious,
daily plotting of treason against king Henry the eight, by which he overthrew
himself, and all his Noble Family; and for the same, was beheaded at the
Tower Hill by London, the 17. of May, 1521. in the thirteenth year of King
Henry the eight.

Les armoiries de son pere. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls of Southampton, their
Arms, Wives, and Children.
BEauois a Saxon, and flower of Chiualry in his time, was at the siedge of
York, in the fourth year of William Conqueror; and the year after, fought
the great battle at Cairdiffe in South Wales, against the Normans; he was
made Earl of Southampton by the said Conqueror, and was a Witness to his
Charter, of lands that he gave to the Abbey of S. Edmonsbury in Suffolk, by
the name and title of Earl Beauois. He dyed without issue (known) the tenth
year after the Norman Conquest. This is that Beauois of Southampton. M. Camden
in his Britannia, page 272. says, That whiles the Monks labored to set out
his fame with their feigned Fables, they obscured his doughty and Martial
Actions in Arms.

William Fitz-Williams, knight of the Garter, Treasurer of the household to
king Henry the eight, Lord Privy Seal, and Lord Admiral of England, was
created Earl of Southampton, at Hampton Court, the 29. year of the said Kings
Reign. He married Mabell, daughter of Henry Lord Clifford of Westmerland, and
sister and heir of Henry first Earl of Cumberland, and dyed without issue, at
New Castle upon Tine, the 34. year of king Henry the eight.

Et portoit, lozengie d'argent and de ^ueulles. THomas Wriothesley, Knight of
the Garter, son of William Wriothesley, York Herald of Arms, and
grandchilde to John Wriothesley, alias Garter king of Arms, was created Baron
of Tichfield, at Hampton Court the first of January, the 35. of Henry the
eight, Anno, 1543. and Lord Chancellor of England, in May the year after; in
which Office he continued until the beginning of king Edward the sixth his
reign, when for his obstinacy in the Roman Religion, he was the sixth of March
removed, and William Paulet Lord S. John of Basing put in his place. He was
after created Earl of Southhampton, the 17. of February, in the first year of
king Edward the sixth, and married Jane, daughter and heir of William Cheney,
by whom he had issue, Henry the second Earl of Southampton of that name, and
four daughters; Mary the eldest, was first married to William Shelley of
Michelgroue in Sussex, and after to (...) Lister, son of Sir Michaell Lister
knight; Elizabeth, was wife to Thomas Radcliffe Earl of Sussex; Katherine,
married to Thomas Cornwallis Groom-Porter; and Mabell the fourth daughter, was
wife to Sir Walter Sands knight. He dyed at his house called Lincoln Place in
Holborne, the 30. day of July, in the fourth year of king Edward the sixth, and
was buried in S. Andrews Church in Holborne.

Et portoit, d'azur a un croix d'or, enuironne de quatre faulcons close
d'argent. HEnry Wriothesley, son and heir of Thomas aforesaid, was after the
death of his Father, the second Earl of Southampton, and Baron of Titchfield.
He married Mary, daughter of Sir Anthony Brown Viscount Mountague, and knight
of the Garter, by whom he had issue, Henry Wriothesly the third Earl of
Southampton of that Family; and Mary married to Thomas Arundell Baron of
Warder. He dyed at Ythell in Hampshire, the fourth of October, 1581. and was
buried at Titchfield, the 23. of Queen Elizabeth.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. HEnry Wriothesley, (son and heir of
Henry aforesaid) was the third Earl of Southampton of this Family, and Baron
of Tichfield, Knight of the Garter, and Captain of the Isle of Wight. He
married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir John Vernon of Hodnet in Staffordshire, and
had issue, James Wriothersley; Thomas a second son, Penelope, Anne and
Elizabeth, 1618.

Et portoit, d'azur a un croix d'or, enuironne de quartre faucons d'argent. A
CATALOGVE OF THE Earls of Sussex, their Arms, Wives, and Children.
William de Albeney, the third of that Name, grandchilde to William de Albeney
and Queen Aelidise his wife, (the widow of King Henry the first) by his son
William the second; was in the life time of his Father, created the first Earl
of Sussex, by King Henry the second, and girded with the Sword thereof. ( Roger
Houeden, page 320. a. line 36. 1177.) He was faithful to the said King, in all
his wars against Henry Courtmantell his son, the young King. He married
Mabell, the daughter of Hugh Kiuiliock, Earl of Chester, and had issue, two
sons and four daughters; William and Hugh, both Earls of Arundell and
Sussex, who dyed without issue; Mabell the eldest daughter, was married to Sir
Robert Tatesall Knight; Isabell the second daughter, married John Fitz-Alan,
Lord of Clun and Oswaldstre; Nicholea the third daughter, married Roger Lord
Somery; and Cicely the fourth daughter, was married to Roger Lord Monthault, of
Hawarden in Flintshire. This William dyed at his Manor of Offington, in the
year, 1199. and was buried at Wimondham.

Et portoit, de gueulles au lion rampant d'or, arm and lampasse d'azur.
William de Albeney, the fourth of that Name, and second Earl of Sussex; was a
Witness to the Charter of King John, bearing date the fourth of May, in the
14. year of the said Kings Reign, by the name of William of Arundell, Earl
of Sussex, and dyed in his return from Damieta in Palestine, 1221. And his
body being brought into England, was buried at Wimondham, leaving his Brother
Hugh his heir, to succeed him; whom Hubert de Burgo Chiefe-Iustice of England,
had the custody of, during his Wardship.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. HVgh de Albeney, brother and heir of
Will^^m aforesaid, was Earl of Arundell, and the third Earl of Sussex. He
married Isabell, daughter of William Earl Warren and Surrey, and dyed in the
prime of his youth, without issue, 1243. and was buried with his Ancestors, in
our Lady Church at Wymondham, who were Patrons and Founders thereof, leaving
his four sisters his heirs. Mabell the eldest, was married to Sir Robert
Tatesall, who had by partition of her brothers lands, the Castle and Barony of
Buckenham. Isabell the second sister, being married to I^^n Fitz-Alan, Lord of
Clan and Oswaldstre in Wales, had the Castle and Honor of Arundell, Nicholea
the third sister, being wife to Roger Lord Somery, had the Manor of Barrow;
and Cicely the fourth sister, being married to Roger Lord Mouthalt, had the
Castle of Rising in Norfolk. The partition of these lands and others, was made
and divided between these four sisters and beyres of this Hugh, in the 28.
year of King Henry the third.

Et portoit, de gueulles a^ lion rampant d'or, arm and lampasse d'azur. John
Plantagenet, (son and heir of William, the 6. Earl Warren and Surrey, and
grandchild to Hamelyne Plantagenet, base son of Geffrey, Earl of Anion and
Main) the seventh Earl Warren and Surrey, was by King Henry the third, made
Earl of Sussex; which honor was then void, by the death of Hugh de Albeney,
Earl of Arundell and Sussex. This John was one of the Noblemen, which King
Henry the third commanded to assemble at London, to treat of diverse matters.
Amongst which, one was, that all men should show before the Justices of the
Kings Bench, by what right they held their lands; which thing did much molest
and disquiet the Subjects, until this John made his appearance, who being
asked by what right he held his Lands, suddenly drew out his sword, and said;
By the sword did my Grandfather hold his Lands; and with this will I keep
them. But Alan Zouch Lord Chiefe-Iustice, told him, That if he could yield no
other reason, judgment would be given against him: whereupon, the said Earl
immediately before the Judges, did cruelly wound and hurt the said Alan; of
which wound, he shortly after dyed. For which murder, the said John Earl
Warren, Surrey and Sussex, was arrigned, and acquitted by the oath of 25.
Knights: in that he affirmed upon his honor, that he did not commit the said
fact, upon any pretenced malice, neither in contempt of the King, nor his
Laws; but only in defense of his ancient Inheritance; and so was released,
upon payment of a fine of 1200, Marks, in Anno, 1270. After King Edward the
first, in the 25. year of his Reign, made this John, Earl Warren and Sussex,
Governor of Scotland; Sir Hugh Cressingham, Lord Treasurer; and William
Earnley Chiefe-Iustice. He married Alice, daughter of Hugh le Brun, Earl of
the Marches of Aquitaine and half sister to King Henry the third, by whom he
had issue, as in the Title of Surrey. He dyed at Kenington, the first of the
Kalends of October, the 33 of King Edward the first, and was buried at Lewis in
Sussex, 1304.

Et portoit, eschiquettee d'or and d'azur. John Plantagenet, Earl Warren and
Sussex; as also Earl of Stratherne in Scotland, Lord of Br^mfield and Yale,
and grandchild and heir of John, the seventh Earl Warren by his son
William; who after the death of his grandfather, enjoyed all his Lands and
Honors, for the space of 41. years, and dyed without issue, 1347, leaving
Alice his only sister and heir, married to Edmond Fitz-Alan Earl of
Arundell, to succeed him in all his Inheritances. M. Camden in his Britannia,
page 320. denies this John, and John his Grandfather, to be ever Earls of
Sussex, in these words. After the death of Hugh de Albeneio, the last Earl of
Arundell and Sussex of that sur-name; the Title of Earl of Sussex lay hidden
and lest, until that King Henry the eight, in the 21. year of his Reign,
created Robert Radcliffe Earl of Sussex. But to prove the contrary, and that
they were both Earls of Sussex, you shall have these proofs following. ( Tho:
Walfingham, page 60.) About the Feast of S. Michaell, 1294. Elianor, daughter
of King Edward the first, was given in marriage at Bristow, unto Henry Earl of
Barry, by whom she had issue, a daughter named Ioane, married to John de
Warren, Earl of Surrey and Sussex. (Again, the same Author further says)
This year 1305. dyed John de Warren, Earl of Surrey and Sussex; after whom,
his Grandchild also named John, did succeed, taking to wife the Kings Niece,
by his daughter Elianor, who the Earl of Barry had married. (And thus much for
the first John) Now to prove this second John (his grandchild) to be Earl of
Sussex, take this out of an old original Deed. Atonsceus que ces lettres
verront et erront, Antoni, par la grace de Dien Patriarch de Jerusalem, et
Euesque de Duresme, Henry de Lacy, Camite de Nicole, John de Garrone, Comite de
Surrey et de Sussex, Eymar de Valence, Comite de Penbroke, Hamfraie de Bohun,
Comite de Hereford et de Essex, Robert de Clifford, etc.a Boloigne le D'arein
Iour de Ianner, lan de grace M.CCC. et Septism.

Et portoit, eschiquettee d'or and d'azur. RIchard Fitz-Alan, Earl of
Arundell, Lord of Clun and Oswalstre, after the death of John Plantagenet,
Earl Warren, Surrey and Sussex, was knighted by King Edward the first, in the
18. year of his Reign, at which time he was also girt with the Sword of the
Earldom of Sussex. He was son of John Fitz-Alan, grandchild of John
Fitz-Alan, and Isabell his wife, second sister, and one of the heirs of Hugh
de Albeney the last Earl of Arundell and Sussex of that name; unto which
Isabell, the Castle and Honor of Arundell fell by partition. Some late Writers
have set down, that in respect the Family of Fitz-Alans had the Castle of
Arundell, they were Earls of Arundell; which to me is very strange, that a
dead Stone, or Castle made of Stones and Timber, can give an honor and title
of dignity to a living creature. But this is contradicted and proved untrue by
many examples, where Noblemen have sold the place whereof their Title of
Honor was, and yet notwithstanding, both they and their heirs have retained
their titles of honor still, and can it be better manifested then in this very
Family of Fitz-Alans? For had not this Richards Father, his Grandfather, and
great Grandfather (all three John's) the possession of the Castle of Arundell,
with the appurtenances, and yet never any of them earls thereof? etc. This
Richard married Alison, daughter of the Marquess of Saluce in Italy, and had
issue. Edmond Fitz-Alan Earl of Arundell, beheaded at Hereford, 1326. as is
more at large in the Title of Earls of Arundell. He dyed in the 30. year of
King Edward the first, 1301.

Et portoit, de gueulles, au lion rampani d'or arm and lampasse d'azur. RObert
Radcliffe, son of John Radcliffe Lord Fitz-Walter, was Knight of the Garter,
Lord Fitz-Walter, Egrement and Burnell, and after created Viscount Fitz-Walter
at Bridewell, the 18. of June, in the 17. year of King Henry the eight; and
the 8. of December, in the 21. year of the said Kings reign, he was created
at White Hall Earl of Sussex. He married three wives, the first was Elizabeth,
daughter of Henry Stafford Duke of Buckingham, by whom he had issue, Henry Lord
Fitz-Walter, Sir Humfrey Radcliffe of Elstow, knight; and George Radcliffe
third son. His second wife was Margaret, sister of Edward Earl of Derby, by
whom he had issue, Anne, wife to Thomas Lord Wharton; and Jane, married to Sir
Anthony Brown, Viscount Mountague. His third wife was Mary, daughter of Sir
John Arundell of Cornwall knight, by whom he had issue, Sir John Radcliffe
knight, who dyed without issue, in the year 1566. and was buried in S. Olaues
in Hartstreete in London. This Earl Robert dyed at Chelsey, the 28. of
November, 1542, the 34. of King Henry the eight.

Et portoit, d'argent a la band engresley de sable. HEnry Radcliffe, son and
heir of Robert aforesaid, after the death of his Father, was Earl of Sussex,
Viscount Fitz-Wa^ter, Lord Egremont and Burnell, and knight of the Garter, and
married two wives; the first was Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Howard Duke of
Norfolk, by whom he had issue, Thomas the third Earl of Sussex of this
Family; and Henry the fourth Earl of Sussex; and Francis. His second wife was
Anne, daughter of Sir Philip Calthorp knight, by whom he had issue, Egremont
Radcliffe, attainted of treason; Mary, married to Sir Thomas Mildmey of Essex
knight. This Henry dyed in the fourth year of Queen Mary, 1557. and was
buried in S. Laurence Poultneys Church, near London-Stone in London.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. D'argent a la band engresley de sable.
THomas Radcliffe, son and heir of Henry aforesaid, was after the death of
his Father, Earl of Sussex, Viscount Fitz-Walter, Lord Egremont, Burnell, and
Knight of the Garter, Lord Chamberlain of the Household to Queen Elizabeth,
and Justice of Air, of all the Forests and Parkes beyond the Trent. He
married two wives, the first was Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Wriothesley,
Earl of Southampton, by whom he had issue, Henry and Robert that dyed young
without issue. His second wife was Frances, daughter of Sir William Sidney
knight, and sister of Sir Henry Sianey knight of the Garter. He dyed without
issue, at his house at Bermondsey in Southwarke, the 9. of June, 1583. and was
very honorably carried through London, to New Hall in Essex, and there buried
with a Hearse, and the Officers of Arms giving their attendance the 9. of July
after.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. HEnry Radcliffe, second son of Henry the
second Earl of Sussex, and brother and heir of Thomas the third Earl of
Sussex, was after the death of his brother, the fourth Earl of Sussex of his
Family, Viscount Fitz-Walter, Lord Egremont and Burnell, Knight of the Garter,
and Captain of Ports-mouth, married Honora, daughter and heir of Anthony
Pound, of Hampshire Esquire, and had issue, Robert Radcliffe the fifth Earl of
Sussex. He dyed in the year, 1593.

Et portoit, d'argent a la band engreslee de sable. RObert Radcliffe, son
and heir of Henry aforesaid, was after the death of his Father, the fifth Earl
of Sussex of that Family, Viscount Fitz-Walter, Lord Egremont and Burnell, and
knight of the Garter, 1618. He married Bridget, daughter of Sir Charles
Morison knight, by whom he had issue, Henry Radcliffe Lord Fitz-Walter, who
married Jane, daughter of Sir Michaell Stanhop knight; Thomas Radcliffe second
son; Elizabeth, wife to Sir John Ramsey, Viscount Hadington; and Honora
Radcliffe.

Et portoir, d'argent a la band engreslee de sable. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls
of Surrey, their Arms, Wives, and Children.
William de Warren, son of William de Warren, a Norman, begotten of the
daughter of Herfastus the Dane. This William, with Roger Mortimer his younger
brother, came into England with William the Conqueror, whose daughter Gundred,
the said William married, and had given him in marriage with her, all
Chirkland, Bromfield and Yale; and after was by the said Conqueror made Earl
of Surrey, and Lord of Dinasbrayne in Wales. He built the Castle of Holt, and
founded the Priory of Lewis in Sussex; and had issue by the Countess Gundred
his wife, William de Warren, the second Earl of Surrey; and a daughter named
Gundred; and after died the 8. of the Kalends of July, 1088. the first of king
William Ruphus, and was buried at Lewis. His wife Gundred dyed in childe-bed at
Castle-Acre in Norfolk, the 6. of the Kalends of June, 1085. three years
before her husband, and was buried also at Lewis. About this Williams creation,
and who made him Earl of Surrey, there has bin some question, (which here I
hope to give satisfaction of) M. Camden in his Britannia sets down, that
king William Ruphus made him Earl, and not William Conqueror. And M. Milles,
in his Book (called Somersets untruly) page 616. follows him, step by step.
M. Camden for his authority, voucheth the said William de Warrens Charter, of
the Foundation of the Priory of Lewis, (as he says) in these words.

Donaui etc. pro salute Domini mei Willielmi Regis qui me in Angliam adduxit,
and pro salute Dominae meae Matildis Reginae matris vxoris meae, and prosalute
Domini mei Willielmi Regis fillij sui, post cuius aduentum in Anglicam terram,
hanc Chartam feci, and qui me Comitem Surregiae fecit, etc.

To this will I add this, taken out of the Original book of Lewis, which I
hope will end this Controversy, and clear the doubt.

Willielmus de Warren primus Comes Surrey, et fundator Ecclesiae Lewensis diem
suum clausit extremum viij. Kal. Iulij. Anno gratiae. 1088. et fundationis
Ecclesiae praedictae xi. et A conquestu xxiij. Iste primo non vocabitur nisi
solummodo Willielmus de Waren postea vero processu temporis a Willielmo Rege et
Conquestore Angliae cuius filiam disponsauit, plurimum Honoratus est atque
comes Surrey factus, et appellatus est. Iste iacet in Capello Lewensis iuxta
Domina Gundradam Comitissam suam et filiam praedicti Regis Conquestoris, etc.

By this it is manifestly proved, that William the Conqueror (and not William
Ruphus) did create, and make this William de Warren, the first Earl of Surrey.
Also it is to be remembered, that the Countess Gundred died three years before
her Husband, and two years before her Father; and how could she then have the
Title and Name of Countess, unless her Husband had been an Earl before she
dyed, in William Conquerors time.

Et portoit, Eschequettee d'or and d'azur. William de Warren, the second Earl
of Surrey, son and heir of William the first, finished the Priory of Lewis
(begun by his Father) and new founded the Church of our Lady at Castle-Acre,
1090. He married Isabell, daughter of Hugh the great Earl of Vermandois, and
sister of Raphe de Peronne Earl of Vermandois, and widow of Robert de
Bellomont Earl of Mellent, by whom he had issue, William the third Earl
Warren and Surrey; and Reginald, which Reginald married Alice, daughter and
heir of William de Wirmingay. He had also two daughters, Gundred married to
Roger de Bellomont Earl of Warwick; and Ada to Henry Earl of Huntington, Son
of David king of Scots. This William died the fifth day of the Ides of May,
1138. which was the fifty year of his Earldom, wherein he continued until
the third year of king Stephen, and then was buried at his Fathers feet, in
the Church of Lewis.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. William de Warren, son and heir of
William the second Earl Warren and Surrey, was after the death of his Father,
the third Earl Warren and Surrey; and married Ela, daughter of William Taluace
Earl of Sagiens, grand child to Roger Montgomery, Earl of Arundell and
Shrewsbury, by his son Robert. He had issue, William de Warren, Patricke and
Philip; he had also a daughter named Isabell, who was first married to William
of Bloys, (son of King Stephen) Lord of the Egle, and Earl of Mortaigne and
Boloigne; and after to Hamelyn Plantagenet, Earl Warren and Surrey in her
right. This William the third Earl Warren and Surrey, dyed going to Jerusalem
with Lewis King of France, in the year 1148. when he had been Earl ten
years; and Ela his Countess dyed 26, years after, in the year 1174.

Et portoit, les armoiries de son pere. WIlliam of Bloys, son of King
Stephen, was Earl of Mortaigne and Boloigne, Lord of the Egle, and of the
Honor of Peuensey, and by his wife Isabell, only daughter and heir of
William, the third Earl Warren and Surrey, he was also the 4. Earl Warren
and Surrey: he lived in the time of King Stephen his Father, and of king Henry
the second, and dyed without issue, and was buried at Toulouse, in the year
1159. leaving his two sisters his heirs, to succeed him in his Inheritance.
Ida the eldest, was married to Reginald Dampmartyn, Earl of Boloigne in her
right; and Mauld the second sister, was married to Henry Duke of Lorrayne.

Et portoir, de gueulles a trois palz de vair, au chef d'or, charge de un Aigle
de gueulles, membrez and becquez d'azur. HAmelyne Plantagenet, second son of
Geffrey Plantagenet and Mauld the Empress, was Earl of Aniou, Tourayne and
Main in France, and married Isabell, daughter and only heir of William, the
third Earl Warren and Surrey, (the widow of William of Bloys aforesaid) in
whose right he was Earl Warren and Surrey, and had issue, William Earl Warren
and Surrey; and two daughters. Isabell the eldest, was married to Roger Bigot
Earl^ of Norfolk; and Margaret the second daughter, was married to Baldwyn
Rivers Earl of Devonshire. This Hamelyne continued Earl 43. years, in the
Reigns of Henry the second, Richard the first, and king John, and dyed in the
year 1202. and was buried by his wife Isabell, in the Chapter house at Lewis.

Et portoit, seem de France a la bordure d'engleterre. WIlliam Plantagenet,
son and heir of Hamelyn and Isabell his wife, was the sixth Earl Warren and
Surrey, and married Mauld, daughter of William Marshall the elder, Earl of
Penbroke, and sister and one of the heirs of Anselm Marshall, Earl of
Penbroke (the Widow of Hugh Bigot, Earl of Norfolk) by whom he had issue,
John Earl Warren and Surrey, and two daughters: Margaret the eldest daughter,
was married to the Lord Percy; and Isabell the second daughter, was wife to
Hugh Earl of Arundell. This William assumed unto himself the sur-name of
Warren, and did bear his Mothers Arms, and was Earl 28. years, and dyed at
London, the fifth of the Kalends of July, 1239. the 23. year of the Reign of
King Henry the third, and was buried by his wife Mauld, in the Abbey of S.
Pancrace, at Lewis in Sussex, who dyed three years before.

Et portoit, eschiquette d'or and d'azur. John, the seventh Earl Warren and
Surrey, and Regent of Scotland in King Edward the firsts time, son of William
Plantagenet aforesaid, and Mauld Marshall his wife; was by King Henry the
third, made Earl of Sussex; which Earldom had lien void from the death of
Hugh de Albeney, Earl of Arundell and Sussex; (as in the Title of Earls of
Arundell and Sussex is more at large.) This John married to his first wife,
Alice, daughter of Hugh le Brun, Earl of the Marches of Aquitaine, half
(sister by the Mother) to King Henry the third, by whom he had issue William
de Warren, who married Ioane, daughter of Robert Vere Earl of Oxford, and dyed
before his Father, in the year 1286. and two daughters: Elianor the eldest,
was married first to Henry Lord Percy, and after to a Scottish Earl in
Scotland; Isabell the second daughter, was married to John Balioll King of
Scots. This John's second wife was Ioane, daughter of William Lord Mowbray, and
had issue John, of who^ Warren of Poynton in Cheshire is descended. He dyed at
Kenington, the fifth of the Kalends of October, 1304. and the 33. year of King
Edward the first, and was buried at Lewis by his wife Alice, who dyed fourteen
years before.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. John the eight and last Earl Warren,
Surrey and Sussex, (son and heir of William de Warren, that dyed before John
the seventh Earl Warren, Surrey and Sussex his Father, 1286.) and Earl of
Stratherne in Scotland, Lord of Bromfield and Yale: he lived in the times of
Edward the first, the second, and the third, Kings of England, and was Earl
41. years from his Grandfathers death, to whom he was immediate heir. He
married Ioane, daughter of Henry Earl of Bar, and of Elianor his wife,
daughter of King Edward the first, but by her he had no issue. He departed this
life, the day before the Kalends of July, in the year of our Lord God, 13^7.
in the 21. year of King Edward the third; leaving no issue of his body
begotten, whereby the Inheritance fell to Alice his sister, wife to Edmond
Earl of Arundell, his next heir.

Et portoit, eschiquettee d'or and d'azur. RIchard Fitz-Alan, son and heir
of Edmond Fitz-Alan, Earl of Arundell by Alice his wife, sister and heir of
John, the eight and last Earl Warren and Surrey, etc. was after the death of
his Father, Earl of Arundell, Lord of Clun and Oswaldstre, and chief Butler
of England, and (in right of his Mother) he was Earl of Surrey, Lord of
Bromfield, Yale, Chirkland, and Dynas-bran in Wales. He married Elianor,
daughter of Henry Earl of Lancaster, widow of John Lord Beaumont, and had
issue, Richard Earl of Arundel, John, Thomas and others, (as in the Title of
the Earls of Arundell) He dyed in the Castle of Arundell, the 49. year of
Edward the third, and was buried in the Priory of Lewis in Sussex.

Et portoit, gueulles au lion rampant d'or lampasse, and arm d'azur. RIchard
Fitz-Alan, Earl of Arundell and Surrey, son of Richard Fitz-Alan and Elianor
his wife, succeeded his Father in the Earledomes aforesaid. And being charged
to combine with Thomas Duke of Gloucester, Thomas Earl of Warwick, and others,
to raise a rebellion at Haringey Park, all were taken, arraigned, and found
guilty of treason, the 20. of King Richard the second; for which, the said
Richard Earl of Arundell, was beheaded at Tower Hill by London, and his body
was buried in the Augustine Friars in London. He married Elizabeth, daughter of
William de Bohun Earl of Northampton, and had issue, Thomas Earl of Arundell
and Surrey; Richard and William that dyed young without issue, and four
daughters; Ioane the eldest, was married to William Beauchampe, Baron of
Aburgauenny; Elizabeth the second daughter, was wife to Thomas Mowbray Duke of
Norfolk, and after Earl of Surrey by his wife. Margaret the third daughter,
was married to Sir Rowland Lenthall Knight; and Alice the fourth daughter, was
married to John Charlton, Lord Powis.

Et portoit, lez arms de son pere. THomas Holland, Earl of Kent, and Lord
Wake, son of Thomas Holland Earl of Kent, and half brother to king Richard
the second, was (after the attaindor and death of Richard Fitz-Alan, Earl of
Arundell and Surrey) created Duke of Surrey, in the 21. year of King Richard
the second. He was one of them which accused Thomas of Woodstocke, Duke of
Gloucester, of treason; for which, in the first Parliament held in king Henry
the fourths time, 1399. he with the rest of the accusers, were deprived both of
honors and livings. But afterward, conspiring with others of the Nobility, to
surprise King Henry the fourth, and to set up King Richard again (who was then
living) was with the Earl of Salisbury bewrayed, and flying to Circester in
Glocestershire, were by the Townes-men there, taken and beheaded in the year
1400. He married Constance, daughter of Edmond Langley Duke of York, the
widow of Thomas Lord Spencer, Earl of Gloucester, and dyed without issue.

Et portoit, gueulles a trois leopards passant en pale d'or, au bordur
d'argent. THomas Fitz-Alan, son and heir of Richard aforesaid, by Elizabeth
Bohun his wife, in the first year of King Henry the fourth, was restored in
blood, after the a^taindour of his Father, and was Earl of Arundell and
Surrey, Lord of Bromfield and Yale, and Knight of the Garter, Lord Warden of
the Cinque Ports, and Constable of Dover Castle. This Thomas obtained great
honor and fame, for his valiant atchieuements; amongst many, one was his going
out of Normandy to the Bellouacas, to hinder the building of the Castle of
Gerbery, with a small company of Soldiers; at whose coming the enemy left the
Castle. At which great piece of service, this Thomas was very sore wounded,
whereof he shortly after dyed, the 13. of October, 1414. in the third year of
King Henry the 5. and was buried at Arundell. He married Beatrix, base daughter
of John K. of Portugal, at London, in the year 1405. in the presence of K.
Henry the 4. (after whose death, she married John Holland Earl of Huntington)
and had issue, John Fitz-Alan, who dyed in the life time of his Father, without
issue; by reason whereof, and that this Thomas had no issue male to succeed
him, his Inheritance (which belonged to the Earldom of Surrey) was divided
amongst his four sisters before mentioned. But the Earldom of Arundell went
according to his restitution, and the intayle, to John Fitz-Alan, Lord
Maltrouers, his Uncle John's grandchild, by his son John.

Et portoit, gueulles au lion rampant d'or, arm, and lampasse d'azur. John
Lord Mowbray, (son of John, grandchild of Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk,
and Elizabeth his wife, daughter and one of the heirs of Richard Fitz-Alan,
Earl of Arundell and Surrey) was in the life time of his Father, created Earl
of Surrey by King Henry the sixth. And after the death of his Father, he was
Duke of Norfolk, Earl of Nottingham, and Earl Marshall of England, Lord
Segraue, and of Gower. He married Elizabeth, daughter of John Talbot, first
Earl of Shrewsbury, and had issue, Anne his only heir, married to Richard
Duke of York, son of King Edward the 4. He dyed at his Castle of Framingham,
1575. and was buried at Thetford in Norfolk.

Et portoit, gueulles a un lion rampant d'argent, lampasse and arm d'azur.
RIchard of Shrewsbury, (so named because he was borne there) second son of
King Edward the fourth, was by his Father, created Duke of York by Act of
Parliament, 1474. And in the right of Anne his wife (daughter and heir of John
Mowbray Duke of Norfolk) he was also Duke of Norfolk, Earl Warren, Surrey,
Nottingham, and Earl Marshal of England, Lord Mowbray, Segraue and of Gower.
This Richard being but a Child, with his Brother King Edward the fifth, were
(by the commandment of Richard Duke of Gloucester their unnatural Uncle)
secretly murdered in the Tower of London, the 9. day of the Kalends of June,
1483. without issue.

Et portoit, escartelle France and d'engleterre au lambell d'argent, trois
cantons de gueulles. THomas Howard, son and heir of John Howard first Duke
of Norfolk, was by King Richard the third, created Earl of Surrey, in the
life time of his Father, 1483. and after his Fathers death, he was also Duke of
Norfolk, and Lord Treasurer of England. He fought the battle at
Floddon-Field in Northumberland, against James the fourth, King of Scots, in
the absence of Henry the eight in France; in remembrance whereof, the said
King Henry, gave him for an augmentation to his Arms, on an Escutcheon gold a
demye Lion rampant, with an Arrow shot in his mouth, within a double tressure
gueulles. He married two Wives, and had issue by the^ both: His first Wife was
Elizabeth, the only daughter and heir of Sir Frederick Tilney Knight, (the
Widow of Humfrey Burchier Lord Barners) by whom he had issue, three sons and
two daughters: Thomas the eldest son, was Duke of Norfolk; Edward the second
son, being Lord Admiral, was slain at Breast, without issue. Edmond the
third son, married Joyce, daughter of Richard Culpeper of Kent, and had issue
two sons, and a daughter named Katherine, wife to King Henry the 8. Elizabeth
the eldest daughter of this Thomas Duke of Norfolk, was married to Thomas
Bullen Earl of Wiltshire, and Muriell his second daughter, was Wife to John
Gray Viscount Lisle, and after she married Sir Thomas Knyuet Knight. This
Thomas Duke of Norfolk, married to his second Wife, Agnes, daughter of Philip
Tilney Esquire, and had issue, three sons and four daughters; William the
first son, was Baron of Effingham, Lord Admiral and Chamberlain of the
household to Queen Elizabeth; Richard the second son, and Thomas the third
son, died in prison, in the Tower of London, for contracting marriage with the
Lady Lenox; Anne the first daughter, was married to John Vere Earl of Oxford;
Dorothy the second daughter, was wife to Edward Stanley, Earl of Derby;
Elizabeth the third daughter, was married to Henry Radcliffe Earl of Sussex;
and Katherine the fourth daughter, was first married to Sir Rice ap Thomas,
Knight of the Garter, and had issue. She was after married to Henry Daubeny,
Earl of Bridg-water. This great D. dyed in the 16. year of K. Henry the 8.
1524. and was buried at Thetford in Norfolk.

Et portoit, gueulles a la band d'argent enter six croix recroisettes bottonne
au pied fiche de la primier. THomas Howard, son and heir of Thomas the
second Duke of Norfolk, was after his Father, the third Duke of Norfolk, and
second Earl of Surrey of that Family, Earl Marshall, and Lord Treasurer of
England, Knight of the Garter, Lord Mowbray, Segraue, and Bruise of Gower. He
married two Wives, the first was Anne, daughter of King Edw. the 4. by whom he
had issue, two sons that died young. His second wife was Elizabeth, daughter of
Edward Stafford D. of Buckingham, by whom he had issue, Henry Howard Earl of
Surrey (who was arraignd of high treason at the Guild Hall in London, the 15.
of January, 1546. the 38. of King Henry the eight, and was found guilty, by
twelve common Iuriats, and the 19. day of the same Month, was beheaded at
Tower Hill) who married Frances, daughter of John Vere Earl of Oxford, and had
issue, Thomas Howard the fourth Duke of Norfolk, and Thomas Viscount Byndon,
and Mary a daughter, married to Henry Fitz-Roy, Duke of Richmond and Earl of
Nottingham, (base son of King Henry the eight, begotten of the Lady Talboys.)
This Thomas third Duke of Norfolk, dyed in the first and second years of King
Philip and Queen Mary.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. THomas Howard, son and heir of Henry
Earl of Surrey aforesaid, and grandchild to Thomas the third Duke of
Norfolk, was restored by Queen Mary, and made the fourth Duke of Norfolk,
Earl of Surrey, and Earl Marshall of England, Lord Mowbray, Segraue, and
Bruise of Gower, and Knight of the Garter. He married three Wives, the first was
Mary, daughter and heir of Henry Fitz-Alan, Earl of Arundell, by who^ he had
issue, Philip Earl of Arundel. His second wife was Margaret, daughter and
heir of Thomas Audley, Lord Audley of Walden in Essex, and Chancellor of
England, by whom he had issue, Thomas Howard Earl of Suffolk, and Lord
William third son, and Margaret, married to Robert Sackuile Earl of Dorset.
His third Wife was Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Francis Leyborne knight, the
Widow of Thomas Lord Dacres of Gillesland, but by her had no issue. This
Thomas was beheaded at the Tower Hill, in the year 1572.

Et portoit, gueulles a la band d'argent, enter six eroix recroisettees
betonne, au pied fiche d'argent. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls of Tankeruile, their
Arms, Wives, and Children.
HEnry Gray (son of Sir John Gray Knight, and of Ioane his Wife, eldest
daughter and co-heyre of Edward Charlton Lord Powis) for his Martial prowess
and valor, was by King Henry the fifth, 1417. created Earl of Tanquer-vile in
Normandy, to have unto him and his heirs males, by delivering one Bassinet at
the Castle of Roan every year on S. Georges day. There were created with him
at the same time, Gascoine de Foyz, Earl of Longevile; and Sir John Bourchier
Earl of Ewe.

This Henry married Antigone, base daughter of Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, by
whom he had issue, Richard Lord Powis, Humfrey second son, and a daughter
named Elizabeth, married to Sir Roger Kyneston Knight, and was after slain in
a battle at Blangie, near to the City of Angiers, by the Duke of Alanson,
where were slain with him, the Noble Duke of Clarence, Gilbert Vmfrauile,
Earl of Anguish, the Lord Ros, and almost 2000. others, the 22. day of March,
1420.

Et portoit, burelle d'argent and d'azur de huit pieces, sur la tout a la band
de gueulles. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls and Marquesses of Winchester, their
Arms, Wives, and Children.
SAherus de Quincy, Lord of Groby in Leicestershire, son of Robert, was
created Earl of Winchester, the 13. of March, in the eight year of the Reign
of King John, and had given him by the said Kings Charter, a rent or annuity,
issuing out of the profits of Hampshire; and was one of the Noblemen, to whom
the rest of the Kingdom gave authority, to cause the King to abide and stand
to his Edict, which (with the consent of the whole body of the Realm) was
enacted by a Parliament held at Rowning-Mead, between Windesore and Staynes,
in the 17. year of the said King John. He was also the chief man the Barons
employed, to bring into the Land Lewis the French kings son, to aid the Barons
against king John. He did give and confirm by his Charter, unto Robert de
Quincy his eldest Son, to indow Hawis his Wife, sister to the Earl of Chester,
Buceheberdar, Grantesset, Bradham, and Herdewich, with their appurtenances, for
one hundredth pounds lands; with condition, that if those lands were not worth
one hundred pounds the year, he should make it up so much of other his own
Lands of Inheritance in England, by the judgment of lawful Knights, to wit,
men of the Earls of Chesters and his. And further, the said Saer did give to
his said son Robert and Hawis his Wife, two Knights fees, viz. the fee of
Matthew Turpin, of Winterslawa in Wiltshire, and the fee of Richard Turuile of
Helmeden. Witness to this Deed, Earl David, William Earl Ferrars, etc.

This Saer, married Margaret, second sister and co-heyre of Robert
Fitz-Pernell, Earl of Leicester and Steward of England, by whom he had issue,
Robert Lord Quincy, Roger second son, after his Father, Earl of Winchester,
and another Robert third son, and two daughters; Hawis the eldest, was
married to Hugh de Vere Earl of Oxford: the second I find not certainly,
neither her name, or what became of her. He dyed at Acon, going to the
Holy Land, in the 4. year of King Henry the third: his body was buried at
Acon, his heart and bowels being brought into England, was buried in the Abbey
of Gerondon in Leicestershire, 1219. He bare for his Arms, in a Seal annexed
to his Charter (in my custody) A fece with a lambell of 12. points; but the
colors thereof (as yet) could I never find.

ROger Quincy, (second son of Saer aforesaid) after the death of his Father,
and in the absence of Robert his elder brother in the Holy Land, assumed the
title and name of Earl of Winchester. For which, Robert his elder brother,
upon his return again into England, brought an assize, for entering and using
the title of Earl of Winchester, it being the said Rogers Freehold: which
being come to be tried at Westminster, the King being there in person, gave
judgment for Roger the second son, by reason he had been invested in the
said Earldom, and had place and voice in the high Court of Parliament and
elsewhere, as Earl of Winchester; he was to hold and continue the title still,
during his life. He married Hellyn, daughter and heir of Alan, Lord of
Galloway in Scotland; in whose right, he was Constable of Scotland, and Lord of
Galloway, and had three daughters his heirs; Margaret the eldest, was married
to William de Ferrars Earl of Derby, with the Barony of Groby; Hellen the
second daughter, was married to Alan Lord Zouch, of Ashby de la Zouch in
Leicestershire; and Elizabeth the third daughter, was married to Alexander
Common, Earl of Bucqhaine in Scotland. He dyed the 25. of April, the 48. of
King Henry the third, 1264.

Et portoit, gueulles a sept maseles d'or. 3.3.1. HVgh Lord Spencer (son and
heir of Hugh Chiefe-Iustice of England, slain at the battle of Euesham,
1256. taking part with Simon Mountfort Earl of Leicester, against King Henry
the third) was created Earl of Winchester, in the 14. year of King Edward the
second, at a Parliament held at York. At which time, Sir Andrew of Harkley,
was made Earl of Carlisle; and in the 16. year of the said kings Reign, he
was made Lord Treasurer of England, and Lord of Denbigh. This Hugh and Hugh his
son, were the great favorites to King Edward the second; who being suspected
to be corrupters of the King, were by the Nobility banished the Realm. But
after, the King being minded to recall them home again, to his Company and
Counsel: Queen Isabell pursued this Hugh to Bristow, and taking him,
commanded him to be bound; and without any further answer or trial, to be
drawn and hanged in his Armor, taken down alive and bowelled, his bowels to
be burned, and his head to be smitten off, and his body to be hanged up again,
and after four days, to be cut all to pieces, and given to dogs to eat; his
head was sent to Winchester, and there set up in the year 1326. He married
Isabell, daughter of William Beauchampe Earl of Warwick, (the widow of Sir
Patricke Chaworth, Lord of Kidwelly in Wales) by whom he had issue, Hugh Lord
Spencer Earl of Gloucester, executed by the Nobility at Hereford; and a
daughter named Isabell, which was second Wife to John Lord Hastings of
Aburgauenny, etc.

Et portoit, d'argent, escartelle de gueulles frette d'or, sur la tout au band
de sable. LEwis of Brugges, a Burgundian borne, Lord de la Gruthuse, Prince of
Steenhuse, Lord of Auelghien, de Spiers, de Amested, et de Oscampe, was created
Earl of Winchester by Letters Patents, bearing date the 23. of November, in
the 14. year of King Edward the fourth. By which Patent, he had also given him
(by way of increase to his Arms) D'azur a dix mascles d'or en orme d'une
Canton de nostre propre arms d'engleterre: cest asauoir, de gueulles un
leopard passant d'or arm d'azur. pat. 12. Edw. 4. pars. 1. m. 2. These honors
did King Edward confer upon him, because he gave him great entertainment, when
he was driven out of England, by Richard Neuill Earl of Warwick. Which
Earldom of Winchester, when King Edward was dead, the said Lewis resigned
again to King Henry the seventh.

He married Margaret, daughter of Henry de Borselle, Lord of Vere, Sandeburgh
and Phalix, and had issue, John de Brugges Lord of Gruthuse, Father of Reginald
Brugges, Lord of Gruthuse. His ancient Arms was, D'or a la croix sable; and
his Wives Arms were, Sable a la face d'argent.

WIlliam Pawlet Knight, son and heir of Sir John Pawlet knight, descended of
a second Brother of the Pawlets of Wiltshire, was created Lord S. John of
Basing, the 9. of March, in the 30. year of king Henry the 8. and knight of
the Garter, in the 35. year of the said Kings Reign; and in the third year
of King Edward the sixth, he was created Earl of Wiltshire: and the eleventh
of October, in the fifth year of the said Kings Reign, he was created
Marquess of Winchester: he was also Lord high Treasurer of England, and Master
of the household to King Edward the sixth, and President of the Counsel. He was
borne in the year 1483. and was of the privy Counsel to King Henry the eight,
King Edward the sixth, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth of famous memory. He
lived to see one hundredth and three persons issue out of his loins, and dyed
at Basing, the tenth of March, 1571. where he was honorably buried, when he
had lived 87. years. Who being on a time asked, how he carried himself in
those tempestuous times (wherein so many of all sorts miscarried) His answer
was; By being a Willough, and not an Oak. He married Elizabeth, daughter of
Sir William Capell knight, and had issue, four sons and four daughters;
John Pawlet Marquess of Winchester; Sir Thomas Powlet knight, who married
Mary, daughter and co-heyre of Thomas Moore of Dorsetshire; Sir Chidioc Powlet
of Wade knight, third son, who married Anne, daughter of Sir Thomas White;
and Sir Giles Powlet fourth son, married (...) daughter of (...) Trapes.
Alice the eldest daughter, was Wife to Richard Stowell of Somersetshire;
Margaret second daughter, married Sir William Berkley Knight; Margery the third
daughter, was married to Richard Waller of Oldstoke; and Elianor the fourth
daughter, was wife to Sir Richard Pecksall Knight, Master of the Buck-Hounds.

Et portoit, sable trois espees auec le pointz embas d'argent, au cresant d'or.
John Powlet (son and heir of William aforesaid) succeeded his Father, and
was Marquess of Winchester, Earl of Wiltshire, and Lord S John of Basing. He
married Elizabeth, daughter of Robert Willoughby Lord Brook, and had issue,
William Powlet, Marquess of Winchester after his Father; Sir George Powlet of
Crundall in Hampshire Knight; Richard Powlet third son; and Thomas Powlet
fourth son, who married Anne, daughter of (...) Brent; Mary Powlet eldest
daughter, was married to Henry Lord Cromwell of Oukham in Rutlandshire; and
Elizabeth the second daughter, was first married to Sir William Courtney of
Powderham Knight, and after to Sir Henry Oughtred Knight.

This John dyed at his house at Chelsey, 1576. and was buried at Basing, the
19. of Queen Elizabeth.

Et portoit, les armoiries de son pere. WIlliam Powlet (son and heir of
John) was in the life time of his Father, summoned to the Parliament held at
Westminster, 1575. as Lord S. John of Basing, and there had place and voice
accordingly; and after his Fathers death, he was also Marquess of Winchester,
and Earl of Wiltshire. He married Anne, daughter of William Lord Howard of
Effingham, and heir to her Mother Katherine, daughter and co-heyre of Sir John
Broughton, of Tuddington in Bedfordshire, by whom he had issue, William Powlet
Marquis of Winchester now living, 1618. Anne, wife to Sir Thomas Dennis of
Devonshire Knight; and Katherine, Wife to Giles Wroughton Knight, son and
heir of Sir Thomas Wroughton of Broadhinton in Hampshire Knight. This William
dyed in the year, 1598.

Et portoit, sable trois espees auec le pointz embas d'argent, au cresant d'or.
WIlliam Powlet, Marquess of Winchester, Earl of Wiltshire, and Lord S. John
of Basing now living, 1618 married Lucie, daughter of Thomas Cecill, Baron of
Bourghley, and Earl of Exeter, and had issue, William Lord S. John of Basing,
who married Mary, daughter of Anthony Brown, Viscount Mountague; Thomas second
son; John third son, Henry fourth son, Charles fifth son, and Edward the
six son, etc.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls of Worcester and
Meullen, their Arms, Wives, and Chlidren.
VVAlleran de Bellomont, or Beaumont, son of Robert de Beaumont, Earl of
Meullen in Normandy, was by King Stephen created Earl of Worcester, in the
year 1144. He married Elizabeth, daughter of Simon Mountfort, Earl of Eureux
in Normandy, and Aunt of Simon Mounfort, Earl of Leicester in England, by whom
he had issue, Robert Earl of Meullen, and Lord of Pont-Audamare, who married
Mauld, one of the daughters and co-heires of Reginald Earl of Cornwall (base
son of King Henry the first) and had issue, Henry, Peter, and Mabell; Henry
dyed without issue; Peter was Earl of Meullen, and revolted to the French
King, 1166. delivering up to him his Castle of Bellomont; Mabell the daughter,
was married to William de Riueris (sur-named de Vernon) Earl of Devonshire,
and had issue, Baldwin and Mary, which Mary was first married to Sir Robert
Courtney Knight, and after to Peter Prouz of Devonshire, of whom there are many
remaining at this day. To which Peter de Prouz, the said Robert Earl of
Meullen, gave in frank marriage with the said Mary his grandchild, the
third part of his lands in England; and unto Baldwin de Riueris her brother, he
gave other lands in Normandy, with the Manors of Estruminster, Moreys, and
Riddleston in England.

This Walleran, founded the Abbey of Bordesley in England, in King Henry the
seconds time, and dyed in the year 1166. and was buried at Worcester. Others
have, that he dyed a Monk at Pratelles in Normandy.

Et portoit, fizelle d'or and d'azur en band, a un bordure de gueulles. SIr
Thomas Percy Knight, Vice-Chamberlaine to King Richard the second, (son of
Henry Lord Percy, and younger brother of Henry Percy first Earl of
Northumberland) was after made Steward of the Household to the said king; and in
the year 1397. was created Earl of Worcester, and Lord high Admiral of
England. But afterward (envying King Henry the fourths usurpation, and
obtaining the Kingdom) entered into a conspiracy with Henry Hotspur his
brothers son, and many other Noblemen and Knights, to surprise King Henry,
whilst he was busied in his wars in Wales. Which plot being discovered, they
were constrained to abide the hazard of a battle at Shrewsbury, the fourth of
the said Kings Reign. Where, upon the rumor of the death of Henry Hotspar,
who was then slain with a Lance; all the rest fled, but this Thomas Earl of
Worcester, who was taken prisoner, and the next day after beheaded at
Shrewsbury, 1403. He married Elizabeth, eldest sister and co-heyre of David
Strabolgie, Earl of Atholl, by whom he had issue, Henry Percy Earl of Atholl,
who married Margaret, daughter of Sir Matthew Brus of Scotland, and had issue,
two daughters his heirs; Elizabeth was married to Sir Thomas Burgh knight, of
whom, the Lord Burgh of England descended; and Margaret the second daughter,
married Henry Lord Gray of Codnor.

Et portoit, d'or an lion rampant d'azur: a eressant gueulles. RIchard
Beauchamp (son and heir of William Beauchampe Baron of Aburgauenny) was
created Earl of Worcester, in the seventh year of King Henry the fifth, and
married Isabell, daughter of Thomas Lord le Despencer, and sister and heir of
Richard Lord le Despencer, and had issue, Elizabeth his daughter and heir,
Wife to Sir Edward Neuil Knight, younger son of Raphe Neuill, first Earl of
Westmerland, who was summoned to Parliament by Writ, as Baron of Aburgauenny,
the 29. of Henry the six. This Richard Earl of Worcester, was leader of the
wars in France, in King Henry the fifts time, and in besiedging the City of
Meux in Bry, was slain with a stone thrown out of an Engine, in the tenth
year of King Henry the fifth, and was buried in the Abbey of Tewksbury.

Et portoit, gueulles a un face and six croiseletz botones d'or, a un croissant
sable en la face. John, Lord Tiptoft and Powis (son and heir of John Lord
Tiptoft, and Ioice his Wife, daughter and co-heyre of Edward Charlton Lord
Powis) was created Earl of Worcester, in the 27. year of King Henry the sixth;
and the year after, he was made high Constable of England, and Lieutenant of
Ireland. He married Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Hopton, and sister and heir
of Sir Walter Hopton, by whom he had issue, Edward Lord Tiptoft, who was after
restored, and made Earl of Worcester by King Edward the fourth. This John
Earl of Worcester, was attainted by Parliament, and beheaded at the
Tower Hill, the tenth of King Edward the 4. 1470. and his body was buried in
the Preaching Friars in London.

Et portoit, d'argent a un Saulteur engresley de gueulles. EDward Lord Tiptoft,
after the death of his Father, was restored in blood, and made Earl of
Worcester by King Edward the fourth. He dyed without issue, the 12. of Angust,
in the third year of King Richard the third, and was buried at Ely; leaving
his Fathers four sisters his heirs, viz. Phillip, married to Thomas Lord Ros
of Hamlake; Ioane, Wife to Sir Edmond Englethorpe of Cambridshire; Ioice,
married unto Edmond Sutton, son and heir of John Lord Dudley; and Margaret
the fourth daughter, professed her self a Nun.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. CHarles Somerset, Knight Banneret, (base
son of Henry Beaufort Duke of Somerset, begotten of Ioane Hill his Concubine)
was Vice-Chamberlaine to King Henry the seventh, and after Lord Chamberlain,
both to King Henry the seventh and King Henry the eight. He married three
Wives, the first was Elizabeth, daughter and heir of William Herbert Earl of
Huntington, by whom he was Lord Herbert of Gower, and was after created Earl
of Worcester, at Lambeth house on Candlemas day, 1513. in the first year of
King Henry the eight. His second Wife was Elianor, daughter of Edward Sutton
Lord Dudley. His third Wife was Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Lord Laware: By
his first Wife he had issue, Henry Lord Herbert, after Earl of Worcester; and
Elizabeth, married to Sir John Savage knight. By his second Wife he had issue,
Sir Charles Somerset knight, Captain of Risebanke and Callis; Sir George
Somerset of Badmansfield Hall in Suffolk; and a daughter named Mary, married
to William Lord Gray of Wilton. By his third Wife he had no issue. This
Charles, in the tenth year of King Henry the eight, surrendered and yielded up
to Mounsieur Chastillion, to the use of the French King, the City and Castle
of Tourney, for four hundredth and sixty thousand Crowns, to be paid to King
Henry. At which surrender, the said Chastillion was not suffered to enter with
Banner displayed, but rolled up, because the said City was not won by force,
but yielded up by composition (which is to be noted.) He was Knight of the
Order of the Garter, and dyed in the 17. year of King Henry the 8. and was
buried at Windesore.

Et portoit, lez arms de France and d'engleterre escartelle, a un bordure
gobonne d'argent and d'azur, au baston finester d'argent, sur le tout a un
escusson per pale d'azur and de gueulles au trois lions rampant d'argent. HEnry
Somerset Lord Herbert, and second Earl of Worcester of that name, married
Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Anthony Brown Knight, and had issue, William Lord
Herbert, after Earl of Worcester, Sir Charles Somerset Knight, and
Standard Bearer of the Pensioners, to Queen Elizabeth. Thomas Somerset, who
dyed in the Tower of London; Francis Somerset fourth son, was slain at
Muscleborough field. Lady Elianor eldest daughter, married to Sir Roger
Vanghan; Lady Luce second daughter, was Wife to John Neuill Lord Latymer; Lady
Anne third daughter, married Thomas Percy Earl of Northumberland, beheaded at
York, 1572. and Lady Jane the youngest daughter, was married to that worthy and
valorous knight, Sir Edward Mansell of Glamorganshire, Father of Sir Thomas
Mansell, Baronet, Sir Robert Mansell knight, and others. This Henry dyed.

Et portoit, d'or, a la face France escartelle d'engleterre, a la bordure
gobonne d'argent and d'azur. William Somerset, Lord Herbert, and Earl of
Worcester, son and heir of Henry aforesaid, and grandchilde to Charles,
married Christian, daughter of Edward Lord North of Kirthing in Cambridgshire,
by whom he had issue Edward Lord Herbert, and two daughters; Elizabeth, married
to William Windesore, a younger son of William Lord Windsore; and Luce the
second daughter, was married to Henry Herbert, son of Sir Thomas Herbert of
Wynestow in Mountgomerishire in Wales. This William was Knight of the Garter,
and dyed at his house by S. John's at London, and was honorably conueighed by
the Officers of Arms and others, to Chepstow in Wales, and there buried in the
year, 1589.

Et portoit, lez arms de son pere. EDward Lord Herbert, after the death of his
Father William, was the fourth Earl of Worcester of that Family, Knight of the
Garter, Lord Privy Seal, of his Majesty's privy Counsel, and one of the Lords
Commissioners for the Office of Earl Marshall of England, a very honorable
and good friend to the Officers of Arms, 1618.

He married Lady Elizabeth, daughter of Francis Hastings Earl of Huntington,
and Katherine his Wife, daughter and heir of Henry Pole, Lord Montague, and
had issue, William Lord Herbert, that dyed without issue, Henry L. Herbert now
living, who married Anne, daughter and sole heir of John Lord Russell, son
and heir of Francis Earl of Bedford; Sir Thomas Somerset, Knight of the Bath,
and Master of the Horse to Queen Anne; Sir Charles Somerset, Knight of the
Bath; and Sir Edward Somerset, Knight of the Bath, fifth son; Lady Elizabeth
Somerset, wife to Sir Henry Guilford Knight; Katherine second daughter, married
William Lord Peter of Writile in Essex; Anne, Wife to Sir Edward Winter of
Glocestershire Knight; Francis, married to Sir William Morgan of Llantarnam in
Monmouthshire; Blanch, wife to Thomas Arundell, son and heir of the Lord
Arundell, of Warder Castle; and Katherine the youngest daughter, was married to
Thomas, now Lord Windsore, 1618.

Et portoit, d'or, a la face escartelle France and d'engleterre, a la bordure
gobonne d'argent and d'azur. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls of Wilsthire, their
Arms, Wives, and Children.
LIonell Plantagenet, (sur-named of Antwerpe, the place of his birth) third
son of King Edward the third, was by his Father, in the 26. year of his
Reign, created Earl of Wiltshire, and in the 36. year of his Reign, he was
created Duke of Clarence. He married Elizabeth, daughter and heir of William
Lord Burgh, Earl of Vlster in Ireland, and of Mauld his wife, sister of Henry
Duke of Lancaster, by whom he had issue, Philip his only daughter and heir,
married to Edmond Mortimer Earl of March. This Leonell dyed coming from
Mellent, in the year of our Lord, 1368. etc.

Et portoit, les armoities de France and d'engleterre escartelle, au lambell
d'ermyn, chargee au trois cantons de gueulles. WIlliam Lord Scroope (son of
Richard, Lord Scroop of Bolton, Lord Chancellor of England) was by King
Richard the second, in the 21. year of his Reign, created Earl of Wiltshire;
and the year after he was made Lord high Treasurer of England, and Knight of
the Garter. Who^ when Henry of Bullingbroke, Duke of Lancaster, came from being
a banished man to be King, by the name of king Henry the 4. he took this
William Lord Scroope, Sir John Bussie, and Sir Henry Green (King Richard the
seconds Favorites) and beheaded them at Bristow, in the year 1399. This
William, bought the Isle of Man, of William Mountague, Earl of Salisbury;
which Island, after the said Williams attaindor, King Henry the 4. did give it
to Henry Percy the first, Earl of Northumberland, in the first year of his
Reign; to hold the same, by the service of carrying the sword, with which he
entered England before him at his Coronation. He dyed without issue, leaving
Roger his Brother to succeed him.

Et portoit, d'azur a la band d'or. James Butler (son and heir of James
Butler, fourth Earl of Ormond) was in the life time of his Father, created
earl of Wiltshire, in the 27. year of King Henry the sixth; and in the 37.
year of the said Kings Reign, he was made Knight of the Garter; and the year
after, Lord high Treasurer of England. And in the first year of King Edward
the fourth, he was beheaded at New Castle, without issue; leaving Thomas his
brother his heir, who after succeeded him, and was Earl of Ormond.

Et portoit, d'or au chef endente d'azur. John Stafford (second son of
Humfrey, Duke of Buckingham) was made Knight of the Garter, in the tenth year
of King Edward the 4. and in the 12. year of the said Kings Reign, he was
created Earl of Wilishire. He married Constance, daughter and heir of Sir
Henry Green, of Drayton in Northamptonshire Knight, and had issue, Edward
Earl of Wiltshire; and dyed in the 14. year of King Edward the fourth, 1473.

Et portoit, escartelle France and d'engleterre au bordure and cressant
d'argent. EDward Stafford, son and heir of John aforesaid, was after the
death of his Father, Earl of Wiltshire, and died without issue, the 14. of
King Henry the seventh, 1498. and was buried at Drayton in Northamptonshire,
which Lordship he had by his Mother, Constance Greine.

Et portoit, lez armoiries de son pere. HEnry Lord Stafford, (second son of
Henry Stafford Duke of Buckingham, and brother of Edward the third Duke of
Buckingham, beheaded at the Tower Hill, the 13. of Henry the eight) was created
Earl of Wiltshire, in the first year of King Henry the eight, 1509. He was
made Knight of the Garter before, in the 20. year of King Henry the seventh,
and married Muriell, sister and co-heyre of John Gray, Viscount Lisle, but by
her had no issue. This Henry dyed the 6. of March, the 14. of King Henry the
eight.

THomas Bollen (son and heir of Sir William Bollen of Blickling in Norfolk
Knight, and of Margaret his wife, daughter and one of the heirs of Thomas
Butler Earl of Ormond, Brother and Heir of James Butler, Earl of
Wilt-Wiltshire, before mentioned) was first created Viscount Rochford in the 17.
year of King Henry the eight; and in the 21. year of the said Kings Reign,
he was created Earl of Wiltshire and Ormond; and to have the State, Title and
Dignity of Wiltshire, to him and his heirs male, and the State, Title and
Dignity of Ormond, unto him and his heirs for ever (a president not to be
sampled) He was made Knight of the Garter, and Treasurer of the Household to
King Henry the 8 in the 15. year of his Reign. He married Elizabeth, daughter
of Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk, and Earl Marshall of England, and had
issue, George Bollen Viscount Rochford, beheaded without issue, and two
daughters; Anne the eldest, was first created Marchioness of Penbroke, and
after married to King Henry the eight. Mary the second daughter, married to
William Carry, Esquire for the body to King Henry the eight. This Thomas, Earl
of Wiltshire and Ormond, dyed in the 30. year of the said Kings Reign, 1538.

Et portoit, d'argent au cheuron enter trois testes de Boef cope de sable, arm
d'or. WIlliam Powlet Knight, descended of a second Brother of the Powlets of
Wiltshire, was created Lord S. John of Basing, in the 30. year of Henry the
eight, and made Knight of the Garter, the 35. of the same Kings Reign; and
after, in the third year of King Edward the sixth, he was created Earl of
Wiltshire: and in the fifth year of the said kings Reign, he was created
Marquess of Winchester, as more at large does appear in the Title of
Winehester.

Et portoit, sable trois espees avec le points embas d'argent, au cressant
d'or. John Powlet, son and heir of William, succeeded his Father, and was
Marquess of Winchester, and Earl of Wiltshire, and Lord S. John of Basing,
and dyed at his house at Chelsey, 1576. and was buried at Basing, the 19. of
Queen Elizabeth, as is more at large, in the title of Winchester.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. WIlliam Powlet, son and heir of John,
was in the life time of his Father, summoned to Parliament, 1575. as Lord S.
John of Basing; and after the death of his Father, he was both Marquess of
Winchester, and Earl of Wiltshire, and dyed in the year 1598. as in the Title
of Winchester.

Et portoit, sable trois espees auec le pointz embas d'argent, au cressant
d'or. WIlliam Powlet, Lord S. John of Basing, Earl of Wiltshire, and Marquess
of Winchester now living, 1618. married Lucie, daughter of Thomas Cecill Earl
of Excester, by whom he has issue, as aforesaid, in the Title of Winchester.

Et portoit, sable trois espees auec le pointz embas d'argent, au cressant
d'or. A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls of Westmerland, their Arms, Wives, and
Children.
RAphe Lord Neuill, of Raby, Branspath, in the Bishoppricke of Durham,
Warkeworth in Northumberland, Sheryhuton in Yorkshire, and Midleham in
Richmondshire, etc. was created Earl of Westmerland, in the 21. year of the
Reign of King Richard the second; and in the first year of King Henry the 4.
he was made Earl of Richmond for term of life. He was also Knight of the
Garter, Earl Marshall of England, and Lord Warden of the Marches toward
Scotland. He married two wives, the first was Margaret, daughter of Hugh Earl
Stafford, by whom he had issue, two Sons and seven daughters, John Lord Neuill
his son and heir, married Elizabeth, sister and co heir of Edmond Holland
Earl of Kent, and had issue, Raphe second Earl of Westmerland and others, and
dyed in France before his Father. Raphe the second son, was Lord of Ousley in
Warwickshire, in right of Mary his Wife, daughter and co-heyre of Robert
Ferrars Baron of Ousley. Mauld the eldest daughter, was married to Peter Lord
Mauley of Moulgraue: Alice, wife first to Sir Thomas Gray of Heton, and after
to Sir Gilbert Lancaster: Philip, wife to Thomas Lord Dacres of Gillesland:
Margaret, married to Richard Lord Scroope of Bolton: Anne, wife to Sir Gilbert
Vmfreuile, of Kyme in Lincolnshire; Margery was Abbess of Barking; and
Elizabeth was a Nun in the Minories in London.

His second Wife was Ioane, daughter of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, by the
Lady Katherine Swinford, by whom he had issue also, eight sons and five
daughters: viz. Richard Neuill Earl of Salisbury; William Neuill, Lord
Falconberg; Edward Neuill, Lord of Aburgauenny; George Neuill, Lord Latymer;
Robert Neuill, Bishop of Duresme; Cuthbert, Henry and Thomas Neuill, dyed
without issue. Katherine the eldest daughter, was married to John Mowbray,
second Duke of Norfolk, by whom she had issue. Elianor second daughter, was
Wife to Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland? Anne the third daughter, was
married to Humfrey Stafford, Duke of Buckingham; Jane a Nun; and Cicely the
fifth daughter, was married to Richard Plantagenet Duke of York, who had issue,
King Edward the fourth, and King Richard the third. Which Richard Duke of
York, by the greatness and the number of his Wives kindred, was able to bandy
for the Kingdom of England, against the House of Lancaster. This Raphe dyed in
the 4. year of King Henry the sixth, 1425.

Et portoit, gueulles au Saulteur d'argent. RAphe Neuill, son and heir of
John Lord Neuill, and grandchild of Raphe, first Earl of Westmerland
aforesaid, was after the death of his said Grandfather, the second Earl of
Westmerland, Lord of Raby, etc. He married Elizabeth, daughter of Henry Lord
Percy (sur-named Hotspurre) son and heir of Henry Percy Earl of
Northumberland, by whom he had issue, John Lord Neuill, who married Anne,
daughter of John Holland, Duke of Excester, and Earl of Huntington, and was
slain at Towton-Field, on Palme-Sunday, the first of King Edward the fourth
without issue, in the life time of Earl Raphe his Father. After this John's
death; Sir John Neuill Knight his Uncle, married Anne Holland his Widow, of
whom he begot Raphe Neuill, the third Earl of Westmerland. This Raphe second
Earl of Westmerland, died the third of November, the second of King Richard
the third, 1484.

Et portoit, gueulles au Saulteur d'argent. RAphe Neuill (son and heir of
Sir John Neuill knight, second brother of Raphe, second Earl of Westmerland)
was after the death of his Father and Vnck^ the third Eaile of Westmerland, and
married Margaret, daughter of Sir Roger Booth of Barton in Lancashire Knight,
(Brother of Laurence Booth Bishop of York) and had issue Raphe Neuill, that
dyed before his Father; who having married Editha, daughter of Sir William
Sands of Hampshire, had issue Raphe Neuill the 4. Earl of Westmerland. T his
Raphe, the third Earl of Westmerland had issue also, a daughter named Anne,
married to Sir William Cogniers Knight, and dyed.

Et portoit, gueulles au Saulteur d'argent. RAphe Neuill, (son of Raphe Lord
Neuill, and Editha Sands) was after the death of Raphe Neuill third Earl of
Westmerland his grandfather, the fourth Earl of Westmerland, Lord of Raby,
Banspath, etc. and Knight of the Garter. He married Katherine, daughter of
Edward Stafford Duke of Buckingham, by whom he had issue, seven sons and ten
daughters: the first son Henry, was after his Father, the 5. Earl of
Westmerland; Sir Thomas Neuill Knight, second son; Edward Neuill, Christopher
Neuill fourth son, Raphe, George and Cuthbert Neuill; Elianor the eldest
daughter, died without issue; Dorothy, was wife to John Vere Earl of Oxford;
Mary, wife to Sir Thomas Danby Knight; Ioane Neuill; Margaret, wife to Henry
Manors Earl of Rutland, who lies buried at S. Leonards at Shoreditch, 1560.
Elizabeth, wife to Thomas Lord Dacres of Gillesland; Elianor, wife to Sir Brian
Stapleton Knight; Katherine, wife to Sir John Constable of Holdernesse, buried
also at Shoreditch, 1591. Anne, wife to Sir Foulke Greuill Knight; and Vrsula
the youngest daughter. This Raphe dyed in the 15. year of King Henry the
eight, 1523.

Et portoit, les armoiries de son pere. HEnry Neuill (after the death of Raphe
his Father) was the fifth Earl of Westmerland, Lord of Raby, Branspath,
Shery-huton and Midleham, and Knight of the Garter. He married Anne, daughter
of Thomas Manors Earl of Rutland, and had issue, Charles Neuill, sixth Earl
of Westmerland; Katherine, married to Sir Thomas Gray of Chillingham knight;
Elianor, wife to Sir William Pelham Knight, Master of the Ordenance to Queen
Elizabeth. This Henry married to his second Wife, Anne, daughter of Sir Richard
Cholmley Knight, by whom he had diverse children that dyed young. He dyed the 9.
of February, 1564. the sixth of Queen Elizabeth.

Et portoit, de gueulles au Saulteur d'argent. CHarles Lord Neuill, after the
death of Henry his Father, was the sixth and last Earl of Westmerland, Lord of
Rabie, Branspath, Shery-huton, Midleham, etc. This man, unmindful of his
Princes favors, and of his duty to his Country, joined and combined himself,
with Thomas Percy Earl of Northumberland, and others, and was the chief
Leader and Stirrer of the Insurrection in the North parts of England, against
Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, in the year, 1570. For which rebellion, he
was by Parliament adjudged a Traitor, and had his goods and lands consiscated,
and himself to have suffered death, had he not fled beyond the Seas, where he
hued long after in very poor and miserable estate, and where he dyed.

He married Anne, daughter of Henry Howard Earl of Surrey, and fifter of
Thomas Howard, the last Duke of Norfolk, and had issue three daughters,
Katherine Neuill, Elianor and Margaret.

A CATALOGVE OF THE Earls and Dukes of Warwick, their Arms, Wives, and
Children.
HEnry de Nouoburgo (a Castle or Town in Normandy, where the said Henry was
borne) son of Roger de Bellomont, and Adelina his Wife, daughter of Walleran,
and sister and heir of Hugh Earl of Mellent (Father and Mother also of
Robert, Earl of Mellent and Leicester) was created Earl of Warwick, by
William the Conqueror, and had given him the Borough and Liberties of Warwick,
as fully and surely, as when they were belonging to the Crown of England. He
married Margerie, sister and heir of Rotr^c, Earl of Pereh, by whom he had
issue, sieve sons; Roger de Bellomont, Earl of Warwick; Rotherick,
Archbishop of Roan; Robert, sur-named of Newburgh; Geffrey and Henry, and two
daughters. He founded the Priory of S. Sepulchers in Warwick, and dyed in the
23. year of King Henry the first, 1123. and was buried with his Ancestors, at
Pratum (or Preaux) near the Town of Pont-Adamare in Normandy.

Et portoit, lozengie d'or and d'azur. ROger de Bellomont (son and heir of
H^^ry le ^puoburgo aforesaid) was after his Father, the second Earl of
Warwick after the Conquest. He married Gundred, daughter of William, the second
Earl Warren and Surrey, and had issue, William Earl of Warwick, who dyed
without issue, and Walleran, who was the fourth Earl of Warwick. This Roger
made diverse iournies to the Holy Land, and dyed the second day of the Ides of
June, in the year 1153. and was buried at Warwick.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. William de Plesseto, son and heir of
Roger de Bellomont, was after his Fathers death, the third Earl of Warwick
after the Norman Conquest. He married two Wines, the first was Matilda, eldest
daughter and co-heyre of William Lord Percy, and sister of Agnes, the Wife of
Ioceline de Louaine. His second Wife was Margaret, daughter of the Lord
D'eyuile, but had no issue by either. He dyed the 17. day before the Kalends of
December, 1183. leaving his Brother Walleran to succeed him in the Earldom of
Warwick.

Et portoit, les arms de son bisayeul. WAlleran (second son of Roger de
Bellomont) after the death of William his elder brother, was the fourth Earl
of Warwick, and married two wives; the first was Margaret, daughter of Humfrey
de Bohun Earl of Hereford, who dyed without issue. His second Wife was Alice,
daughter of John Harecourt, by whom he had issue, three sons and one
daughter, William, Henry and Walleran; Alice the daughter, was married to
William Mandud, Baron of Hanslape in Buckinghamshire, and Chamberlain of the
Exchecquer. This Walleran, at the Coronation of king John, did carry the sword
upon the right hand of the said King, for his service due for the Earldom of
Warwick, and dyed in the year 1200. being the second of King John.

Et portoit, lozengie d'or and d'azur a la bordur gueulles. WIlliam, son and
heir of Walleran, the fourth Earl of Warwick, was after the death of his
Father, the fifth Earl of Warwick: In whose time, all England was under the
subjection of the Pope, for seven years together. He dyed without issue, as
John Rous of Warwick has.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. HEnry, second son of Earl Walleran, and
brother and heir of William, the fifth Earl of Warwick aforesaid, was the
sixth Earl of Warwick. He was ever faithful to king John, although he took
from him the Lordship of Gower in South Wales. He always maintained the said
Kings part, against Lewis the French Kings Son, and others the Nobility of
the Realm: who took unto themselves the name of Maintainers of the liberties
of the Kingdom. He married two Wives, the first was Margery, daughter of
Henry de Oyley, Baron of Hochnorton, and Founder of Osney Abbey and Missenden,
and sister and co-heyre of Henry D'Oyley the younger, by whom he had issue,
Thomas Earl of Warwick, and a daughter named Margery, who was first married
to John Marshall (Brother of William Marshall the elder, Earl of Penbroke) who
(in her right) was Earl of Warwick, and dyed without issue. Her second
husband was John de Plessetis, a Pictauian borne, who in her right was also
Earl of Warwick.

This Henry married to his second Wife, Phillip, daughter of Thomas Lord
Basset, of Hedington in Oxfordshire, Founder of the Priory of Bisseter, by whom
he had no issue. He dyed in the second year of King Henry the third.

Les arms de son pere. THomas, son and heir of Henry, the sixth Earl of
Warwick, after the death of his Father, was the 7. Earl of Warwick; and
married Ela, daughter of William Longspee, Earl of Salisbury, base son of
King Henry the second, by whom he had no issue. He dyed issuelesse, the 26. of
King Henry the third, 1242. leaving his sister Margery his heir, and to
possess his Inheritance; She being married to John Marshall, as aforesaid.

Et portoir, eschiquettee d'or and d'azur, au cheumon d'hermines. John
Marshall, son of John the Kings Marshall in King Henry the seconds time, and
Brother of William Marshall the elder, Earl of Penbroke, (whom M. Milles has
greatly mistaken in his Book, page 794) This John married Margerie, sister and
sole heir of Thomas, the seventh Earl of Warwick, in whose right, he was the
eight Earl of Warwick, by the permission and favor of King Henry the third,
and after dyed without issue, the 27. year of the said Kings Reign.

Et portoit, de gueulles a la band fizelle d'or. John de Plessetis, a Pictauian
borne, after the death of John Marshall, married Margery his Widow, sister and
heir of Thomas, the seventh Earl of Warwick, in whose right (and King Henry
the thirds permission and favor) he was the 9. Earl of Warwick. This John,
with diverse other Englishmen, traveling from Aquitaine toward their own
country over land, by a safe conduct of the French Kings, were arrested in a
Town of Poictow, called Ponts, and there imprisoned (notwithstanding they
showed the said License) he dyed without issue, in the year 1263. and was
buried in the Monastery of Missenden in Buckinghamshire.

Et portoit, d'argent a six annelletz de gneulle^. 3^2, 1. WAlleran, third
son of Walleran, the fourth Earl of Warwick, and Vnkcle and heir of
Margery, Countess of Warwick his Niece, after whose death, and her two
husbands, John Marshall, and John de Plessetis Earl of Warwick; he was the
tenth Earl of Warwick, and the last of that Family. In his time lived these
famous Writers, Robert Groshed Bishop of Lincoln; Roger Bacon and others. He
dyed without issue, leaving William Manduit, Baron of Hanslape, his sister
Alices son to succeed him, as John Rous of Warwick has.

Et portoit, lozengie d'or and d'azur a la bordur de gueulles. WIlliam Manduit
(or Maledoctus) son of William Manduit, Baron of Hanslape, and Alice his
wife, sister and heir of Walleran the tenth Earl of Warwick, was after the
death of William his Father, Baron of Hanslap, and hereditary Chamberlain of
the Exchequer; and after the death of Walleran his Uncle aforesaid, was the
eleventh Earl of Warwick, and was surprised in his Castle of Warwick, by
Simon Mountfort Earl of Leicester; and (with his Wife and Family) were carried
away prisoners to the Castle of Kenelworth, and his Castle of Warwick
despoyled, because he took part with King Henry the third, against the Barons.

He dyed without issue, the 4. day of the Ides of January, in the year 1268.
and was buried honorably at Warwick, leaving Isabell his sister and heir,
married to William Beauchampe Baron of Elmeley, called the Blind Baron.

Et portoit, d'argent a deux bars de gueulles. WIlliam Beauchampe, or
Bello-Campo, Baron of Aelmley and Hanslap son of William Beauchampe, and
Isabell Manduit, was the 12. Earl of Warwick, Shirieffe of Worcestershire by
Inheritance, and Chamberlame of the Exchequer, and by his Wife, Lord of
Kirtling. This William, with Richard Bishop of London, Reginald Gray, John
Gifford, and Alan Plugenet, were appointed Tutors and Governors to Prince
Edward, in the absence of King Edward the first his Fathers abode in Flanders,
He married Mauld, daughter and one of the heirs of John Fitz-Geffrey, Lord of
Kirtling, and Chiefe-Iustice of Ireland, and had issue, Guy Beauchampe Earl of
Warwick; Isabell, wife to Patrick Chaworth, Lord of Kidwelly in South- Wales;
and Mauld, married to (...) Blount. He dyed at Aelmley, the 26. of King Edward
the first, and was buried at Worcester by his Father, in the Friars Minories.

Et portoit, gueulles a la face enter six croix croisettees d'or. GVy
Beauchampe, son and heir of William the 12. Earl of Warwick, was after the
death of his Father, the thirteenth Earl of Warwick, Baron of Aelmley and
Hanslap, and Founder of the College at Elmeley, and had ginen him by king
Edward the first (for his good service) the Castle of Barnard in the
Bishopric of Durisme, being parcel of the Baliols inheritance. He was one of
the Noblemen, which caused Peter of Gaueston (King Edward the seconds Minnion)
to be beheaded.

He married Alice, daughter of Raphe de Toneio, and sister and heir of Robert
Lord Toneio, Baron of Flamsted, and had issue two sons, Thomas and John, and
a daughter named Elizabeth, wife to Thomas Lord Astley; Thomas was after his
Father, Earl of Warwick, and John was Admiral of England, Constable of Dover
Castle Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, Knight; and one of the first Founders
of the Noble Order of the Garter, and dyed in the 34. year of King Edward the
third, and was buried in the body of the Church of S. Paul in London, leaving
Thomas Earl of Warwick his heir, who was then found to be 40. years of age,
and above. This Guy, dyed in the year 1315. the 9. of King Edward the second,
and was buried at Brodesley in Worcestershire.

Et portoit, gueulles a la face enter six croix croisettees d'or. THomas
Beauchampe, the 14. Earl of Warwick, after the death of Guy his Father: he
was borne in the Castle of Warwick, and christened by Thomas, Earl of
Lancaster. And in the year 1337. he was made Marshall of England, by king
Edward the third, during pleasure, and was one of the Founders of the Noble
Order of the Garter. He walled and embattelled his Castle of Warwick, and
adorned it with Gates and Bulwarks. He was at the battles of Cressy,
Poictiers, and at the assiedge of Callis, with king Edward the third He married
Katherine, daughter of Roger Mortimer, Earl of March, and had issue, three
sons and six daughters; Guy the eldest son married, and had issue two
daughters, Elizabeth and Katherine, and dyed before his Father, in the 34 year
of king Edward the third. Thomas second son, was after his Father, Earl of
Warwick; William the third son, was Baron of Aburgauenny: Mauld, wife to
Roger Lord Clifford; Katherine, married Hugh Earl Stafford; Elizabeth, wife to
John Beauchampe, Baron of Hatche in Somersetshire; Ioane, Wife to Raphe Basset
of Drayton; Isabell, married to William Vfford, Earl of Suffolk; the last was
a Nun.

Et portoit, de gueulles a la face enter six croix croisettees d'or. THomas
Beauchampe, after the death of Thomas his Father, and Guy his eldest Brother,
was the 15. Earl of Warwick, etc. This Thomas, vpbraided King Richard the
second, with the murder of Thomas Duke of Gloucester his Uncle; For which, he
was ever after very hateful unto him, and was in the 21. year of the said
Kings Reign, at a Parliament, adjudged and condemned with the Earl of
Arundel, of high treason; the Earl of Arundell was beheaded, and this Thomas
confined to the custody of William Lord Scroop, and Earl of Wiltshire, into
the Isle of Man: A great part of his Inheritance being taken from him, was
given to Thomas Holland, Earl of Kent and Duke of Surrey, half Brother to
King Richard. But after, in the second year of King Henry the 4. he was
restored again, both to honor and lands. He married Margaret, daughter of
William, Lord Ferrars of Groby, and had issue, Richard Earl of Warwick, and
Margaret, married to John Baron Dudley. He dyed in the second year of King
Henry the 4. in his Castle of Warwick, and was there buried by his Ancestors.

Et portoit, les arms deson pere. RIchard Beauchampe, son of Thomas
aforesaid, was after his Fathers death, the fixteenth Earl of Warwick, and by
his Wife, Lord Lisle. He was Governor of Normandy, and Lieutenant general
under John, Duke of Bedford, Regent of France, for King Henry the 5. who made
him Captain of Callis, and of the City and Castle of Meaux in Bry. He married
two Wives, the first was Elizabeth, daughter and heir of Thomas Lord Berkeley,
and Margery his wife, daughter and heir of Warren, Lord Lisle and Ties, by
whom he had issue, three daughters, who were heirs to their Mother; Margaret
the eldest, was married unto John Talbet Earl of Shrewsbury, and had issue,
John Talbot Viscount Lisle. Elianor the second daughter, was first married to
Thomas Lord Ros, of Hamelake; and after to Edward Beauford, Duke of Somerset.
Elizabeth the third daughter, was Wife to George Neuill, Lord Latimer. This
Richards second Wife was Isabell, daughter of Thomas Spencer, Earl of
Gloucester, and sister and heir of Richard Lord Spencer, by whom he had issue,
Henry Duke of Warwick, and Anne, married to Richard Neuill, Earl of
Salisbury, who (in her right) was after Earl of Warwick. This Richard, the
sixteenth Earl of Warwick, dyed at Roan, in the year 1439. and his body
being brought into England, was buried in the New College at Warwick, the 17.
of King Henry the sixth.

Et portoit, de gueulles a la face enter six croix croisettes d'or. HEnry
Beauchampe, son of Richard aforesaid, was after the death of his Father, the
seventeenth Earl of Warwick, and of Albemarle, Baron of Elmesley, Hanslape,
Spencer, and Aburgauenny, and Knight of the Garter. And in the 20. year of
King Henry the sixth, he was restored to all his livings, with great applaud and
honor, being crowned King of the Isle of Wight, by the Kings own hands, and
made chief Earl of England. And in the year 1444. being the 23. of the said
Kings Reign, he was created Duke of Warwick, and had granted him in all
meetings and assemblies, both in Parliament and elsewhere; to have place and
precedence next after the Duke of Norfolk, and before the Duke of But^ingham.
He had given him also the Castle of Bristow, with the appurtenances, and the
Isles of Gernsey and Iarsey. He married Cicely, daughter of Richard Neuill,
Earl of Salisbury, and sister of Richard, Earl of Warwick, and had issue,
one only daughter and heir named Anne, being but two years old at his
death. She was Ward to William de la Pole, Duke; Marquess and Earl of
Suffolk; and dyed in the year 1449. being but six years of age, and was
buried at Reading; and Henry her Father dyed at Hanley, the place of his birth
(being not full 22. years old, in the year of our Lord, 1446. and was buried
at Tewkesbury (as John Rous of Warwick has.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. RIchard Neuill, some and heir of Richard
Neuill, Earl of Salisbury, married Anne, daughter of Richard Beauchampe, the
16. Earl of Warwick, by his second Wife, and sister and sole heir of the
whole blood of Henry Beauchamp, Duke of Warwick aforesaid; in whose right,
this Richard Neuill, in the 28. year of King Henry the sixth, was the
eighteenth Earl of Warwick; and by that Name and Title sat in Parliament
held at Westminster, the 33. of the said Kings Reign; and in the 39. year of
Henry the sixth, his Father being dead, was also Earl of Salisbury and Lord
Monthermer, great Chamberlain and Admiral of England, Lord Warden of the
North Marches toward Scotland, and of the Cinque Ports, Captain of Callis,
and high Steward of the Duchy of Lancaster.

At what time this Richard was sent into France, to treat a marriage for King
Edward the 4. King Edward fell in love, and married Elizabeth, daughter of
Richard Wooduile, Earl Ryuers (the Widow of Sir John Gray) which procured
great hatred between this Earl and the King. Which disgrace, this Richard
being not able to digest, plotted a confederacy with George, Duke of Clarence,
King Edwards brother, for to restore King Henry the sixth: and assembling his
Forces at Banbury, he overthrew King Edward in battle, and took him
prisoner. But King Edward within a while after (by the help of his Friends)
made an escape from out the Castle of Banbury, wherein he was prisoner, and
began a new war at Stamford, where he was Conqueror, and enforced this Earl
Richard to fly into France. But within six months after, he returned again
into England, and enforced King Edward to fly into Flanders, to Charles Duke
of Burgundy, who had married his sister; setting King Henry at liberty, after
ten years imprisonment.

After all which, King Edward (by the assistance of his said Brother of
Burgandy) came into England again, and waging battle against King Henry's
Faction, at Barnet, ten miles from London, vanquished his enemies, and slew
this Richard, and his brother John, Marquess Mountague, in the year 1471.
being Easter day. And this was the end of this great Earl of Warwick, who
pulled down Kings, and set them up again at his pleasure. He had issue by his
said Wife, two daughters his heirs; Isabell, married to Gearge Plantagenet,
Duke of Clerence, Brother to King Edward the 4. And Anne, first married to
Edward, Prince of Wales, son of King Henry the sixth, who was slain at
Tewksbury; and after to Richard Duke of Gloucester, after King of England.

Et portoit, gueulles (...) faulteur d'argei^^, au lambell gobonne d'argent and
d'azur. GEorge Plantagenet, Duke of Clarence, brother of King Edward the 4.
found drowned in a But of Malmescy, in the Tower of London. He married Isabell,
daughter and coheyre of Richard Neuill, Earl of Warwick aforesaid, in whose
right he was the 19. Earl of Warwick, and had issue, Edward, the twentieth
Earl of Warwick, and Margaret, Countess of Salisbury, Wife to Richard Pole
Knight, Father of Henry (...) Mountague, as in the Title of Clare is more at
large.

Et portoit, les armoiries de France escartelle d'engleterre, au lambell
d'argent chargee de trois cantons de gueulles. EDward Plantagenet, son and
heir of George, Duke of Clarence, and Nephew to King Edward the 4. was after
the death of his Father, Earl of Salisbury, and the twentieth Earl of
Warwick, and the last heir male of the Family of Plantagenets. He was a
child of most difastrous fortune, as the creature, who had from his Cradle
been nursed up in prison, and his fatal day was hastened by another man's
folly. For a certain youth of mean parentage, was subborned by a knave
Priest, to take upon him, the name and person of this Earl Edward; giving it
out, that he had lately escaped out of the prison, in the Tower of London. This
bruit caused a great tumult amongst the Commons, who the^ were glad to hear,
that a branch of the Plantagenets was to be restored to the Imperial Diadem.
But the truth was, that Edward Earl of Warwick, had complotted with Perkyn
Werbert (as it was said) to make an escape: the which attempt, was then held
no less a crime then high treason it self. But the plot being discovered, the
silly young Nobleman, was brought to his trial for the same, the 21 of
November ( John Earl of Oxford, being then appointed Lord high Steward of
England) and found guilty, and for the same the 28. day of November after
after, in the 15. year of King Henry the seueuth, was beheaded at the
Tower Hill. His body being conuayed to Bisham, was there buried, he being then
24. years of age, 15^9.

Et portoit, les arms de son pere. John Sutton, alias Dudley, son of Edmond
Dudley, and Elizabeth, daughter of Edward Gray, Viscount Lisle, and Aunt and
heir of Elizabeth Gray, Countess of Deuon; was created Viscount Lisle, the
34. of King Henry the eight, and after Earl of Warwick, in the first year of
King Edward the sixth, 1547. And lastly, in the fifth year of the said King
Edward, he was created Duke of Northumberland.

He married Anne, daughter of Edward Guilford, and sister and heir of Sir
Henry Guilford Knight, by whom he had issue, eight sons and five daughters.
Henry the eldest son, married Wynefred, daughter of Richard Lord Rich, and
dyed at the siedge of Bollen, 1543. Thomas dyed young; John third son, was
Earl of Warwick: he married Anne, daughter of Edward Seymour, Duke of
Somerset, and dyed without issue, being 24. years old: Ambrose the fourth
son, was also Earl of Warwick, and dyed without issue; Robert the fifth
son, was Earl of Leicester, and married Lettice, daughter of Sir Francis
Knolles, Knight of the Garter, and Treasurer of the Household to Queen
Elizabeth, and had issue, Robert, Baron of Denbigh, that dyed young; Guilford
Dudley sixth son, married the Lady Jane, daughter of Henry Gray Duke of
Suffo^ke, who were all three beheaded, in the year 1553. Henry the seventh
son, married Margaret, daughter and only heir of Thomas, Lord Audley of
Walden, and was slain at S. Quintins, 1557. She was after married to Thomas
Howard, the last Duke of Norfolk. Charles the eight son, dyed young;
Temperance, Margaret and Katherine, dyed all three young; Mary, was married to
Sir Henry Sidney, Knight of the Garter, Lord Deputy of Ireland, and President
of Wales, and had issue, Sir Phillip Sidney knight, and Robert Sidney Earl of
Leicester, 1618. and Katherine the youngest daughter, was married to Henry
Hastings, Earl of Huntington. This John, Duke of Northumberland, was beheaded
at Tower Hill, in the year 1553.

Et portoit, d'or au lion rampar^^ vert a la queue nouee. AMbrose Dudley, son
of John, Duke of Northumberland, on S. Stephens day, the 26. of December, 1562.
and the 4. of Queen Elizabeth, at White Hall was created Baron Lisle, and the
same day made the 22. Earl of Warwick. He was Master of the Ordenance, and
Knight of the Garter, and of the privy Counsel to the said Queen. He married
three wives, but had no issue by either: the first was Anne, daughter and
co-heyre of William Whorwood, Attorney general to King Henry the eight: the
second was Elizabeth, daughter of Gilbert, Lord Talboys: and the third was
Anne, eldest daughter of Francis Lord Russell, and Earl of Bedford. He dyed
without issue, in the year 1589. and was buried at Warwick.

Et portoit, lez armoiries comme son pere. RObert Lord Rich of Leze, grand
child to Richard Rich, created Lord Rich of Leze, the 17. of February, 1547.
and Lord Treasurer of England (by his son Robert Lord Rich) was by Letters
Patents dated at Salisbury, the (...) of August, 1618. made the three and
twentieth Earl of Warwick. He married Penelope, daughter of Walter Deuereux,
Earl of Essex, and had issue, Robert Lord Rich, who married Frances, daughter
and heir of Sir William Hatton Knight, and has issue, Robert and others. Sir
Henry Rich, Knight of the Bath, second son, married Isabell, daughter and
heir of Sir Walter Cope Knight; Charles third son; Luce, eldest daughter,
married to Sir George Carry of Devonshire Knight; Essex second daughter, was
married to Sir Thomas Cheek Knight; and Penelope third daughter.

Et portoit, gueulles au cheuron, accompaigne de trois croix recroisettees
d'or. A CATALOGVE OF THE Dukes and Earls of YORK, their Arms, Wives, and
Children.
OTho, son of Henry Leo, Duke of Bauaria, Saxom and Sardinia (begotten of
Mauld, daughter of Henry the second, King of England, who was after Emperor, by
the name of Otho the 4.) was girt with the Sword of the Earldom of York, in
the first year of the Reign of King Richard the first his Uncle, 1189. But
afterward King Richard made an exchange with Otho, and gave him the Earldom
of Poictow, for the Earldom of York. He married two wives, the first was
Mary, daughter of the Duke of Brabant; the second was Beatrix, daughter of
Phillip the Emperor, son of Frederick the Emperor, and dyed without issue
in Saxony, 1218. This Otho had a brother both by Father and Mother, named
William, from whom are descended, the Dukes of Brunswicke and Luneburgh in
Germany: who, for memory of their alliance and kindred with the Kings of
England, bare for their Arms, the ancient Arms of the Dukes of Normandy.
Gueulles deux leopards passant d'or.

EDmond, fifth son of King Edward the third (sur-named of Langley, the Kings
Manor house near S. Albons, where he was borne) was created first Earl of
Cambridge, in the 36. year of his Fathers Reign, and Lord of Tindale, and was
Knight of the Garter: and in the ninth year of King Richard his Nephew, he
was created Duke of York. He married two Wives, the first was Isabell, second
daughter and one of the heirs of Peter, King of Castile and Leon, by whom he
had issue, Edward, Earl of Rutland, Duke of Albemarle and York; Richard,
after Earl of Cambridge; and Constance, first married to Thomas Spencer, Earl
of Gloucester, and after to Thomas Holland, Earl of Kent.

This Edmonds second Wife was Ioane, daughter of Thomas Holland, Earl of Kent,
and sister and co-heyre of Edmond Holland, Earl of Kent, but by her had no
issue. He was in the absence of his Father in France, made Protector of the
Realm of England; and after dyed in the third year of King Henry the 4. his
Nephew, and was buried at Langley.

Et portoit, France seem and d'engleterre escartelle, au lambell d'argent
chargee au 9. torteaux. EDward Plantagenet (son and heir of Edmond of
Langley aforesaid) was created Earl of Rutland and of Cork, in the 13. year
of King Richard the second; and in the 21. year of the said Kings Reign, he
was created Duke of Albermale, and Constable of England; and after the death of
his Father, he was also Duke of York, and Lord of Tyndall. He married Phillip,
daughter and one of the heirs of John Mohun, Lord of Dunster, but by her had
no issue. He was slain at the battle of Egincourt, the 25. of October, the
third of King Henry the fifth, 1414. At which battle were slain, Charles Lord
Dalabreth, high Constable of France; Jacques le Chastilion, Lord of Dampier,
high Admiral of France; John, Duke D'Alanson; Anthony, Duke of Brabant;
Edward, Duke of Barry; the Earls of Marle, Vawdemont, Blawmont, Grand pree,
Russey, Faulconbridge, Fois and Lastrake; 25. Lords, 8000. Knights, Esquires,
and Gentlemen of Name and Arms. This Edwards body was brought over sea into
England, and buried at Fotheringhay.

Et portoit, lez armoiries de son pere. RIchard Plantagenet (son and heir of
Richard of Conesburgh, Earl of Cambridge, second son of Edmond Langley, Duke
of York aforesaid) was after the death of Edward his Uncle without issue,
restored to be Duke of York, Earl of March and Vlster, Lord of Wigmore and
Clare, etc. He was Lieutenant to King Henry the sixth, in his Kingdom of
France, and Dukedom of Normandy, 1435. and was Chief of the Faction of the
White Rose, being descended of Lyonell, Duke of Clarence. This Richard, raised
a deadly war against the House of Lancaster, clayming his lawful right in the
Kingdom of England: which after, his son Edward obtained, and was King, by
the Name of Edward the fourth. He won the battle of S. Albons, against King
Henry the sixth, 1455. and in the same year, he was made by Parliament, heir
apparent to the Crown, and Lord Protector of the Realm. And after, in the 39.
year of the said Kings Reign, he was slain with his young son Edmond, at
the battle of Wakefield, 1460. at Fotheringhay. He married Cecily, daughter
of Raphe Neuill, first Earl of Westmerland, and had issue, Henry that dyed
young; Edward, that was after King, by the Name of king Edward the 4. Edmond
Earl of Rutland, slain in the Town of Wakefield, by the Lord Clifford, the
same day his Father was slain in the battle. John, William and Thomas dyed
young; George, Duke of Clarence, and Richard, Duke of Gloucester, after King.
Anne the eldest daughter, was first married to Henry Holland, Duke of Excester,
and after to Sir Thomas Saint-Leoger Knight by whom he had issue, Anne, Mother
of Thomas Manors, Earl of Rutland; Elizabeth, Wife to John de la Pole, Duke
of Suffolk; Margaret third daughter, wife to Charles, Duke of Burgundy and
Vrsula.

Et portoit, France seem and d'engleterre escartelle, au lambell d'argent
chargee au neuf torteaux. RIchard, sur-named of Shrewsbury, the place of his
birth second son of King Edward the 4. was by his Father (at a Parliament
held at Westminster, the 20. day of May, 1474.) created Duke of York; and in
the 19. year of the said Kings Reign, he married Anne, the only daughter and
heir of John Lord Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, Earl Warren and Surrey, and
Earl Marshall of England, in whose right he was Duke of Norfolk, etc. This
Richard, being but a child, was with his brother, King Edward the fifth (by
the command of Richard, Duke of Gloucester, their unnatural Uncle) most
cruelly murdered in the Tower of London, the 9. day of the Kalends of June,
1483. without issue: his place of burial was never known certainly to this
day. His wife died also young without issue, and was buried at Westminster.

Et portoit, France and d'engleterre escartelle, a lambell d'argent chargee au
neuf torteaux. HEnry, second son of King Henry the seventh, in the tenth
year of his Fathers Reign, was created Duke of York, in the Parliament house
at Westminster, and after Prince of Wales; and lastly King of England, by the
name of King Henry the eight; Father of Elizabeth, that most worthy and
triumphant Queen of most happy memory.

Et portoit, escartelle France and d'engleterre, a lambell d'argent chargee au
neuf torteaux. CHarles, second son of James, King of Great Britain, France
and Ireland; being Duke of Albany, Marquess of Ormont, Earl of Ros, and Lord
of Ardmanoch; was created Duke of York, by his Father, at White Hall, on
Twelfeday, being the sixth of January, 1604. and after created Prince of Wales
at White Hall, the third of November, in the year, 1616.

A CATALOGVE OF THE Viscounts since the Norman Conquest, their Arms, Wives,
and Children.
John Lord Beaumont, son of Henry Lord Beaumont, sat in Parliament the tenth
year of King Henry the sixth, as Lord Beaumont; and was after by Letters
Patents, bearing date at Reading, the 12. of February, in the 18. year of King
Henry the 6. made Viscount Beaumont. He married Elizabeth, daughter and heir of
Sir William Phillips, Lord Bardolph, and had issue, William and Henry, both
Viscounts, and dyed without issue leaving Jane their sister and heir, married
to John, Lord Louell. This John, was slain at the second battle of
Northampton, the 9. of July, the 38. of King Henry the sixth.

Et portoit, d'azur, au lion rampant seem de lices d'or. I find (before this
John, Viscount Beaumont) John Robsert, Captain of S. Samers in France, son
of Sir Lewis Robsert, knight of the Garter, to be Viscount Robsert, in King
Henry the fifts time. But by whom, or where he was made Viscount, I find not,
neither whom he married, or of any issue he left behind him.

HEnry Bourchier Knight, son and heir of William Bourchier, created Earl of
Ewe, at Maunt in Normandy, by King Henry the fifth, sat in Parliament the 15.
of King Henry the 6. as Lord Bourchier; and in the 25. year of the said kings
Reign, he was in Parliament, by the name and title of Viscount Bourchier; and
in the 27. year of King Henry the 6. Richard Duke of York, by his Charter,
did confirm certain Lands unto him, in marriage with Isabell his sister, with
an annuity of one hundred pounds by the year, by the name and title of Henry,
Viscount Bourchier. He had issue 6. sons, William that dyed before his
Father, Sir Henry Bourchier knight; Humfrey, slain at Barnet-Field, 1471.
John, Thomas and Edward; and dyed in the year 1483.

Et portoit, d'argent a un croix engreslee de gueulles; enter quatre bouces de
sable. John Talbot, second son of John Talbot, first Earl of Shrewsbury, by
Margaret his Wife, eldest daughter and co-heyre of Richard Beauchampe Earl of
Warwick, was created Viscount Lisle, in the 31. year of King Henry the 6. He
married Ioane, daughter and one of the co-heyres of Sir John Chedder Knight,
and had issue, Thomas Talbot, who was also Viscount Lisle, and was slain at
Wotton Vnderedge, without issue; and Elizabeth, married to Edward Gray, who in
her right was also Viscount Lisle. This John, was slain with his Father, in
the wars in France, in the year 1453.

Et portoit, gueulles au lion rampant, a la bordure engreslee d'or; au
croissant d'argent WIlliam Berkeley, son of Sir James Berkely Knight, and of
Elizabeth his Wife, daughter of Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk; was created
Viscount Berkeley, the 20. year of King Edward the 4. and after Marquess
Barkeley; and married two Wives, but had no issue by either. He gave most part
of his Lands to King Henry the seventh, and dyed the seventh of the said Kings
Reign, and was buried in the Augustine Friars in London, leaving Sir Morris
Berkeley Knight, (his brother) his heir.

Et portoit, gueulles au cheuron accompaigne de dix croix patees d'argent.
FRancis Louell, son of John, Lord Louell, and Jane his Wife, sister and heir
of William, Viscount Beaumont; was created Viscount Louell, at Eltham, in the
22. year of King Edward the fourth; and in his style did write himself,
Viscount Louell, Baron Holland, Deyncourt, and Gray of Rotherfield. He married
Anne, daughter of Henry Lord Fitzhugh, and was after slain at Stoke-field,
1487. without issue, leaving his two sisters, Ioane and Friswold his heirs;
Ioane was married to Sir Bryan Stapleton Knight, and Friswold to Sir Edward
Norris Knight.

Et portoit, burelle vndee de six d'or and de gueulles. EDward Gray, second
son of Reginald, Lord Gray of Ruthyn, married Elizabeth, daughter of John
Talbot, Viscount Lisle, and sister and heir of Thomas her brother; in whose
right he was created Viscount Lisle, by King Edward the 4. and had issue, John
Gray, Viscount Lisle, who married Muriel, daughter of Thomas Howard, Duke of
Norfolk, and had issue Elizabeth, married to Henry Courtney, Earl of Deuon,
and dyed without issue: the said Edward had also issue, two daughters,
Elizabeth and Muriell; Elizabeth was first married to Edmond Dudley, of the
privy Chamber to King Henry the seventh, and had issue, John Dudley, Viscount
Lisle, and after she was married to Arthur Plantagenet, base son of king
Edward the fourth, who was also Viscount Lisle. Muriell the second daughter,
was Wife to Henry Stafford, Earl of Wiltshire, but by him had no issue.

Et portoit, burellee de six d'argent and d'azur, trois torteaux en chef au
lambell d'argent. John Lord Wells, son of Lyonell Lord Wells, and Margaret
his Wife, Duchess of Somerset, daughter of John Lord Beauchampe, was created
Viscount Wells, by King Henry the seventh; and married Cecily, daughter of
King Edward the fourth, by whom he had issue a daughter, named Elizabeth, which
dyed without issue. He dyed, and was buried in the Augustine-Fryars in London.

Et portoit, d'or, au lion rampant a la double queue sable, arm and lampasse
de gueulles. SIr Charles Brandon Knight, created Viscount Lisle, the 4. of King
Henry the eight, and Duke of Suffolk, in the fifth year of the said Kings
Reign: who, at the request of the French Queen, then his Wife, resigned the
Title and Dignity of Viscount Lisle, to Arthur Plantagenet, base son of King
Edward the 4. who had married the daughter and heir of Edward Gray, Viscount
Lisle aforesaid, and had issue, as is more at large in the Title of Suffolk.

Et portoit, burelle d'argent and de gueulles de dix pieces, a la lion rampant
d'or coronne per pale d'argent and de gueulles, arm and lampasse d'azur.
ARthur Plantagenet, base son of King Edward the 4. was after the surrender of
Charles Brandon, created Viscount Lisle at Bridewell, the 26. of April, in the
15. year of King Henry the eight, and married Elizabeth, daughter of Edward
Gray, Viscount Lisle, and sister and heir of John Gray her brother, by who^ he
had issue, three daughters his heirs, Bridget, Frances and Elizabeth; Bridget,
was wife to Sir William Carden Knight; Frances, married first John Basset, and
after, Thomas Monk of Devonshire; Elizabeth the third daughter, was married to
Sir Francis Iobson Knight. This Arthur dyed the third of March, 1542. the 33.
year of the Reign of King Henry the eight.

Et portoit, France and d'engleterre escartelle au baston sinestre d'argent.
But most commonly he is made to quarter the Arms of Vlster and Mortimer (as
his Father did before he was King: which I hold not good, for a bastard has no
right to any Arms but his Fathers chief Coat; to show he was the natural
son of such a man. John Dudley Knight, son of Edmond Dudley, and Elizabeth
his wife, sister and heir of John Gray, Viscount Lisle, was created Viscount
Lisle, by King Henry the eight, in the same year Arthur Plantagenet dyed,
1542. and was after made Earl of Warwick, and lastly Duke of Northumberland,
as in those Titles is more at large.

Et portoit, d'or au lion ram pant a la double queue vert. RObert Radcliffe,
Baron Fitz-Walter (grandchild of Sir John Radcliffe Knight, and Elizabeth his
Wife, daughter and one of the heirs of Walter Lord Fitz-Walter) was created
Viscount Fitz-Walter, in the 17. year of King Henry the eight; and after, he
was created Earl of Sussex. He married three Wives, and had issue by them all,
as in the Title of Earls of Sussex, is more at large. He dyed in the 34. year
of King Henry the eight, 1542.

Et portoit, d'argent au band engreslee sable. THomas Bollen, son and heir
of Sir William Bollen of Blickling in Norfolk, Knight, and of Margaret his
wife, daughter and one of the heirs of Thomas Butler Earl of Ormond in
Ireland, being Treasurer of the household to King Henry the eight, was created
Viscount Rochford at Bridewell, in the 17. year of the said Kings Reign, and
in the year 1529. Earl of Wiltshire. He married Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas
Howard, second Duke of Norfolk, and had issue, as in the Title of Earls of
Wiltshire is more at large. He dyed in the 30. year of King Henry the eight.

Et portoit, d'argent au cheuron enter trois testes de Boef cope de sable arm
d'or. EDward Seymour, knight of the Garter, and uncle to king Edward the sixth,
was first created Viscount Beauchampe in the 28. of Henry the eight, 1536. and
Earl of Hartford the 29 of Henry the eight: and lastly, Baron Seymour and Duke
of Somerset, the first of King Edward the sixth, 1547. He married two wives, and
had issue by them both, as before in the Title of Hertford is set forth. He
dyed, beheaded (for felony) at the Tower Hill by London, the eleventh of
January, 1551. the 5. of King Edward the sixth.

Et portoit, gueulles a deux Ailes l'aigle en leurre d'or. WAlter Deuereux,
Lord Ferrers of Chartley, (son of John Lord Ferrers and Cecily Bourchier his
Wife, Sister of Henry Bourchier Earl of Essex, and cousin and heir of Anne,
the wife of William Parre Marquess of Northampton) was created Viscount
Hereford, the first of King Edward the sixth; and married Mary, daughter of
Thomas Gray Marquess Dorset, and had issue, Sir Richard Deuereux knight, who
dyed before his Father, leaving issue by Dorathea his Wife (daughter of George
Lord Hastings, and Earl of Huntington) Walter Earl of Essex, who married
Lettice, daughter of Sir Francis Knolles, Knight of the Garter, and Treasurer
of the Household to Queen Elizabeth, and had issue, Robert late Earl of Essex,
etc.

Et portoit, d'argent a un face gueulles au trois torteaux in chef. LOrd Thomas
Howard, second son of Thomas Howard the third Duke of Norfolk, was created
Viscount Howard of Bindon, the first of Queen Elizabeth. He married Elizabeth,
daughter and one of the co-heyres of John Lord Marney, and had issue, Henry,
Viscount Byndon; Thomas Viscount Byndon, that died in the year, 1610. Francis
and Gyles, and three daughters, Elizabeth, Grace, and Douglas married to Sir
Arthur Gorge Knight.

Et portoit, les arms de Howard avec la cressant pur la difference. ANthony
Brown, Knight of the Garter, was created Viscount Mountague at Hampton Court,
the second of September, 1554. the first of Queen Mary, and married two Wives,
the first was Jane, daughter of Robert Radcliffe Earl of Sussex, by whom he
had issue, Anthony Brown his eldest son, who married Mary, daughter of Sir
William Dormer of Ethorp in Buckinghamshire, and dyed before his Father,
leaving issue Anthony Brown, now Viscount Mountague, 1618. and Mary, married
unto Henry Wriothesley Earl of Southampton, Father of Henry now Earl of
Southampton, 1618. This Anthonies second wife, was Magdalen, daughter of
William Lord Dacres of Gillesland in the North, by whom he had issue, Sir
George Brown Knight, Thomas and Henry, and three daughters; Elizabeth wife to
Sir Robert Dormer, son of Sir William aforesaid; Mabell second daughter, and
Jane Brown was the third daughter. This Anthony dyed at his house of Medhurst
in Sussex, and was there very honorably buried, with four Officers of Arms.

Et portoit, fables trois lions passant en la band enter quatre cottice
d'argent. SIr Robert Cecill Knight, second son of William Cecill, Baron of
Burghley, Lord high Treasurer of England, being Secretary to Queen Elizabeth,
and Master of the Court of Wards, and Chancellor of the University of
Cambridge) was by King James, first created Baron of Essenden, in the Tower of
London, the 13. of May, 1603. and after Viscount Cranburne, the 20. of August,
1604. and lastly Earl of Salisbury, the 4. of May, 1605. He married Elizabeth,
daughter of William Brook Lord Cobham, and had issue, William Cecill now Earl
of Salisbury, 1618. and Francis, wife to Henry Lord Clifford, son and heir
of Francis Clifford, now Earl of Cumberland, 1618.

Et portoit, burelle de dix, d'argent and d'azur, sur le tout, six Eschuchons
3.2.1. sable six lions rampant d'argent, a un cressant pur la second
difference. SIr Robert Sidney, Knight of the Garter, son of Sir Henry Sidney,
Knight of the Garter, Lord Deputy of Ireland, and Lord President of the
Counsel of the Marches of Wales; was first created Baron of Penshurst, in the
Tower of London, the 13 of May, 1603. and after, Viscount Lisle at Greenwich,
the 4. of May, 1605. And lastly, was created Earl of Leicester it Salisbury,
the second day of August, 1618. being then Lord Chamberlain to Queen Anne. He
married Barbara, daughter and sole heir of John Gamage, Lord of Coytie in
Glamorganshire, and had issue, Sir Robert Sidney, Knight of the Bath and Lord
Lisle, now living, 1618. and others; as in the Title of Earls of Leicester is
more at large.

Et portoit, d'or a la pheon d'azur. SIr Robert Carr Knight, borne in Scotland,
was first created Viscount Rochester at White Hall, on Monday in the Easter
week, being the 25 of March 1611. and lastly, by Letters Patents bearing date,
1614. made Baron of Branspath and Earl of Somerset. He was also Lord
Chamberlain of the Household to King James. He married Frances, daughter of
Thomas Howard, Earl of Suffolk. This Robert and his Lady Frances, were both
arraigned at Westminster Hall, the 24. and 25. of May, 1616. for being privy
and consenting to the poisoning of Sir Thomas Ouerbury Knight, the said Earls
great friend and fauouret; and were found guilty by Peers, and had their
judgment to dye for the same; as in the Title of Somerset is more at large.

Et portoit, gueulles au cheuron d'argent, charge de trois estoilles de sable,
brise de un leopard passant d'or, du primier canton de l'es^u. SIR George
Villers Knight, a younger son of Sir George Villers of Brookesby in
Leicestershire Knight, was first created Baron of Whaddon, and after Viscount
Villers at Woodstocke, the 27. of August, 1616. and the 16, of January after,
he was created Earl of Buckingham at White Hall: and lastly, the first day of
January, 1617 he was made Marquess of Buckingham, by the delivery of a Letters
Patents. He was also Knight of the Garter, Master of the Horse, one of his
Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel, and one of the Lords Commissioners,
for the Office of Earl Marshall of England, 1619.

Et portoit, d'argent au croix de gueulles, charge de cinq coquilles d'or. SIr
Thomas Egerton Knight, being Lord Chancellor of England, was created Baron of
Elesmere at Hampton Court, the 17. of July, in the first year of King James;
and the 7. of November, 1616, he was created (at White Hall) Viscount
Brackley. He married Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Rauenscroft of Flintshire,
and had issue, Thomas that dyed before his Father, and Sir John Egerton, now
Earl of Bridgwater, 1619. and a daughter named Mary, married to Sir Francis
Lee, Knight of the Bath. He dyed at York-Place, by Charing-Crosse.

Et portoit d'argent, au lion rampant gueulles, enter trois pheons, a la
bordure engresley de sable. SIr William Knolles, Knight of the Garter, and
Treasurer of the Household to King James, and Master of the Court of Wards, was
first created Baron of Grayes, in the Tower of London, the 13. of May, 1603.
and after Viscount Wallingford at White Hall, the seventh of November, 1616. He
married two wives, by the first he had no issue. His second Wife was Elizabeth,
the eldest daughter of Thomas Howard, Earl of Suffolk, and Lord Treasurer of
England, by whom he had issue.

Et portoit, d'azur a la croix recercelez desiiont, seem croix recroisettes
d'or. James, Lord Hay of Sauley, was by the delivery of a Letters Patents, made
Viscount Doncaster, in July, 1618. and married two wives; the first was Honora,
daughter and sole heir of Edward Lord Denny of Waltham, and had issue. His
second wife was Lady Luce, second daughter of Henry Percy Earl of
Northumberland, by whom he had issue.

Et portoit, d'argent trois escuchons de gueulles. FINIS.
Errors published in Print, to the great prejudice of those they concern.
MAry Queen of France, Sister of King Henry the eight, had issue by Charles
Brandon Duke of Suffolk, her Husband, two sons; Henry Brandon Duke of
Suffolk, and Charles a second son. Milles page 543. HEnry Brandon Duke of
Suffolk, and Charles his brother, were the sons of Katherine Willoughby
Duchess of Suffolk, and not the sons of Marie the French Queen, as Milles
has. THomas Gray, Marquess Dorset, begot of Margaret Wootton his wife two
Sons; Sir John Gray Knight, who married Marie, Daughter of Anthony Brown,
Viscount Montague, and Henry Gray, Baron of Groby. HEre Henry Gray Baron of
Groby, is made to be brother to John his own Father. And Mary Brown, is also
made to be daughter to her own brother. Mil. page 408. WIlliam de Romera,
Earl of Lincoln, married Auice, daughter of Richard de Riparijs, and had issue
William de Romara who married the daughter of Stephen Earl of Albemarle. Here
the father is made to marry his sons wife, and the son his own mother,
which the foundation of the Abbey of Reuesby does approve. Mil. 936. and 937.
John Courtney, begot of Elianor daughter of Hugh Spencer Earl of Winchester
Hugh Courtney, whom King Edw. the third made Earl of Devonshire. Here
Eleanor Spencer, is made to be mother to Hugh Earl of Devonshire, when as in
truth she was his wife. Milles page 459. IN the year 1546. the Duke of
Norfolk and his son the Earl of Surrey, were suddenly apprehended, and sent
to the Tower of London, for bearing in their Escochion certain Arms, which
were pretended only to belong unto the King, which Arms notwithstanding, they
and their Ancestors time out of mind had borne, without check or
controulement. For this offense was the said Earl endited, etc. HAd not this
Writer been a little too bold and busy, in matters of Arms and Herauldry
(wherein he has showed himself very ignorant) he would never have put this
in print. I wish him therefore to know, that the honorable family of the
Howards he speaks of, may, and do lawfully bear, and quarter, the Arms of
Thomas of Brotherton the Kings son; but not the king of Engla^ds Arms.
Therefore I would have M. Martyn to know, that those Arms he mentions, did
want a lambell for the difference; the neglect whereof, made it the Kings
Arms, and not Tho: of Brothertons. HEnry Stafford (son of Humfrey the sixth
Earl of Stafford, and Anne Neuil his wife) married Margaret Countess of
Richmond, mother to King Henry the seventh. THey that are desirous to find this
Henry Stafford, and his marriage with Margaret Countess of Richmond mother to
king Henry the 7. must go into Purgatory for it; for in heaven, nor upon the
earth it is not to be found Mill. page 433. EDward Fynes, Lord Clynton created
Earl of Lincoln, 1572. THere was never any of the family or name of Fynes
Earl of Lincoln, to this time, 1618. But the truth is, there was one Edw:
Clynton, that was created Earl of Lincoln, in the year 1572. which I take to
be the person he means. Henry Fynes, Earl of Lincoln. Mil. page 950 and
952. WIlliam, Brother of Malcolm king of Scotts, married Ermingard, Daughter of
Richard de Beaumont, at Woodstocke in the Kings Chapel, the 33. year of King
Henry the second, and died in the year 1124. the 27 year of his age THis
William is made to marry this Ermingard his wife at Woodstocke, 62. years
after he was dead: For the 33. of King Henry the second, is 1186. and the year
of his death, as he says, is 1124. Milles page 909. KIng John left behind him
four sons, viz: Henry who succeeded him, Richard who was elected K of the
Romans; William of Valence, and Guido Disnay: and three daughters, the second
was married to William Marshal, Earl of Worcester, etc. KIng John had but two
sons, and none named William of Valence, or Guy de Disnay, for they were the
sons of Hugh le Brun, Earl of the Marches of Aquitaine, and not king John's;
and that William Marshal was earl of Worcester is as untrue as the other; for
he was only Earl of Penbroke, and not of Worcester. Martyn, page 59, 60.
RObert de Bellemont, Earl of Mellent, married Matild, daughter and one of the
heirs of Reginald Earl of Cornwall, son of King John. Mills page 830. FRom the
beginning of the reign of King Henry the first, to King John, was 98. years,
and so far wide is this Author from the truth. For this Reginald he mentions,
was base son of King Henry the first, and not of King John. LEttice daughter
of sir Frances Knols, was widow of Robert Earl of Essex. THis Lettice, is
made to be Wife to her own son. Mil. page 843. HVgh de Audley, youngest
Son of James Audley, and of Adela Longspee. THis Hugh de Audley, was not the
son of James Audley, and of Adela Longspee. But the son of Nicholas Audley,
and Katherine Giffard his wife. Milles page 378. MIchaell de la Pole (son and
heir of Michaell, and Katherine Stafford) married Elizabeth, daughter of
Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norffolk, and had issue three daughters; Isabell, wife
to the Lord Morley, Katherine a Nun, and Elizabeth Countess of Kendall. THis
Michael de la Pole, whom he says had issue 3. Daughters, dyed at Egencourt
field in France, 1415. without any issue at all. And this Isabell, Katherine,
and Elizabeth, Countess of Kendall, were his three sisters, both by Father and
Mother, and not his daughters. Mil. page 535. THomas Earl of Arundell, married
Constance, Daughter of Edmond of Langley, Duke of York, and had issue, Anne
married to Hugh de Audley, who had isvue James. THis Thomas Earl of Arundel,
never had any such Daughter, named Anne, but dyed the third of King Henry the
fifth, without any issue at all. Neither was there ever any such Hugh Audley,
that ever married any such Woman. Mil. page 347. RObert, base son of King
Henry the first, was the first Earl of Gloucester, and married Mabell Daughter
of Robert Fitz Hamon, and Sibel his Wife, daughter of Robert de Belesmo, Earl
of Shrewsbury. RObert Fitz-Haman, never married any Sibill, daughter of Robert
de Belesmo. For Robert de Belesmo had his eyes put out, and dyed in the Castle
of Kardiffe in Wales, without any issue: And for Mabell the daughter of Robert
Fitz-Hamon, she never married Nigell Lord Mowbray, for that Mabell he married,
was daughter and coheyre of William Fitz Patrich, Earl of Salisbury, who had
given her in Marriage, the Manor of Bansted in Surrey, as is manifested by the
said Grant. After this Roberts death, Mabell his Wife, married Nigell, Lord and
Baron of Mowbray. Milles, page 359 ISabell, daughter of Gilbert de Clare, Earl
of Hertford, married William L. Bruise of Gower in Wales. THis Isabell, married
Robert Brus of Annanderdale in Scotland, and not William Bruise of Wales, and so
both the man, and the matter, quite mistaken. Milles page 369. ISabel daughter
of William king of Scots married Robert Lord Ros of Hamlake, Father of Robert
Lord Ros, father of William Lord Ros, Competitor for the crown of Scotland.
RObert Lord Ros, that married Isabell daughter of William King of Scots, had
issue William L. Ros, who had issue, Robert Lord Ros of Hamlake, Father of
another William, that was one of the Competitors for the Crown of Scotland. So
ye the first William L. Ros is quite left out, and by that means the second
Robert is left without a father. Mil. page 507. RObert de Valonijs, Lord of
Orford married Cicely, sister of William Blound, and had issue Cicely de
Valoniis wife to Robert Vfford, steward of the household to King Edward the
second. RObert de Valoniis, which married the Sister of William Blound, had
issue a son Robert, who was Father of Cicely de Valoniis wife to Robert
Vfford: So that, the right Father of Cicely Valonijs that married Robert Vfford
is quite left out, and not once mentioned, and Robert de Valonijs and Cicely
Blound, who was her Grandfather and Grand mother, made to be her father and
mother. Milles, page 528. MArgaret, daughter of Sir John Norwich Knight, and
sister and heir of Thomas Norwich, was wife to Robert Vfford Earl of
Suffolk. THis Margaret, was Sister of Sir Walter Norwich Knight, and Aunt and
heir to John Norwich, son of the said Sir Walter. So that this descent, is
out of joint, and greatly mistaken. Mil. page 529. RIchard Plantaginet, son
of King John, was created Earl of Cornwall in the year 1227. and died at
Barkhamsted, being very old, in the year 1572. NOw surely, I have not read of
any so old since Christ's time. For, by this account of 1227. and 1572. this
Richard lived after his being Earl, 345. years. And then was he a very old
man indeed. Mil. page 552. RRobert Sackuile, eldest son of Thomas, was after
his Father, Earl of Dorset, by Lady Margaret Howard, sole Daughter of Thomas
Duke of Norfolk. HOw this Robert Sackuile, could be Earl of Dorset, by Lady
Margaret Howard his Wife, is more then by my Books I can find; considering his
father was created Earl of Dorset, to him and his heirs male. Mil. page 413.
ALan (sur-named the red) or Fergant, Earl of little Britain, married the
daughter of Fulke Rechin Earl of Anioy; and had issue, Howell disinherited,
Bertha married to Eudo Earl of Porhet, and Constance wife to Geffrey son of
Iuhell. HEre is Howell, Bertha, and Constance, made to be Children to Alan
Fargant, when as they were the children of Conanle Gross Earl of Britain,
and so they fathered upon a wrong father. Milles page 588, 589. WIlliam the
first Earl Warren and Surrey, married Gundred, daughter of William Conqueror,
and had issue William and Reginald, who married Adeliza, Lady of Wirmingay in
Norfolk, and had issue William de Warren. WIlliam the second Earl Warren and
Surrey, son of William the first, married Isabel, daughter of Hugh the great
Earl of Vermandois, and had issue, William the third Earl Warren, and
Reginald de Warren, who married Adeliza daughter of William de Wormegay, and
had issue, William. REginald de Warren, mentioned in this place, is made to
have two several Fathers and Mothers, as by this aforesaid it may appear; but
the first is false. His true Father was William the second Earl Warren, and
his mother was Isabel, Sister of Rafe de Peronne, Earl of Vermandois. Mil.
page 616, 617, 618, 619. WIlliam the third, Earl of Arundell and Sussex,
married Mabel, sister and Coheire of Hugh Meschines, surnamed Blundeuile, the
last Earl of Chester of that Family. THere was never any Hugh Meschines Earl
of Chester (surnamed Blundeuile) nor any Mabell his Sister. But the truth is,
there was a Mabell, which was Sister and Co-heire of Randoll Blundeuile Earl
of Chester. Mil. page 642, 643. ISabell, second Sister and Co-heyre of Hugh
Earl of Arundell and Sussex, married John Fitz Alan, Lord of Clun and
Oswaldtre; by whose right, the Castle and honor of Arundell came to the Fitz
Alans. Their son John Fitz Alan, was Father of Richard first Earl of Arundel
of that Family. IT is true, that this Isabell married John Fitz Alan, and had
issue John, who by Mauld Verdon his wife, had issue a third John, who married
Isabell Mortimer, and had issue Richard the first Earl of Arundel, which
third John is omitted, and so the said Richards Grandfather made to be his
father. Mil. page 643. HEnry Percy the ninth Earl of Northumberland, Lord
Percy, Lucy, Poynings, Fitz-Payne, and Brian, and in his mothers right, Lord
Latymer. HOw this Henry Earl of Northumberland, can be Lord Latymer in right of
his Mother, is more then by my reading I could ever find any proof for.
Milles page 734. For I take it, that all Daughters and heyrs of a Baron by Writ
(be they never so many) are all interessed alike by their birth, to their
Fathers Dignity; which Dignity by no means can be divided, and therefore
lost (when there is more Daughters then one) and to reuert to the King from
whence it came, to bestow upon which daughter he will, or other stranger,
whomsoever it shall please him. LOra daughter of William Bruise Baron of
Brecknocke, wife unto Robert Fitz Pernell Earl of Leicester, and Sister of
that William Bruise, who was commonly called Earl of Brember Castle in Sussex,
and Lord of Brecknock and Abergauenny, she left sieve daughters her heirs,
Isabel, Ela, Mauld, Eua, and Eleanor. IT is true that this Lora did marry
Robert Fitz Pernel, Earl of Leicester. But that she had five daughters, is
very untrue: for the said Robert died without issue. And those five Daughters
here mentioned, were the Daughters of William Lord Bruise of Brecknocke,
begotten of Eua his Wife, one of the daughters of William Marshall, the elder
Earl of Penbrooke. So that this Lora was their great Aunt, and not their
mother. Mil. page 836. WIlliam de Clynton, youngest son of John de Clynton,
and of Ida his wife, daughter and one of the heirs of William de Oding sells
Baron of Marstoke, was by King Edward the third created Earl of Huntington,
1337. THis William de Clynton, Earl of Huntington here mentioned, was son of
John Lord Clynton and Mauld Beaumont, and Grandchild to another John and Idona.
Mil. page 916. Now he has left out John L. Clynton, and Mauld Beaumont the
said Williams right father and mother, and made him son to his Grandfather and
Grand mother Idona. John Hastings, son and heir of Lawrence, was the second
Earl of Penbroke, who at his death, left Anne Maney his wife great with child
of John Hastings the third Earl of Penbroke. Mil. page 1098. HOw could
Margaret, daughter of King Edward the third, be mother of John Hastings the
third Earl of Penbroke, when as at the said John's death, he says; that Anne
Manny his Fathers second wife was great with Child of him, except he prove
that he had two Mothers. John Hastings third Earl of Penbroke was son of John
Hastings, second Earl of Penbroke, begotten of his first wife Margaret,
daughter of King Edward the third Milles page 1099.

A Table of the Several Catalogues contained in this Book.
ARundell. 1 Albemarle. 10 Anguish. 15 Atholl. 17 Buckingham. 18 Bedford. 21
Britain and Richmond. 25 Bath. 35 Bridge-water. 36 Boughan. 37 Chester. 37
Cornwall. 44 Carlisle, 51 Cumberland. 53 Cambridge. 54 Devonshire. 56 Derby. 65
Dorset. 73 Essex. 78 Excester 85 Ewe or Augie. 88 Ferrars. 65 Gloucester. 90
Hartford 90 Hereford. 99 Huntington 105 Kent. 114 Kendall. 121 Lincoln. 122
Lancaster 127 Leicester. 131 March. 137 Mountague. 140 Mountgomery. 142
Northumberland. 142 Norfolk. 151 Northampton. 161 Nottingham. 165 Oxford. 169
Penbroke. 177 Rutland. 189 Richmond and Britain. 25 Rivers. 193 Shrewsbury.
194 Salisbury. 200 Suffolk. 208 Somerset. 213 Stafford. 219 Southampton. 223
Sussex. 225 Surrey. 230 Tankeruile. 239 Viscounts. 269 Winchester. 239
Worcester. 244 Wiltshire 248 Westmerland. 252 Warwick. 255 York. 265
Faults escaped in Printing, to be Corrected thus.
IN Edward the 1. Children by his first wife, read Elianor borne the 50. year
of her Grandfathers Reign. In Edw. 1. Children by his second wife, line 20.
read Edward the third, for Edward the fourth. In Edward the seconds issue,
read John of Eltham died in Anno, 1334. for 1354. In Henry the 8. base
children, read Henry Fitz-Roy created Earl of Nottingham at seven years of
age.
Page 13. line 33. read Dunster, for Dunsteth. Page 18. line 9. read before
He married; (by the name of Earl of Buckingha^.) Page 20. line 12. read Vrsula
for Vrsuld. Page 21. line 22. read Apulia, for Turkey. Page 22. line 39. read
Sir Thomas Fitz-Williams, Father of William. Page 23. line 1. read Katherine
for Margaret. Ibid. line 4. read 31. for 13. Page 24. line 7. read
Hampton Court, for the Tower of London. Ibid. line 10. read third for second.
Ibid. line 11. read second for third. Ibid. line last, read has issue, for
had no issue. Page 29. line 17. read Euerard for Euerus. Page 34. line 33.
read Tarbolton, for Trebant. Page 36. line 6. read Edward Lord Fitz-Walter,
for Richard. Ibidem. The Earl of Bridgwaters Arms, vide, 276. Page 37. line
23. read Aurenches for Aurenges. Ibid. line 29. read Rufus for Ruphus. Page
38. line 18. read Morcar, for Mocar. Page 39. line 11. read Robert Quincy,
son of Sayre Earl of Winchester. Page 47 line 23. read Gauershith, for
Gauershife. Page 48. line 22. read Wenselaus for Veselanus. Page 52. line 16.
read Dreux for Drux. In the beginning of the Earls of Clare, line 1. read
Richard son of Gilbert, for Richard Fitz-Gilbert. Ibid. line 11. read 1131,
for 1331. Ibid. leaf 2. line 26. read Gilbert for John. Ibid. at Rich. the
second Earl of Gloucester, line 8. read Beuis for Benet. Ibid. last page, line
18. read Kyme for Kent. Page 54. read Edward Neuill for Henry Neuill. Page
62. line 11. read Grandchilde for Grandfather. Page 63. line 7. read
Somersetshire for Devonshire. Page 64, line 17. read Sir William Maynard, for
Sir Henry. Page 71. line 19. leave out, Einsham in Oxford. Page 73, line 3.
read 217. for 2171. Page 74, line 16. read Edmond Beauford, son of John
Beauford.
Errata:
Page 79* line 29. read for Geffrey Fitz-Piers Arms, Et portoit, escartelle
d'or et de gueulles au bordure vaire. Page 83. line 29. read Sir Nicholas
Tufton, for Sir John. Page 83, line 32. In Parr, read 36, for 25. Ibid. line
30. read Baron Parr of Kendall. Page 90. line 20. read Baieux for Bayon. Page
98. line 21. read, was made Baron Seymour, and Duke, etc. Page 99, line 11.
read son of Osberne. Page 104. for Henry Plantagenets Arms, read Seem de
France escartelle D'engleterre au lambell d'hermines. Page 109, line 7. read,
1219. (as Sir Robert Cotton says.) Page 117, line 2. read Sir Thomas Holland,
son of Sir Robert. Page 120, line 16, read Sir Henry Gray second son, for
third. Page 122, line 34, read 1151, for 111. Page 136, line 19, read 1588.
for 1586. Page 150. line 25, read Sir Thomas Stanley, for Sir Edward. Ibid.
line 42. add Elianor Percy, wife to Sir William Herbert. Page 153, line 15,
read partition, for petition. Page 176. line 14. read Elizabeth for Anne.
Ibid. line 16. read 18. Earl of Oxford, for 19. Page 187, line the last,
read du trois lions, for lions. Page 190. line first, read Edmond Plantagenet
third son, for son and heir. Ibid. line 1. read Edmond Plantagenet third son
of Richard Duke of York. Page 191. line 9. leave out Elianor married to John
Bourchier. Page 192. line 16. read Frances for Mary. Page 199, line last,
read 1616, for 1618. Page 202. line 24. read 11. for 9. Page 210. line 4.
read had issue, for had no issue. Page 212, line 23. read Harington, for
Huntington. Page 213. line 6. leave out Queen Elizabeth. Page 214. line 8.
read Hugh for Henry Vere. Page 215. line 23. read, which was by King Henry 8.
to The Bullen, as in pa. 250 Page 223. line 21. leave out (heir.) Ibid. line
21. read sister, for sister and heir. Page 233, line 11. read 38, for 28.
Page, 234, line 12. read 1347, for 1357. Page 242. line 33. read M. 11. for M.
2. Page 263. line 8. read Henry Lord Mountague. Ibid. line the last, read
1499, for 1599. Page 265. line 3. read Chancellor, for Treasurer.
FINIS.

