A Declaration unto the Lords, of the Jews desire these fiftene years for
Ebrew explication of our Greek Gospel: hindered by a brase of wicked selly
D.D.: whereof the God of Jews and Gentiles has paid the one: and will pay the
other: when he has detected who he is.



1611.

I heard, R. H. of a most honorable bent of the K. for clearing in Ebrew and
Grek by the Apoc. all the Bible: and my desire that way is stird by news from
Graecia. One Edw. Crain a shipper of N. Castle: was long in Thrace: where
Jews daily rejoiced of our knowledge in the law, hoping to learn from us
salvation. And one came with him to Venice, for Leyden, hearing (by the Post of
Collen belike) that I meant stay there. He would be fully instructed of me: that
he might return to save his nation. And I whole fiften years craved allowance
to show Christ through the Bible. But Satan hindered all hitherto. Now I hope
the sting in the Dragons tail shall be pluck up: that no libellers crew sting
more. They joy that I show Jesus not Joseph son to Ely: Luc. 3. Iechonias,
Matthew. 1. only by Kings phrase father to Salathiel, by all Rabbines upon Ier.
22. and Parted Macedoniens the fourth Kingdom in Daniel: and Daniels 490.
years seven times the captivity space, begone at the Angels message and drawn
exactly unto our Lords death. Even by Aben Ezra their own Doctor: forced to
overthrow their own Thalmudiques all: by clear ending of Moses. Also this was
acceptable, that I showed Ps. 16. That* Christ said, that thou will not leave
me to the Grave till the body see corruption. and so Act. 2. and Creed:
crucified dead and buried: and went to God: where (...) has heaven for the
Godly, and Gehenna for the wicked: both on high. They thought we in England
held a going to Hell. As Chrysologus now 1200. years: and Rome confuted by
Isaac Ben Arama. fol. 205. that so our Gospel could not be from God: if it
taught that the Fathers could mis of Paradise hence or Messiah. The very Deuels
and Porphyrie their Angel in Eusebius. Apod. Euang. 3. say: our Lords soul was
the Godliest of all souls: and the soul of the godly goes into the soil of
heaven: where Jesus and all just be. This much the very Deuels confessed: But
our translation Ps. 16. thou will not leave my soul in Hell, and the same Act.
2. is more shameless then any part of the Alkoran. And a sixth poinct cheared the
text of the holy Grek: where Beza 60. years checked the text and milliones after
him. Hence they thought God never gave it. For as in the course of nature God
preserves all his creatures and all the letters of the Law: so he would have
kept every letter of the New Testament if he gave it. But before me none
defended the general pureness and eloquence to be from God. So long they
staggered: But now reioiced vncredibly. Five Hebrew little works the most
Eloquent Rabbin of all the world, as prage censured, Rabbi Ruben sent into
England for me. Beside that which I printed to the delight of all Christendom:
But the libellers crew that libelled I forged the first of six: bezelled them
that poor Ruben died in imperfect hope. A copy of one a merchand has in
Ingland. And the Turkey merchants might find who had them. I would request the K.
to try who were the Atheistes that durst so deal to hinder the glory of
Christendom: and salvation of Abraham's sons. I have lately complained to
your Lordships a little: But I reserve this to mine own complaint to his sacred
Majesty. To whom I have to show the original of Abraham Rubens Epistle
printed: for a memorial against them that libelled I forged it. The one died
horribly. Men may mark the others end. I hasten home to instruct the K. and Pr.
if it please them in few hours in all the Bible: and grounds of Divinity
study. And then I may detect the barbarous atheism and brainsick profanesse of
the libellers, scoffing the scottish mist and brettish nation, as the mate would
scoph: for these poinctes: That he turns Atheanly, for the Popes use, our
Lords words in (...) to damn heathen Governors of tyranny. Where our L.
Prove. 8. tells that by him Princes decree right. But he would teach that our
Lord taught against Caesar: to be gilti by Humane Laws. And for Grek in (...)
he is to be accused of extreme blindenes, twelve times the 70. have the word:
but the Ebrew answerable never signifies tyranny: and old Heathen never use
it. So his raving is against the co^cent of Scripture, which God gave: I did
but show: and his denying Messiah to be Christ our Lord in M. Lively, upon
Dan. 9. and time of his baptism or death: which ends Moses, to be plain in
prophecy: and his assertion that Sacrifice was Lawful in Emperor Vespasians
dayesi: this crossing of all salvation worse then Machumedean shall be objected:
and his Lunatique scoffing of the conclusion of the most famous Syllogism of
Archb. whit and B. Winton, concluding vnvincibly that in the Creed to descend
to Hell is to go up to heaven: this shall be urged to disgrade him: or to send
him to Bishop the wild in Virginia. And whereas he bestows: the term Ass on
me: The K. may set him to dispute whether the libeller or I shall bear that
name. If it please the K. to try my vein: if in 24. sermons I make not his
court better in all the Bible, and rules of Divinity: then the libeller will
ever be: I will be greved at no disgrace. I stay to hear of the Jew sent from
15. years zeal of his folk: who give me such words, all, for hebrew
eloquence, and the most, for perpetual orthodoxie, that would make Bar Lo to
burst their panches for envy. Yet if the wind serve I will hasten to salute his
M. and will take order to have the Jew sent to England after leave that he may
come. being yet unbaptized. I wish him to hear before the King all the Bible
in one Hebrew Sermon: and then Baptized.

Your Lordships most Humble H. BROVGHTON.


