The second part of the Merchants Daughter of Bristow.
To the tune of the Maidens Joy.
WElcome sweet Maudlin from the sea,
where bitter storms and cruel tempests did arise:
The pleasant banks of Italy,
We may behold with joyful eyes.
Thanks gentle master then quoth she,
A faithful friend in all my sorows thou have been
If fortune once does smile on me,
My thankful heart shall well be seen.
Blessed be the land that feeds my Love,
Blessed be that place whereas he does abide,
No travel will I stick to prove:
Whereby my good will may be tried.
Now will I walk with joyful heart,
to view the town whereas my darling does remain
And seek him out in every part,
Until I do his sight attain.
And I quoth he will not forsake,
Sweet M. in all her journeys up and down
In wealth and woe thy part I Will take,
And bring thee safe to Padua town.
And after many weary steps,
In Padua they safe arrived at the last,
For very joy her heart it leapes,
She thinks not on her perils past.
But now alas behold the luck,
Her own true love in woeful prison does she find,
Which did her heart in pieces pluck,
And greeude her gentle mind.
Condemnd he was to die alas,
Except he would his faith and his religion turn:
But rather then he would go to mass,
In fiery flames he vowed to burn.
Now does fair Maudlin weep and wail
her joy is changd to weeping sorrow grief and care
but nothing can her plaints prevail,
For death alone must be his share.
She walks under the prison walls,
where her true love does ly and languish in distress
Most woefully for food he calls,
When hunger did his heart oppress.
He sighs and sobs and makes great moan
farwell said he sweet England now for ever more
and al my friends yt have me known
In Bristow town with wealth and store.
But most of al farewell quoth he,
My own true love sweet M. whom I left behind
For never more I shall thee see,
Woe to thy father most unkind.
How well were I if thou wast here
with thy fair handsto close up both these wretched eyes
My torments easy would appear,
My soul with joy should scale the skies.
When M. heard her lovers moan,
her eyes with tears, her heart with sorrow filled was,
To speak with him no means was known
Such grievous (...) on him did pass.
Then cast she off her Ladies attire,
A maidens weed upon her back she seemly set
To the judges house she did enquire,
And there she did a service get.
She did her duty there so well,
And eke so prudently her self she did behave
With her in love her master fell,
His servants favor he does crave.
Maudlin quoth he my hearts delight,
To whom my heart in firm affections tide,
Breed not my death through thy dispight,
A faithful friend I will be tried.
Grant me thy love fair maid quoth he,
and at my hands desire what thou can devise,
And I will grant it unto thee,
Whereby thy credit may arise.
O sir she said how blessed am I,
With such a kind and gentle master for to meet,
I will not your request deny,
So you will grant what I do seek,
I have a brother sir she said,
For his religion is now condemnde to die
In loathsome prison he is laid,
Oppressed with care and misery.
Grant me my brothers life she said,
And to you my love and liking ^ will give
That may not be quoth he fair maid,
Except he turn he may not live.
An English Friar there is she said,
Of learning great, and of a passing pure life
Let him be to my brother sent,
And he will finish soon the strife.
Her master granted this request,
The mariner in Friars weed she does array
And to her love that lay distressed,
She does a letter straightway convey.
When he had read her gentle lines,
His heavy heart was ravished with inward joy
Where now she was full well he finds
The friar likewise was not coy.
But did declare to him at large,
the enterprise his love for him had taken in hand
The yongman did the friar charge,
His love should straight depart the land.
Here is no place for her he said,
but woeful death and danger of her harmles life,
Professing truth I was betrayed,
And freareful flames must end our strife.
For ere I will my faith deny,
And swear my self to follow damnde antichrist,
I Will yield my body for to die,
To live in heaven with the highest.
O sir the gentle friar said,
For your sweet love, recant and save your wished life
A woeful match quoth he is made,
Where Christ is lost to win a wife.
When she had wroght al means she might
to save her friend and that she saw it would not be
Then of the judge she claimd her right
To die the death as well as he.
For look what faith he does profess,
in that same faith be sure that I will live and die
Then ease us both in our distress,
Let us not live in misery.
When no persuasion would prevail,
Nor change her mind in any thing that she had said
she was with him co^demnd to die
And for them both one fire made.
And arm in arm most joyfully,
these lovers twain unto the fire then did go
The mariners most faithfully,
Were likewise partners of their woe.
But when the judges understood,
the faithful frindship in them all that did remain
They saude their lives, and afterward,
To England sent them home again.
Now was their sorrows turnde to joy,
and faithful lovers had now their hearts desire
their pains so well they did employ,
God granted what they did require.
And when they were in England come,
And to merry Bristow arrived at the last,
Great joy there was of al and some,
that heard the dangers they had past.
Her father he was dead God wot,
And eke her mother was joyful of her sight
their wishes she denied not,
But wedded them with hearts delight.
Her gentle master she desirde,
to be her father, and at church to give her then
It was fulfild as she requirde,
Unto the joy of all good men.
FINIS
Printed at London for William Blackwall.


