An Apology to my Lord Treasorer: touching a speech uttered unto his Lordship
by my Lord of C.
MY duty remembered to your Lordship. I received your Lordships answer: why
your Lordships performed not your promise sent unto me, by Master D. Caesar:
for that the Archbishop said: that I had written a book slanderous and
erroneous. I must needs confess, that your exception is sage: while the
Archbishop is not forced to alter his words. And I might be holden dull, if
demanding recompense of twenty years travels, with the principal
approbatio^ of the best, and the best learned in the Realm, I would take my
Lords Graces speeches for a gracious recompense, and full reward: or think
such dealings honorable: or my Lord to be such a scholar, that one of my
leisure in study, should yield unto. Wherefore I must crave leave to call his
Grace into judgment. And your Honors shall be my judges: I will seek no
better. Thus I plead: His Grace denied to my agent, that he said, I had
written erroneous: but said, that he said, I had written to the Queen
untruly. So, if his Grace does not stand to his words, his testimony
cannot in any honor be my hinderance. Judge, I pray your Lordship, whether I
say true: or not. Now it remains, I answer for my writing to the Queen of
his Graces determination, whether I can defend my self or not. First, this I
hope will appear by writing: that I sent unto his Lordship (by Master
Mulcaster) a full declaration of the controversy betwixt D. R. and my self:
that determining upon so much, the strife he should end. I laid down the
controversies in three sequeles. The first was: Whether Judah was under Persia
but an hundred and thirty years, or two hundred years. Now therein seeing D.
R. and I agreed that after Zerobabel built the temple: the time to Alexander
was not an hundred years: so the time betwixt Babels fall and the Temple
building, was to be tried: whether it were two and thirty years, or 107.
years, by both falling to new particulars: That, I clear by nine and forty
thousand arguments at once. For, 49000. thousand returned, Esr. 2. and in Esra
6. the returned buylt up the Temple. D. R. must prove how many died: and if
the greater half wholly had died, or almost all, yet two, only Zorobabel and
Iosuah had been enough for me: both named returners and alive all the while.
Thus much his Grace (I trow) could not choose but see. And all Oxford will
grant that thus much ouerturneth my adversary. So reason would warrant me to
write of his Grace, that which he could not omit without eternal shame. I hope
her Majesty will not be angry with me, for speaking the best of her Archb. that
which common entendement would require any man to hold true. By this your
temporal Honors will see, that his spiritual Grace disgraceth not me: but
his own grace, the Queens Majesty, and the majesty of Gods grace: not
acknowledging his goodness: which in 49000. Jews lives, in few words burns
all Heathen Libraries. Although his Grace having received 50000. pounds of the
Church, at the least, knew not of him self, how the only life of Zorobabel,
or the only of Iosuah, of Nehemiah, of Ezra, of Mardochai, of Aggai, of
Zachari, ouerthrewe all Heathen study-glory: yet when he saw that D. R. marked
the sequel schollerlike: and was driven to invent new opinions against all
the world and reason: I hope his Grace will not plead that he saw not which
way the determination must pass: or seeing contemned his duty. And if he
do, I trust her Majesty will tell him what it is to hold the place of an
Archb. unable to perform that which is easy: that a Bachler of art would
confidently judge. And thus I hope your Lordships will not think it reason
that I should lose all that recompense, which for twenty years pains by the
Queens honor of Government should befall me: for commending one of your own
order, and near the Church: that he was not far from God herein: but
sharp-eyed, true, learned, and honorable. Truly, Sir, I thought it no great
pains to afford a man of high place good words, with all advantage of
warrant: for honoring such as her Majesty preferred, tendering the quietness of
the Church. Although in my conscience I knew that his Grace had but small
skill in difficulties about the Bible: as he shows in complaining that he
was commended. To countenance our common weal, I spoke that which his bodily
eyes saw: though not the eyes of this mind: and had three reporters from him,
to speak that commendation, which of humanity I would afford him. My
adversary D. R. affoordeth me as good words as any can bestow on any
scholar. And if I did not confess that he was the first, that hazarded his
fame to try: whether the millions of christians, that followed Jews on the
captivity books all saving Daniel: and on him followed Heathen
irreconcilable: must burn all their agreement, either with the Jews, or all
their innumerable writings after the Heathen, if I give not him this high
commendation, I should do him injury. All must confess that he showed
learning that carried an whole University six years after him: and an Archb.
to deny his own decree: and to be guilty of denying all ancient grauntes: and
common reason, for the space of the Temples building, a most famous divinity
story: and such as, of which a Church man could not with any honor be
ignorant. The Pericles that so could lighten, thunder, and mingle Graecia, as
D. R. did, must needs be holden pericles and full of glory. As I must
affoorde him all good speech: so I would have affoorded unto his Grace: but
that he does plague me for commending his learning, care of truth, and regard
of his honor.

The second sequel, which followed upon the first: or, as the vser will, the
first upon it, was for Daniels Chronicle of four hundred and ninety years.
Thus it fasteneth unto the other: If it be but four hundred and ninety years
from Daniels prayer unto our Lords death,

Judah was but an hundred and thirty years under Persia: for we both agree
upon three hundred and sixty years following, unto the eighteenth year of
Tiberius.

But, Only four hundred and ninety years are from Daniels prayer at the
Evening offering unto our Lords death: Therefore

Judah was under Persia but hundred and thirty years.



My adversary denied the assumption: for which I will tell a story how he
was brought to grant it. A modest learned man of Oxford came to me, with one
Edward Phynees, a servant of my honorable Patron, whose reast is in Paradise,
Henry the late Earl of Huntingdon: whom my pen must honor, for that he was so
deep for judgment in the chief heads of all the Bible, so sincere for
affection in the heart of Religion, that he is not like ever to be soon
ouermatched by any. But for my syllogism. A good scholar of Oxford came to be
resolved in our controversy: telling that he marked how I used mine
adversary reverently, and was no worse used by him. But said to the matter:
Our D. has turned all against you: all of all degrees. Then said I, Your
self shall turn to me against them presently: if you will speak your
conscience. God forbid (quoth he) that I should strive against the light. Then
I: Mark the narration whence my demand shall arise. Daniel prays at three
a clock: or Evening offering the nineth hour by Jews, Act. 4. when Gabriel
flees to him: and promises to teach him wisdom: and says: Seauentie
seauens of years are pared out to bring in Eternal redemption. Hereupon
follows my demand: Speak before God and his Angels, whence must the
beginning be taken: Doubtless, says he, from Daniels prayer: And where ends
it? Doubtless at our Lords death. Then said I: Commend me to your D. and tell
him from me, that when he has weighed all, he will judge that he may as well
deny all Religion, as make any other limits. Upon his speech the learned man
says in his lecture book: That by all arguments of Scripture, the time
should begin from the first of Darius or Cyrus, as I taught: and Septuaginta
septimanis co^pletis excisus est Christus. So your Lordship sees that he
grants my assumption: and the whole controversy. My Lords Grace has seen
his words in print: and may not plead ignorance. Now the D. consydering what
an infinite company of books he should condemn, all the West for two
thousand years records: and not seeing the millions of Jews, and all Heathen
in particulars to be with me, and all the Bibles frame: sought a kind of cure,
and said: Restat confirmandum per septuaginta septimanas non posse intelligi
annos quadringentos nonaginta: sed alium aliquem numerum incertum per certum.
Upon this comes a third sequel, which I was to fall into by the provocation
of D. R. his denial. A chayning of years is from Adam to Cyrus: which shows
that thence it must be propre: as no wise goldsmith begins a chain but to
make it up: and breaking off in any one place, disannulleth the use of all.
Then said he: The time is not chayned thither, from Adams fall to Babels. Upon
that I wrote a book, proving this proposition: He that denies the Scripture
to have a certain record of times from the creation to the redemption, may as
well deny that the sun has brightness. And that book I sent unto his Grace,
which he saw, and sent me great thanks: with a promise that what so ever his
word could further me, I should have it. Now your Lordship knows that
duty required him to determine, whether I was deceived or not: and to have
taught me better, if I had been deceived. And his Grace knows that I stand
resolute to defend this: that if he say it is erroneous, in an Epistle to the
Queen, he saw already a sharp reply. In which Epistle I write these
words: If it please your Majesty to cause both your Archbishops and both
Universities to determine: I dare assure your Highness, that, while the sun
shines they will not deny (seeing what proof is brought) that God has
recorded the time certeinlie from the creation to the redemption. Here had been
a place for his Grace to have foiled me, for ever: if by learning he could
show that I was deceived. But he saw that D.R. whom Oxford men think to be
not his Graces inferior, (further comparison I will relinquish) would full
quickly have tried, if learning could ouermatch the position set down. Thus by
the matter your Lordship sees what his Grace must buckle with. And whether he
forgate his determination, or three commenders of his learned censure, and
honorable speeches toward me, mistoke him: that little forces, for the Queen
to know: neither is it trauersable, or matteriall for our state. This must be
holde^ the substance of the matter: whether if his Grace deny that God has
recorded in scripture the worlds age from the creation to the redemption. I
may justly accuse him, for concluding against Christ his Religion. For every
man's heart can tell, it is good that the record were in scripture. And seeing
nothing is omitted in the perfect book which is good to be there: his Grace
should think that there it was: though he can not tell where. And although it
is made easy now to see, and soon learned: yet to clear every parcel, it
was not an easy matter. And I know a King, to whom if I had dedicated such a
travel, I should have had thanks: and so I should have had of the Queen: but
that the L. Chauncelour and his Grace both disgraced the work which neither
understood. Your Lordship promised me that you would cause his Grace to
determine the controversy, betwixt D. R. and my self. But I was sure that you
would be deceived. Likewise my Lord Keeper having seen the marrowe of all that
which concerns the bones of this strife, brought into an easy view and taste,
promised that he also would cause his Grace to determine. And I knew that he
should be no less deceived. The matter was brought past all color of strife:
and confirmed for every joint by ancient unbelieving Jews testimony, which
vnvincible truth forced to afford. And now if it please your Lordships both
to urge his Grace to lay down in writing the contradictorie to any position
of mine: then, if I make it not as easy for him to reackon all the tyles in
Lambeth, every one, as the erroures which will follow his Graces assertion:
your Lordshippes may affirm, that I have not dew regard of truth: and, but
small grace in study to mark sequelles and appendances in absurdities. This
kind of speech his G. must warrant: by a narration which may here be fit. M.
Mulcaster, who carried the declaration of D.R. his cause and mine, with a full
anatomy of the matter: returned to the right worshipful M. Peter Osborne this
message: how his G. had determined: with what honorable speeches: how he said:
that he knew my studies earnest, then twenty years, in a path untrodden since
the Apostles time: to clear the narratio^s of scripture: by time, place, and
person: wherein he that crossed me once, would be caught in a thousand
absurdities. They live yet in the family who heard him speak and do all this
well remember. Thus I thought good to defend his Graces censure even against
him self: as in my Epistle to the Queen I wrote as fearing no replier: That I
refused not to abide al disgrace, if my pains were not found true for the
story, and profitable for the quietness of the Realm. And thus your Honor may
see, that I have not written of his G. slanderous, nor of the truth
erroneous. Neither did I commend him to countenance my cause, by his authority
in learning: but to countenance her Majesty's high preferred scholar: and to
show that I envied not his lot, though he has received fifty thousand pound
more then one, whom fifty thousand think to have honored the original truth
more then he with bare latin studies could do possibly.

Your Lordships to command, HVGH BROVGHTON.


