AN EXPOSITION UPON THE LORDS Prayer, compared with the Decalogue, as it was
preached in a Sermon, at Oatelands: before the most Noble, HENRY Prince of
Wales.

Aug. 13. Anno 1603.

With a Postscript, to advertise of an error in all those that leave out the
Conclusion of the Lords Prayer.

Also, the Creed is annexed, with a short and plain explication of the
Article, commonly called: He descended to Hell.

BY HVGH BROVGHTON.

TO THE CHRISTIAN Reader Grace and Peace.
HAving in my custody (Christian Reader) a coppie of M. Broughtons Sermon on
the Lords Prayer: I found it upon perusal, to contain the Sum of all
Divinity: especially being so fitly compared with the Decalogue, which makes
the sense more heavenly, and the harmony more sweet: and being composed
together with much plainenes and brevitie, and also garnished with much
learning from the ancient Rabbis, which the New Testament allows: which
when I had well considered, I began to reason with my self, why so worthy a
work should be hid from the world, and not rather be communicated to all,
for the common good of all: especially considering that it was his continual
desire, and constant endeavor (not to hide his learning, but) to spend him
self, and his whole estate, in the service of Christ, by advancing the Gospel,
and expounding the Holy Schriptures, both the History of them, and also the
Doctrine of them.

And first, for the History of the Scriptures, he composed it, in a most
plain and profitable manner, into one short view, which he called A Consent
of Scripture: and herein he did carefully explain three necessary
Circumstances, that is to say, Time, Place and Person: without the knowledge of
which Circumstances, the History of the Bible can never rightly be understood:
and therefore with great pains, and no less learning, he made many several
Treatises, upon these three Circumstances; first, proving the truth of them by
Scripture: and secondly, in defending of that Truth, against the manifold
Errors of former Writers: and also against the manifold cavilations of sundry
late Opposers. And therefore all those that upbraide his learned pains with
the term of needless Genealogies, and unprofitable Chronology, they are
worthy to bear the burden of their own ignorance: for howsoever, they think
in their own conceit, they know much, yet in deed and in truth they might
know more, to their greater joy and comfort, if they did not despise the Holy
Rules, (I mean the aforementioned Circumstances) wherewith God has garnished his
blessed Word, as a special help to guide every wise hearted Reader in the
true understanding of the same.

And secondly, this Learned Divine of blessed memory, has also declared his
special love to the Church of God, in adding much help, for the better
understanding of the Doctrine of the Bible: although his manner was not to make
large Commonplace books: because the most Writers do employ their pains
about it: therefore he thought it more necessary to employ himself, in giving
Rules for the true understanding of the Scriptures, and for the right
expounding of some Common places, wherein many Writers do not agree, because
the scope of the Scriptures is not rightly understood: and therefore he has
given us warning, how to understand many Common places: as about
Predestination, and the Sufferings of Christ: and about the Article, commonly
called Christ's Descent into Hell: etc. Also he speaks much, and to great
light, upon the mystery of the Holy Trinity, and of the Incarnation and
Resurrection of Christ: as also of the Fall of Man, and of the great mystery
of our Redemption: and of many other weighty points: as appears in this
ensuing Treatise: and in many other of his Works: as in Job, Ecclesiastes,
Daniel, and his large Commentary on the Appocalypsis: etc. Now if this be
true, as it is most evident in the aforenamed books, then it should stop the
mouths of all those, that slander his learned pains, because say they, he
teaches no Sanctification: but they do little consider, when they say so, that
the Ground of Sanctification consists in the Holy and right knowledge of the
Word of God, which must first be seated in the mind and conscience, before it
can be practiced in the life and conversation.

O but, say some, his writings are not worth the reading, because they are so
difficult and hard to understand: I answer with S. Peter, that many things are
hard to be understood in Paul's Epistles, 2 Pet. 3, 16. shall we therefore not
count them worth the reading, because they are somewhat difficult? no, no, God
requires the pains of the mind for the understa^ding of his word, for it is a
treasure hid in the ground, and therefore they must take pains to dig for it,
that will have it: so if men could but endure the pains of the mind, they
would speak more reverendly of this man's Writings: but because men love such
ease, they cannot see the drift of his Writing: and therefore well may his
great Learning lamente, because so few regard it: for it is almost sollitarie
and unknown to his own Nation, because few do know, what his learned
pains may further, which is more precious then Rubies: Yea, therefore, his
knowledge does power tears down her cheeks, because she is understood of
none. But I would to God, that some Learned man would take the pains to
contriue al his Works in to one Volume, that so his great learning might not
perish in Oblivion: but that the ages to come may have it in Record for their
help and furtherance in Divinity studies, who will doubtless reap more fruit by
them, then we do, by reason of our unthankfulness, and so the God of all peace
be with thee Christian Reader; and the Lord give thee understanding in all
things. Amen.

The wise will understand. Dan. 12.
A Sermon on the Lords Prayer, preached at Oatelands, before the most Noble
HENRY, Prince of Wales.
TO THE KINGS MAJESTY.
I Present unto your HIGHNESS, an Exposition of the L. Prayer, recorded in S.
Mat. 6. even as I spoke it for sum of matter. Many were desirous to have it
printed. And for that I thought your MAJESTY the fittest judge, for the
commodity of your people. For a Rabbin who wrote from Constantinople seven
year ago, to be taught from England, I would print it in Ebrew, if your
MAJESTY will give me leave to go to Germany, where my Library yet is; and
some works which our Printers can not set forth for want of skill and letters.
And I most humbly crave leave to go thither, and to print for truth of
Religion, all that my occasions suffer, for English, Ebrew, and Greek.

Your MAJESTY'S subject Hugh Broughton.

OUR Speech with God requires all the grace that words can afford: First,
generally of the prayer and Decalogue.
and because of our selves we have no skill that way: the Son of GOD teaches
us, what words we may safely use; and declare that the holy Spirit was out
teacher. John 1. 4 -- 9.
So we may judge by the light that God planted in our souls, when we came into
the world: by which we may try, what is light, and from God: and what is
darkness, and from Satan.

When God speaks, he speaks to the heart of all men: (...), 29
and as an hammer breaks stones, so his word makes hearts to yield: that
appears in all parts of Gods word, specially in this Form of prayer. It has
the Consent of al native light, for the open phrase; and more nerely of the
Jews Scribes for Divinity, and truly the sum of Christianity: even as the
two Tables had of old.

The Law commands all good: and here we crave (...)
: That we regard him as not resemblable by any Image, but as dwelling in light
that none can come to; nor imagine what should be like unto

These Petitions we make for those things which concern Gods honor
principally.

5.
That we have a moderate portion, and neither want in scarcity, nor abound in
superfluity, but such as serves our household: that the Officers as Fathers,
and the rest as Brethren and Children may live together without sorrow and
distres. Esai^ ^9, 2. ^. ^. 8. 9, 10.
Now, our sins make a partition between GOD and us: by Rancor, Lust, Theft,
Untruth and Avarice: therein, we crave pardon and Gods lenity, as we be soft
to such as use as amiss. And confess our own weakness under the Aegyptiacall
slaverie of Satan: and under Tyrants: such as the Jews felt by Babel, Daniel
all.
Madai, Iavan with Seleuco-lagidae; which as four Beasts made a sea of
troubles, till CHRIST brought his kingdom, power and glory over all the world.

This in sum the Lords Prayer has: and the two Tables have the same; and as
the Tables be answerable one to the other, (...)
so is our Lords prayer unto both. The Law commands all that may be known on
done: and this prayer desires full grace for so much. And as all the five
Books of Moses, Matthew. 22, 40
yea, and the Prophets, are but a Commentary upon the Law: so all the New
Testament is a Commentary upon the Lords Prayer* and both are pure as silver
tried seven times in a vessel of fined earth: Psalm 12.
wherefore we must examine what is dross here, (by our corrupterror) and
remove all such from the pure Metal, that is from God. 1 Corinthians. 3.
And we shall need fire of trial, for the Hebrews, the old Scribes and
Rabbines with their side, who have continued over the world, a great part of
them dealers with the Law, and to which tenor of speech the New Testament if
fitted; they hold the phrases all, as all the terms of the Law, no less then
we do: but they deny the power of them. Therefore they must be better
examined: and that will we do by Gods help in this sort.

First, considering the knowledge and honor of God^ next, our need and
distress: and still compare the Lords prayer with the Dealogue.

Our first speech here, Now particularly of every Petition compared with the
Decalogue.
is of GOD: how, we do acknoledge him: we say, O our Father: much try all
there must be of this world, before the pure meaning appears. The Heathen
Philosophers could say; Zeup^te^ Jupiter, the Father (...) yet they were
godless in this world. This entra^^^ to prayer [to our Father]. Is the cry of
all Gods children, and therefore they that have other Gods against Our Father.
Also the Jew says good words from holy Moses, but not (...) understood: Thou
art our Father, Isa. 63^ 10. and again: Is not he thy Father^ De^t* 3^, ^. yet
both these sorts petish for ever because they know not the Father.

Now, 1 John. 5, 7.
the first degree of Father is most holy in this sentence: There be three, the
Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and these three be one: so the Father is
relative to the SON, called the WORD, as in Prove. 30. Who went up to heaven,
and came down, who gathers the wind in his fist, who bound up the waters in
a garment: who has set the borders of the earth: what is HIS Name, and the
Name of his SON, if thou know it. Here we have Father in the highest
degree, and the SON coeternall: who with the SPIRIT aeternall, all three, one
infinite Nature created the world. They that miss of Fatherhood in this sense,
know not God: and they can not be saved.

In another sense, Father, is the ateribute of God, without distinction of
Person, as JEHOVAH (in Ebrew) and ELOHIM: which two names must be expounded,
that all three may be better understood.

ELOHIM is the first name, Genesis 1. 1.
that the Creator of all has in the Scripture: and in notation it betokens
MIGHTY, and in form a plurality; EL-HEM one mighty nature be They. They
Jew, Rabbi Bochai upon Genesis 1. confesses so much, and brings the like
mysteries from, Eccles. 1^. Remember thy CREATORS in the days of thy youth.
etc. and from Isai. 54. JEHOVAH thy MAKERS. Of old time the Scribes of Doctors
of Iehuda held the Trinity, until stubbornenesse against the Redeemer drew
them to extremity of blindness: Since, they disturb all, and they bred
Arrians. But the old Rabbis held it not strange to hear of Father, Hag. 2, 6.
Son, and Holy Spirit, in the Unity of Godhead, and in ELOHIM, EL-HEM one
mighty Nature be they.

JEHOVAH, likewise is of them held in most high and holy reverence: and where
CHRIST the great GOD says, Deuteronomy. 18. Thou shall perfect with JEHOVAH thy GOD,
he says, Matthew. 5. Ye shall be perfect even as your Father in heaven is
perfect. So we see Father to be used for JEHOVAH. Now, the term JEHOVAH must
be considered: though no tongue can tell fully the force of it; Being, and
giving the Being to all things, and ruling all in order, and performer of
promise, does it betoken. In the narration of Moses, how all the frame of the
world was made, still until the whole host of heaven and earth was finished,
the name ELOHIM only was used: But when the perfect Being had appearance, Genesis
2.
then the Creator is termed JEHOVAH ELOHIM. 1 Timothy 6. 16.
S. Paul translateth it, Who only has immortality, as Elohim, who is only
Mighty.

Eusebius has from some ancient Grecian, the sweetest Epigram, that ever was
made, which can not be referred to my knowledge, but to Jehovah, though in
Greek it can not be sounded. Thus it stands as from God speaking of himself.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Seven sounding letters praise me God the great and eternal:
The Father of all things, Esa. 40. 28.
that never is weary.
And I am the immortal viole of all things,
Which tune the Concent of the heavenly melody.
Some holy Jew that respected, the thrice holy Name JEHOVAH, seems to be the
Father of this Epigramme: (as they had of ancient time very learned men in
the Greek tongue) cited in Clemens, Eusebius, and in Anthologia.

Now by this which has been spoken, we see the term Father, the term Elehim,
and Jehovah, how they be all one.

Also that JEHOVAH is spoken of CHRIST, Isat. 6, 9. and John 12, 41. do show:
and that CHRIST is Jehovah, even the Talmud grants from Ier. 23, and again
31. I will raise unto David the Brightness the lust: and the name by which they
shall call him, is Jehovah our righteousness: so we see how the first word in
holy Prayer, and of the Decalogue, to be all one.

Here we acknowledge the true God, the Eternal of Nature and counsel: Creator
and governor of all things: and holy Justice, and unspeakable mercy: and all
truth in all (...) honors these names^ as errors and haeresies, (...)
argue their authors not to know the name of God.

Now for the term Father, in respect of Creature, we must weigh the use. The
Stars (the Angels) be called the sons of God, Job. 3. 8. When the morning
stars were glad together, and the sons of God shouted. So the Angels, which
were created with the light the first day: they are the sons of Them; the
Mighty, the Trinity. These Angels saw the frame of Meteores, and distinction
of waters, fish, fonles, and beasts, how they could not serve their turn. And
when man was made, though of the slime of the earth, yet in soul equal he was
to Angels, in wi^re to give names to Creatures. And therefore, when God gave
his Angels charge to serve man, that he should not hurt his foot against a
stone; Psalm. 1. ^4.
all should have known, that he made his Angel spirits, and his Ministers a
fla^^^ of fire. But some of them disdained to mark, how all was made for man,
and rebelled against JEHOVAH E^OU^M; and disturbed all the course of wisdom,
Genesis 1. 1^. (...). 8, 12.
and brought man to rebellion, and all the Creature subject unto groaning:
whereupon a new course is manifested; that the SON of God should take the
nature of man, to be our brother, that God might be his Father, as he is man,
and ours for him, who came to perform obedience unto death, to give life:
presently for our souls passing hence to heaven when they leave the body, as
he through the Veil of his flesh entered into the joy of the Father: and they
who stubbornly deny that, 1 Corint. 15.
can have no hope of salvation. And by his Resurrection our bodies shall arise
in the later day; al of both sots: as in our death of body al souls return to
God that gave them, to abide judgment for every hid thing good or evil.

On high, be places of light and joy, called heaven: On high, be places of
torment called Hell: the separation is large enough, that the one can not pass
to the other. The general name is common to both, THE WORLD OF SOULS, to the
Jews, who knew that all souls ascend out of this world: and HADES, or unknown
place, to heathen, who knew not any thing out of this world, but thought, there
were beyond the gates of the sun, as Homer speaks, or out of the light of
the sky, places of distinct state, garden for the godly, and Tartarus prison
for the wicked. Then Heathen took not Heaven as we do, for a place of Gods
glory, out of this world, but for some part of the starrie sky; as Justin
Martyr disputes against them. But the Scripture lifts us above the heaven of
the air, and heaven of stars, into a third heaven: unto that our Lord w^nt
from the cross: unto that S. Paul was taken up: 2 Cor. 12, 4
and all saythfull shall have a Tabernacle there, Luc. 23. 43.
when this earthly dwelling is dissolved. The Thief knew, that our Lords soul
should go hence thither as all just: and our Lord does confirm him therein.

This course the Creater took, taking our nature unto him, Romans 8, 15.
to be our brother, that we may by his spirit cry, Abba Father. In this sense
we cry Abba Father, and Elohim, and Eternal, Psalm. 65. 2.
and O thou that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come.

Israel felt by an outward blessing of deliverance from Egypt, Exodus 20, 2, 3
the spiritual deliverance from Hell, by JEHOVAH, the Eternal: which none other
could perform, that he should be their Father, and they should have no other
Elohim, mighty defender but him: and that he only should be the hearer of
their prayer. and thus the term Father, and Jehovah, and Elohim, our mighty
Judge and defender, sound one and the same thing.

We trespass deadly, when we pray to any other against the Law: Him only shall
thou serve; upon which Law, the Scribes sitting upon Moses chair, say thus: we
have been taught from age to age, that this worship is Prayer: David confirms
this, Psalm 50.
saying: Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will hear thee: and thou
shall worship me: and our Lord more expressly in this chap. Matthew. 6.
When ye pray, pray unto your Father which is in heaven. And neither the holy
Apostles ever, not the common Jews at this day, in their Synagogue, pray but
unto the Creator. The Jews know him not: yet hold the general of praying,
only to God, as the holy Doctors, Simeon, Zachary, and our Lord his Kindred in
S. Luke chap. 3. and Matthew. 1. professed openly. And as he that sacrificed unto
any, but unto God, was to be destroyed as cursed: So, the greater subduction of
honor from God, makes one more cursed. But prayer is more then sacrifice.
Therefore the giving of the greater to a Creature is more cursed.

By this, the Pseudo-Catholiques must confess they have no hope of salvation:
Matthew. 6, 7.
darkening knowledge by words will nothing help their turn: Their heart tells
them that they have small hope in God, that seek to Creatures: whereas God
dwells in light, that none can come to: and Creatures know not the heart of
man, nor how God pittieth or hardens, to show his most wise government of the
world. So they can not call upon him, whom they know not: and miss of the
true Father, as Bastards: and they miss wilfully: and grope like the blind at
noone day.

Now the term our, protests, that we will have no other Elohim, but him:
none other Patrons for our life and soul, but him, who is our Creator: by him
we came into the World: to his providence only we commit our state: his Angels
pitch their tents about us, when he commands: but not any our supplication to
them. When Abraham with his own family fought against four kings, Genes. 14.
Esai. 41.
he trusted only in God: and as God would, the Angels fought for him; not by
any prayer unto them: Neither did he pray eure unto Adam, or Henoch, whom he
knew to be in Paradise: but made God only his Judge.

On earth Civil Magistrates be Elohim: and the Angels also be so called, as
Psalm. 97, 7. Let all the Elohim worship him. But for Civil Officers, so far
they must be followed, (even the heathen) as they hold the Law of nature.

In assemblies of Gods people, 1. Corint. ^.
which may make judges of their own; it is unlawful to plead before infidels:
Moses Bxod. 18. tells that; where the Rulers must be men of religion toward
God: and also the Talmud teaches the same: and God confirms it, 1 Cor. 6.
saying, Dare any of you plead before Infidels.

But here come doubts, Deuteronomy. 1^. Ezekiel. 17. 13. 14. 15. and 21, 23.
because God says: Thou shall make unto thee, a King of thy Brethren. The
Jews held it unlawful to obey heathen: and often rebelled against oath: as did
Zedekiah against Nebucadnetzar: and Theudas and Barcosba against the Romans:
yet the Talmud taught: that when the Jews admitted once the coin of any
prince, therein they acknowledged him their governor: and our Lord confirms
that acknowledgment, Luke 2^. 2^.
upon the image and superscription of Caesar. And full often does S. Paul
teach,that obedience, Romans 13. Tit. 3. 1 Petr. 2, 13.
and S. Peter omitteth not the same doctrine: both foresaw, that as the Jews
rejected Governors, because they would judge in their own laws: so in time
Scholars would among us: pretending that Politicians in heathon studies were
not fit. But Christianity having no new matter, but the Incarnation of the
Angel of our Covenant, the Eternal king of glory, and his Resurrection:
having, I say, no new matter but that, wherein the world would staggar,
suffers not Scholars to bear such sway: but requires others, Politicia^s
always to be Bishops in their Paroches, to censure the Messengers of the
Church; who should read learnedly the Bible: (which few can do, and which
labor spends all a man's youth) And all the sage should speak upon request:
and the rest judge. In such assemblies, one day might open all the Bible: while
plain matters be only touched, and only difficulties be handled. But men love
darkness: and will have other Elohim then God wills.

And whereas God says: Thou shall not make unto thee Elohim of, gold, Elohim of
silver. The Scribes sitting in the chair of Moses truly conclude, that
Governors that buy their places, fall to be Elohim of gold and silver. And
Episcopi of Elders in policy of Gods people made by money, may no more be
honored then an Idol.

The heathen known slaves of Satan had outward obedience, till God by Civil
Policy, and Constantinus might did fell them: and so Elohim of gold may have
in Courts, but as men ha^^ of all true hearts; and men hateful unto God, as
Idols. But the true Officer is worthy of double honor: A^lo^. 1. 1.
as the Prince Theophilus to whom God, dedicated two parts of the N. Testament:
that all should follow such a Bishop, and have no Father, nor Rabbi, but God
and his Vicars: whereof Kings and Rulers are the chief Episcopi and Elders: and
the Readers of the word, which should be or rare skill: yet are superiors only
in diligence.

Al Jews towns had Ros Ielibah, an head of their council, Episcopus, Tzophe:
as Antigonus successor to Alexander Macedon, was holden Tzopheh, or Episcopus
of Asia. But none of the Jews Episcopi ruled saving for one voice; Dio. Sicul.
and so far he was Elohim. Act. Rab. Abr. Ben David in Cabala.
When Ananias went further, S. Paul gave him over to Gods eternal curse: and
he and his son Eleazar authors of Rebellion, brought Jerusalem to be Iebus
again, and trodden down, while they knew not Elohim.

And thus much for the names that warn of right knowledge of God.

For God his honor two warnings are given: Which art in heaven: and therefore by
Commath. 2. not to be fashioned by any thing in heaven or earth.
the one for the eyes, the other for the tongue: but both depend upon the
heart. Now God dwells in light, that none can come to: and would by the frame
of the world teach us of his eternal power and Godhead. But our sloth,
admiring the Creature, will worship him by that. So the stars were Heathens
gods; so the form of a man's body is the Papists: against that, CHRIST
engraved the Law in stone: Thou shall not make unto thy self any graven Image
or likeness of any thing, that is in heaven or earth, or the seas, which the
shore keeps in the lower chanel.

God requires the pains of the mind to think upon him, and to follow his
Word: and none of that course can abide Idols: neither did Idol-knights ever
admire Gods nature or love his Word. Psalm 89.
Nothing in the air, our next heaven, or among the starrie heaven, is like
unto him: but we must ascend into the third Heaven, above all this visible
world, unto an unspekable light, to think well of God: and in that light God is
invisible, and thence brings his hid Counsels into light, for them that in
mind worship him: others be Batts and Mould-warts.

And when we say, that our Father is in the third heaven, we proclaim
rejection of all that worship images, as not being the children of God. So we
here go above all eyesight: and ascend in our minds, above this visible world,
unto the world of Souls: whither all ascend, either to joy in the light of
God, in heaven, and Paradise: or to woe of darkness of Hell and Torment. All
that in light of mind will not ascend to heaven, shall ascend to the throne of
God to hear condemnation, and to have on high a place of woe for ever and ever.

In the days of Enosh men corrupted the calling upon Gods name, Genesis 4. ^6.
giving stars his glory: but the flood taught them the penalty, 1. (...).
16. 1 Pe^. ^, 19.
when their bodies became wrinkled by waters: and their spirits went up to
eternal prison. So Babel was built to the worship of stars, because men that
made their bellies their god, would, and could not with their heavy hearts
ascend the heavens, but by tongues exhorted unto Idols name, and easy
devotion: For that, God did cut them off from Adams tongue, and hope of his
life for ever: saving the few that would endure the minds pains, 2. Corin^. 5.
to search how God in Christ reconciled the world unto himself. And God so
hated the heathen, that he gave by Moses an hedge of Laws to keep Israel from
amity with them: even for the very powling the head, that they should not be
like the Arabians, as Maymony full well expounds that Law, (...)
Levit. 19. and all should still shun the garment polluted by the fleshly
minded men.

A further pains of the mind, (...)
is required for the honor of God: to sanctify his name: and the Law
forbidding to take his Name in vayn, includes that in a Commandment, Now all
Gods doctrine is called his Name: all holy speeches of him: In his LAW shall the
nations trust. Isa. 42. In his NAME, says Matthew. 12. The Attributes, ELOHIM,
JEHOVAH, EL-SHADDAI, ADONAI, ^AH, TZVR: the Mighty, the Eternal, the
All-sufficient, the Stay of the World, the Giver of life and breath, the Rock,
and such: these are abridgements of the Bible, and the Bible a Commentary upon
them. 1. Tim. 6, 1.
So, by NAME, all holy doctrine is contained: and we pray for knowledge in it;
as the Law makes all guilty, that takes his NAME in vain.

Herein stands the greatest care of true Christian Policy: how all
congregations may have many Bishops to sanctify Gods Name: to know the truth,
and to speak it with fear and care. In this stands only the joy of our
souls: and it were better for us, that we were never born, then to miss of
this: for the price is Gehenna.

While the families, that hoped in Christ were few: that one Bishop might teach
them, the Law was not written: Sem, Arphaxad, Selah, Heber, Abraham, and his
sons by Returah, (whence Job was) Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, taught theirs the
redemtion by word of mouth, and equity by the Law of nature. But when Israel
multiplied, a few suffised not to be Bishops, then a Law was written: and all
Israel forty years had leisure to learn it. And Levites were the common
Bishops in the land: as Bishop Eleazar, special one. PAKID, a man of charge,
is Episcopus in the LXX. and 1 Timoth. 3. But not Levites only were learned.
Al Paroches through the twelve Tribes had their Doctors of their own: and all
of Israel often, and no Levite: as some were only of Levites in their 48 towns
lotted to Levi: and the high Council might be all of Israel, or all of Levi,
as it should fall out. The Synagogues or Paroches had nothing to do with
sacrifice: nor had any ceremony of Levi: no cope of Linen, as Aaron, neither
linen: only one shirt, a Girdle, and a Cappe, as Levites in the Temple.
Neither might they any more imitate Aharons attire, then they might sacrifice
there.

In their Synagogues they read the Law, and all saving hand-laborers, thrice a
week from Childhood frequented Divinitie-scholes. Of them the chief were
chosen to rule, and to teach after Angelus Ecclesiae had read: or they might by
sage leave read: after reading, the chosen to rule: and to teach, called Elders
or Bishops, desired the best in esteem to speak: or, after often approbation
they might offer their payns. And this Policy, Luc. 4. and 1 Corin. 14.
allows. So reason bred this policy: and the holy Nation practiced the same
1400 years; knowing it a hard point to sanctify Gods Law: and to beware the
taking of Gods Name in vayn.

Many high poyn^s stand herein. The truth of the Texts of both Testaments: for
the pureness of Coppies, and the right helps for understanding, and the
sufficiency of Gods Word for salvation: these be the chiefest: and all
deceived kingdoms are cursed for missing herein: and the best may begin to
look better about them. And all of wealth must know, that their bent must be
to know, how to sanctify Gods name: As rash swearers so al deceived do take
Gods name in vayn. Wherefore all that are of ability, should from youth know
the Law: and all well might by skillful guides: and a kingdom of Glory must
have many glorious in it: and they be simple, that hope by bare hearing of
Sermons to become learned. As many Gentlemen spend their time to sanctify Gods
name, so all should, and the most part would, if Teachers learned before they
taught.

The effect of this makes the kingdom of heaven to be amongst us: (...), thy
will be done on earth as it is heaven:] as when the sabba^th is duly
sanctified, then Gods kingdom is advanced Command. 4.
that men should obey God in CHRIST on earth, as the Angels obey, being sent
out ministering spirits for them, that shall inherit salvation. For that, we
have one day in the Law, the seventh day, which Adam kept, and all the
Fathers, til in Egypt they forsook Good. Then they found by Manna not rayned,
that day which was the sabbath: and they are commanded to remember, and keep
that Day holy. And that day our Lord rested wholly in the grave, and so
finished the Ceremony. And his resurrection bringing light into the world,
made the day where in God said; Let there be light; as it was the first in
order, to be also the first in dignity.

In the beginning, Genesis 3. 21. Apoc. 13. ^.
the first day after Adam fell, Adam bestowed in sacrifice to meditate on
Christ his Rest: and the first day, after performance of that Rest, became the
LORDS DAY: which Angels with most comfortable joy celebrate in the Gospel: and
in which our Lord often showed himself, wherefore the Church kept it Act. 20.
and Apoc. 1. our Lord appeared unto John in Patmos, and took away the covering
from all the Bible, on that day, being called the LORDS Day. So the same
authority, which appointed Adam, the next day to his fall to Rest in hope of
Christ: appoints us the next to our Lords Rest performed most absolutely.

Adam was to study upon the Creation, which his fall brought under vanity,
and upon the hope of better Rest. And we are to joy in the day of our Light
manifested unto the world, and a plain token of the new world. So the Jews
Sabbath and ours, tend both to one and the same purpose, though the day be
altered.

And their universal consent stands from Moses plain narration, for the word
of not eating of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, and Satan's reply, and
the eating, and sentences, and loss of Paradise; that all fell the same day,
the first day of man: and accordingly at noone day, our Lord on the tree began
the Combat with Satan, and at the cool of the day went into his kingdom,
through the veil of his flesh; leaving this world, which the Latin heathen
call, Descendere ad Inferos: the Greeks, (...): the Jews to return to God,
or, to asceud. And they are barbarous babes, that know neither Latin, Creek nor
Ebrew, nor Divinity, whither just souls were to go.

The term Kingdoms, is taken in three degrees: 1. For Gods power over all: 2.
for his mercies manifestation: and 3. for the happy state of glory in heaven.
But all go by knowledge together: they which know God aright as Governor,
will embrace him as a Redeemer; and shall find him an eternal comforter. For
these degrees we pray; Deuteronomy. ^0. 12. Romans 10. 6.
but the second is most of difficulty for the mind to go up to heaven to
bring Christ down, and to go to the deep, to bring Christ from the dead: and
to dye with Christ: and to seek those things which are above: Therefore Gods
power in Christ, is by the noblest part called, the kingdom of Heaven.

And the government in the Gospel affairs to cherish and rule men in the
Church is the policy of heaven. The Jews though they, many of them, knew not
the person of Christ; yet they had and have all, that the Apostles teach: and
therefore therein no strife was in all the N. Testament: both sides held the
same mind for the old Testament: and differed not for one letter. Both held
the same Common places from Moses: and agree, saving in Traditions, and about
MESSIAH: but for government they agreed: Archysynagogus, Readers of the Law and
prophets, the qualities of a Bishop or Elder, the providing for the poor, the
manner of excommunication, and absolution, the Laws to bridle Elders from
tyranny: all these are the same in both: and reason requires so much, and will
suffer no more in effect.

And our Policy might soon come in equity nere this, if all Bishops were as
many be: and they which worst may would not be holden the Candle. A translation
by consent and study of all, and prayers from very Scripture might be sone
afforded, and unlawful, imitation of Aharons attire might be left with ease:
and these points most vex us, wherein many Bishops never made any stir.

Both equally held that the Vestments of the Temple might not come into the
synagogue; and for the Temple all were put away, when our Lord was put in
grave. So the Laws of this Kingdom be plain. But the study of the Word for
the Hebrew Testament, and the Greek Testament, as we carry our course is
insinite: yet by conference of the N. Testament with Hebrews, most easy and
pleasant. And a learned Jew would tell whom the Apostles express in all their
speachcs: so shining be the Teachers of this Kingdom.

And thus much for the Petitions: and Precepts tending directly to the
knowledge and honor of God.

Order bids to handle next, [Giue us this day our daily bread, least (...)
want we (...) against (...), and against all (...).
the things that succor all our distress: For which we pray that ability be
given us, by giving good, or forgiving ill: as the Law gives charge, so to
do. We are commanded, to honor our Father and Mother: that is to show them
all care, and performance of good. So Abraham showed Terah how the God of
glory appeared unto him; and drew him from Mesopotamia to Haran, to go for
Chanaan, to be partaker of all his good. So Moses tendered Iethro, and showed
what good he should have by joining to Israel.

Now this can not be performed between kindred, unles outward ability be
reasonable: for that, we pray for sufficient food, that neither abundance drive
us to height of mind; nor want, to anger against God: Agur the son of Iakeh,
so prayed, Pro^^ 30 Provertie or riches give me not: nourish me with bread of
fit measure for me. That very phrase the Holy Spirit translateth from the
Proverbs to this place (...) by a new framed word, plain by Comparison, with
(...) abundant, and by (...) absence, being between both, as limited by both.
Agur gives a reason of his demand, for mean wealth: saying, least I be full,
and lie, and say, who is the Lord: or least I be poor and steal: and contemn
the name of my God.

As every particular should rest in mean wealth, whole states should do the
like. Israel learned that, by the Manna, where the much diminished, and the
little sufficed. And all Iudahs policy required the same: that the rich should
help the poor: so that riches could not be great. And the Heathen Porphyri,
cited by Euscbius teaches that of the Jews policy, the content of riches
was practiced in the whole tenor of it. Yet the mistrustfull heart of man, is
wholly set upon storing up. And the Pharisees pretending contemt of the world,
loved silver notably: to whom the Parable of hospital Abraham and Lazar or
Eleazar, that made God his helper, and of the Rich in flames was propounded.
And upon this matter our Lord speaks much hereafter, in the sweetest speeches
that ever were spoken: as, Matthew. 6. Luke 12.
Store not upon the earth: but store in heaven: care not for meat, drink and
clothing: look upon the fowls, and consider the lilies, seek for the Kingdom
of heaven.

The enemies of Christ in the Talmud Ierusalemie, have this saying stolen from
our Gospel, in these words of Monabases son to King Agrippa, in abridgment
thus; The friends chide him for giving all to the poor: He said* My Fathers
stored for earth, I store for heaven: my Fathers stored where hand has stroke;
I store where hand has no stroke; my Fathers stored Mammona; I store for
souls: This says Ierusalemie stealing wit from our Gospel. 1. Tim 5, 4.
So we desire our daily food in competent sort, to recompense them, whose care
preserves us; as our Parents, and the state wherein we live.

Against this we trespass, when by pretense of Religion we overthrow civil
policy, as the Pope does, and all that holy and whit of his in part. Religion
should be so cleared, that all by twenty years of age might be eunning in all
the Bible: that every Officers should be as duty and name requires a
Bishop. One hour would utter many more direct Positions for the Bible, then
all our Bishops yet knew: if hateful dealing hindered not, and unthankful
envy. If one will, one will hazard all upon this.

Further Trespass is in Covet, in all trades: and the greatest in Students: who
commonly for errors become wealthy: men of true learning little care for wealth,
because they regard God: as Iosuah, that sought for himself no part of the
Land: and for the contrary, S. James told the Jews, how they fed
themselves, as to the day of slaughter. So the true regard of honoring Parents
and the State should define our daily bread.

And men of State are equally limited by Law: the King may not multiply
horses, not multiple money: but as all Israel trusted in God to keep their
towns, when thrice a year they went to Jerusalem: And God taught Heathen by
Pharaoh and Senacherib, not to seek destruction: so Gods favor, not horses
should be the strength of a Kingdom. The Ebrewes limit the Kings money, even
so much as pays (...) the wages for his servants: store will be a sore.

Isaiah blames Judah in Azariahs days for multiplying horses and money. And
in his last year tells of ten calamities and utter ruyn, which hastened
one after another, most vehement upon the trusters in their own strength: Se
the Concent, for 10. calamities further touching the sla^e.
Ahaz lost 120000 in one battle: Ezekiah twice felt Assure heavy: Manasseh was
in Babel prisoner; Ammon died by sword: good Josiah by an arrow: Ioachaz soon
is captive, and dead: Ioakim is buried like an Ass: Iehojachin had 37 years
imprisonment: and Zedekiah would see nothing, till he had his eyes plucked out:
And the whole nation lost their Temple, City and Land: wealth and pride, for
horses and money brought all this. So al States should rest in their daily
bread to honor the whole government in competent sort.

An other extremity is here, (...)
Contemt of due care: Idle folk and hinderers of the common good, be as
hurtful, as covetous deceitful Scholars: and should be holden as wicked as
they, and each one, and Public men chiefly, should sweat, to employ all to
the best. And hence flows that care for Colonies, for which India gives
place: And an honorable thing it is, for our solie the ends of the earth, the
possession of Christ, Psalm. 2.
to benifite others and our selves: when our Teachers be learned in troops, as
many be in deed: this course will avoid a course.

And thus much for our distres, helped by giving good. Forgiving ill, comes
after it.

The Law says: (...)
Thou shall not kill. Thou shall not commit adultery. Thou shall not steal.
Thou shall not bear false witness. Thou shall not desire, etc. For all this the
Law is spiritual: and unjust anger is guilty before the high Sanedrin: and
the Lust by sight is adultery: and deceit by sleight, as in Preachers chiefly
is theft: and all Covet in condemnation. For this we condemn all of Adam, that
they offend us, and we them: and we pardon them, considering the common
misery: and so crave pardon of God, as we pardon them. And herein we consider
the cause of our fall: for murdering hate: for adulterous desire: for thievish
sophistry, for lying falsehood, and desiring more then our own.

Outward occasions tempt our weak natures; and to God we pray, Lead us not
into tentation, but deliver us from evil.
that he would deliver us from them. God tempts no man to ill: but he
tempts all men by outward trials: Iam. 1.
and unles God help us, by Satan's whelps we will be soon caught: from him we
pray to be delivered: as in all things he is brsie: 1 Pet. 5. 1 John. 2. Iam. 4.
by reason that all in the world, Is the desire of the eye, the desire of the
flesh, and the pride of life: whence we are at war with our selves. And thus,
prayer for grace, and commandment for duty have been compared.

Now follows a conclusion of most glorious style: For this Conclusion of the
kingdom, power and glory of Christ, se the Post for, following.
For thine is the kingdom, the power and glory, for ever and ever: this
Conclusion comes most goodly, and most godly: and when we mark whence it
comes, a world of knowledge comes with it. But first we have a great Combat
for the possession of it. The Pope his Latin Translation has it not: he
disputes that it should be a trifling addition by Gregory Martyn: and his
Arabique Translation printed at Rome has it not and our Communion book (for
which our Right Reverend Fathers too much contend) has it not. And one Greek
Coppie in the French Library, cited R. Ste. had it not: what shall we then say
to it, if it be no part of the Bible, it is wicked to say, our Lord spoke it:
and by our BB. subscription it is evident that we have not a new Testament. The
sewes say for the Testament in Ierusal. Saned. A Testament that fails in
part, fails in all. Wherefore our Bishops must herein leave the Pope: and he
must looth himself.

And thus stands the Case: strong by coppies, and stronger by matter: first,
of sixteen Coppies in the French Library, cited by To. Stephen fifteen had
this clause: and reason might tell, some trifler left it out, either by the
Latin: or by not knowing why S. Luke left it out: But all of judgment know,
that abridgers in Scripture be short. And S. Luke in the blessings has but
five of the whole. And from the first Narrator, matters are to be had: as even
the Pope stands to his Latin for S. Matthew.

Besides, the Arabique written Translations, one which I have, brought lately
from the East: an other which the worthy renowned Arias Montanus lent the
learned Printer Raphelingius, these have the saying: Thine is the Kingdom, the
power, and glory, for ever and ever.

And here comes the Pope to judgment, how his Arabique Coppie should not
agree with the Greek: seeing other Coppies do: if Coppies common have that
sentence, how should his miss it. The Arabique notation is plain, and void
of schooltricks: and seeing their Translations that are abroad have this clause,
reason tells that the Greek Originals, that went over Arabia had it: as all
the usual in the West. Besides the Chaldi Ethiopian printed at Rome has this:
and the nation was large, reaching over East and South. So millions of
Original Greek Coppies in those quarters are supposed to have the same. Also
the Siriaque Translation has, Thine is the Kingdom, the Power and Glory, for
ever and ever: so millions then held it part of the New Testament: and hold the
Pope a Corrupter. And Theophilact in Greek printed at Rome 1542, has the
sentence. So by number of voices it stands as Gods word.

And better by matter; for when the four fierce beasts, Daniel 7. had taken
away the holy Jews Kingdom, One like a SON OF MAN comes in the clouds of
heaven: and goes again to the everlasting in days: and to him is given
kingdom, power, and glory over all nations. There is a plain prophecy of
the Incarnation and Ascension of our Lord: and soon after, Dani^l. 9. 24,
the year of his death is told: and withal a return from Babel, by hope in
his blood: as from Egypt by the blood of a Lamb. And so this sentence
conteyneth all the Gospel. And if God had not spoken it, Amen:] this is the
subscription to prayer^ so Israel subscribed to the law Deuteronomy 1^. 15. etc. and
5. 27. Thus Prayer and the Decalogue have been compared.
man had never thought of it. But now we see a most glorious Conclusion, and
fit for his wisdom, whom all Nations, People, and Tongues should honor. To
whom be all glory for ever. Amen.

A POSTSCRIPT. To all that wish to be heard in prayer.
An Advertisement of the Lords Prayer, wounded from the Popes Translation:
against Gods Greek, the only Anchor of our Hope.
TWO things we are to use for Religion: if we will be void of wavering: and we
should be vigilant for them: for we have been greatly deceived: and hurt by
negligence and ignorance herein.

First this, we must hold: that we have a pure Bible to every letter, when
coppies are wisely examined: though particular coppies jarre; yet always some
hold that, which reason tells the Author wrote.

The other is, that we be able to show for all that we hold, to be the Bible
against all adversaries: that the words bear the wisdom of God: and that no
man could speak to such wise purpose, as all sage will still confirm by sure
consent.

Against both these we trespass in the communion book, for the Lords Prayer, of
which we should esteem more then of all the Jewels in the world: we leave out
from the Lords Prayer in S. Matthew, as the Popes Latin Testament does, this
saying, Thine is the kingdom, the power and glory for ever and ever: being in
the Greek Original, which only is properly the New Testament: and being taken
by our Lord from Dan. 7. where his kingdom lightneth all the world: more then
the Chalcedon of Judah gave light in the chosen or right Care in Aharons
breast. (...).
The greatness of our error in both, must be weighed in Goldsmiths balances: if
we care to avoid the wrath of him, which peyseth the mountains in weight. (...)


First we betray our ground of faith, and make our selves ascoffe, to the
Jews, and Turks: the Jews hold it to be impossible for God to be a giver of
the New Testament, and not a preserver: all creatures God preserves in their
kind, and to the Jews the old Testament, that no one letter can be lost, by a
work of many a thousand eyes and hands, as a dictionarie for this purpose. And
if we cannot defend, that we have a pure New Testament: for every word in some
coppie, they will, and well may think, that we have but quicksands, for the
stay of our Religion: so the Jews would damn us. And as Arias Montanus
records, the Turks make this their ground, that the Scripture is corrupt,
and Machumed an author of incorrupt wisdom, gave them Conqnest by his skill.

But the Pope presses nearer, for thus he reasons.

If the Scripture be corrupt, the Church must judge:
But the Scripture is corrupt:
Therefore the Church must judge.
For the proof of his assumtion, even the Lords prayer is brought: a Text daily
in use, ever since the Apostles times: and if he can persuade corruption to be
therein, he may better do for other places, less in use. In his Latin
Translation this sentence is left out: and in his Arabik, power, and glory,
for ever, Amen. And we follow him and his Latin coppie still, in our Common
Prayer Book, made from his Latin Translation, and not from the Greek Original:
to make this sure against our selves, That the Church, not the word should
judge: that so often as we say the Lords Prayer, so often we should help the
Pope, for the Churches authority against the Kingdom, Power and Glory of
Christ and his Word.

Hence Gregory Martin the Popes Factor, does triumph against that sentence:
and does call it by Erasmus testimony, a trifling Addition: and well might he
be bold: against us; seeing we join with him against our selves. And if we had
once used the sentence, as S. Matthew does, and in repetition left it out, as
S. Luke does: and all abridgers in Scripture alter somewhat in speech,
according as their argument, and present scope requires: then we had neither
helped the Pope, nor hurt our selves.

In S. Matthew. chapt. 5. 6. 7. our Lord his sermon handles the Talmudique
Common place, for the kingdom of MESSIAH: (...)
upon this Law: You shall make you a King over you of your Brethren: he shows
that his kingdom is of the poor in spirit, for the meek, for the mourners,
for the hungry after justice, for the persequuted, and such: And in the Prayer
lappeth the Kingdom, from Dan. 7. where the poor Jews are defended against
the four Beasts, that come out of the Seas, and perished before our Lord his
coming in the flesh. So to this sense, the sentence was most glorious: but to
bare prayer, as the Apostles required a form, it was not easy to consider it,
without further discourse, Marc. 10. Act. 1.
for men that looked for glory on the earth: and so S. Luke omitted it:
because it was enough to be spoken once: if we had followed now the one, and
now the other, we had honored both: But now we join with the Popes Latin
Translation of man's wit and slight mayming of the Bible, and that which has no
authority against the holy Greek Original, which has the power of him, Job
26.
that framed all the World, and bewtified the heavens by his spirit.

Professed Scholars, that cannot see how they following the Pope, betray their
forts and holds to the enemy; may well be holden Batts and Mouldwarts.

The Greek Testaments, all the printed, even among Papists damn the Latin:
as that of Theophilact printed at Rome: and the Ethiopian, or Chaldean printed
there: and the Syriaque printed at Vienna and Antwerp: so the strength of
truth is invincible: but that we betray out selves to our enemy: and all the
glory of Christ his word. And thus much for the pureness of the Text, tried
against the Popes greatest hope.

Now for the other point of judgment, to discern what is more then man's wit
could breed. Here we have occasion to mark how this saying, Thine is the
kingdom, the power, and glory for ever, tells that God not man spoke it*
and that it is no trifling Addition, but a most heavenly Conclusion of him,
that in the Creation had nothing idle, (...). 1.
nor imperfect.

And here we may consider two most profitable matters: the one, the light this
saying gives to the Prophets: the other, how it perfecte^h the fitting of
prayer to the Decalogue.

All men should mark in the New Testament where the like saying were in the
old: that will bring sweet meditation. The Pharisees say, Luke. 20. 14.
This is the heir: come, let us kill him: so said the Patriarks of Joseph,
least he should rule, Genes. 37, 20
Come, let us kill him: we see the end: God turned both the evils to salvation.

Elias is termed of bad Achab (like his Father Omri) Diastrephon, a Destroyer:
so of the Scribes our Lord is called Diastrephon, Luke 23. 2^
a Destroyer: yet Elias was taken up in a fiery Chariot: and our Lords
Ascension sent fiery tongues, and a fire on the earth: and we know the end of
Achab and the Jews: and may remember a sweet harmony in Gods judgments, old
and new alike.

So S. Paul in his term, of better Resurrection, in the Machabean Martyrs,
Hebr. 11.
taking his phrase from the 12. of Daniell, teaches plainly, how that chapter
speaks of Antiochus Epihanes, and not of the end of the world: and in one
word does, being marked, rid us from errors matching the Lybian sands. We had
never dreamed of the Romans, to be a fourth Monarch there, if we had well
marked S. Paul. But as Antiochus the vile was there spoken of, in the end of
wrath, as in the little horn, chap. 8. so he not a Roman should have been
holden the little horn, chap. 7. and the last mighty Tyrant of the fourth
Beast: by such light, we may judge God the author of such words. Bur that is
most manifest in this kingly saying, Thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and
Glory for ever and ever. In Dan. chap. 7. when the fourth Beast is cast into
the fire, one like a SON of MAN comes with the clouds of heaven, and
again ascends to the everlasting, and is brought before him, and to him was
given kingdom, power, and glory, that all nations should serve him.

The very Jews to this day Iarchi and Sadaias upon that place confess
MESSIAH, He speaks as S. Luke recor^eth, the Angels (...). Luk 2 13.
to be there, The son of Man. And Sadaias notes that by, with clouds of
heaven, the Angels are meant who should attend MESSIAH coming into the world:
and the Jews might know thence, that when the Grecians were overthrown,
MESSIAH should be borne: and we see in the Gospel, that the wicked even then
talked as the godly for the time, being instructed by Daniel. Now Dan. chapt.
9. it is plainly spoken, that Messiah shall be stain: and not for himself,
but to ^o s^ale ^espasse.
finish sin, to wake expiation for iniquity, as being the most holy, in whom
the Prince of this world could find nothing, and who was a Sacrificer for our
sins. And to this day the Jews confess, that MESSIAH: NACID, or Prince, or
Leader, is the Redeemer, called Nagid, or Leader, or Commander of Nations:
Esai. 55. A Commenter that of late wrote upon Dan. 9. confesses that: But the
Incarnation and Resurrection passes flesh and blood; Roman. 10.
which says, Who can go up to heaven to bring Christ down? Or who can go
into the deep, to bring Christ from the dead.

Aben Ezra, the Jew, who 500 years ago, in the Isle Rhodes commented upon
Daniel, confesses that Gabriels 490 years began at Daniels prayer, and ended
when MESSIAH was slain: and Rambam confesses, (as Galatin us cites his words)
that the holy of holy is MESSIAH the sanctified from the sons of David. Such
helps to salvation breaking out Jews confession, as iron breaks our fire
from flint stones, by the Visions of Daniel, chapt. 7. and chapt. 9. for the
son of MAN.

Now the Conclusion of the Lords prayer does call us directly to Dan. 7. and
thence to chapt. 9. therefore it calls into mind. all that those Visions
have: so the end of the fourth Kingdom is seen to be a little before our Lord
his Incarnation: so his most glorious incarnation celebrated by Angels, so his
Ascension attended by the same: so the name MESSIAH, and death of the Just for
the unjust; and Covenant for many in the Lords supper, and year of death and
Jubilee, and ending of Moses Ceremonies; all be called into mind by this
sentence: Thine is the Kingdom power and glory, for ever and ever. And as the
morning spreads over the Mountains, and light flitteth from East to West; so
this sentence spreads over all the Doctrine of the Kingdom: Matt. 5. and 7.
that the subjects of MESSIAH are poor, and in the Sea, but builded upon the
ROCK.

And thus much for the Divine light, by which this sentence may be known, 2.
Tim. 3. 15.
to be no trifling addition, but breathed from God, and a most heavenly parcel
of the New Testament; which the Popes barbarous Latin Translation would
disannull; and others allowance of it would make to be no part of the New
Testament.

Now for the second point, how it absolveth the harmony of the Prayer and
Decalogue, the meditation will have profitable matter: but all must be
considered together.

God says: I am the Eternal thy God: Thou shall have no other Elohim (God and
judge) but me.

We pray, O our Father: to thee only we pray and fly.

God says: Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness
of any thing, etc.

We say: Isai. 40. (...)
Thou art in Heaven; in light that none can come to, nor think to what thou
can be likened.

God says: Thou shall not take the Name of the Eternal, thy God in vain.

We pray: Sanctified be thy Name.

God says: Ezech. 20, 20
Remember that thou keep holy the Saboth day: as Gods kingdoms badge.

We pray: Thy Kingdom come, Thy will be done, in earth as it is in heaven.

God says: Honor thy Father and Mother, that it may be well with thee.

We pray: Give us; all estates, our competent nourishment.

God says: Thou shall not kill. Thou shall not commit adultery. Thou shall
not steal. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor; Thou
shall not covet.

We pray: Forgive us our trespasses, as me forgive them that trespass against
us: and lead us not into hard trials, but deliver us from evil.

Now the Proem of the Decalogue, and end of the Prayer are to be viewed. Thine
is the Kingdom, the power and the glory for ever.
God says: I am the Eternal thy God; that brought thee out of the Land of
Egypt: that was with great glory: and with the blood of the Lamb* and
overthrow of Pharaoh and his Host in the Red Sea; and terror of Nations: and
plague of Amalek, (that would fight against his Cousins in Izhak) and shaking
of the earth, and flight of the Sea.

Jeremy tells, that the Deliverie from Babel, should be more glorious: and
what persuaded 49000 Jews to leave Babel, but the hope of him, which should
come with the Clouds of Heaven, and have Kingdom, power and glory for ever.

In the first year of Bel-esh-zar they saw, that Bell, and Idols bred but fire
and sorrow, and eternal Rest was in the kingdom of Christ: and they knew when
the kingdom should fall, and Cyrus deliver them, and all Nations hear of
their demanding of the way to Sion, upon the hope of the Son of Man coming
to show the Kingdom of heaven to all Nations: and to shake even the heaven of
Moses policy: so that hope turned to the worlds salvation by Christ:
wherefore that speech was worthy to be in the Lords prayer, to light our hearts
in Christ; without whom we have no right at all to say, Abba Father.

Wherefore they that deny this glorious sentence to be part of the New
Testament, or countenance the denyers, are in most heinous blame: and should
amend all that is amiss. Every blemish wherewith we stain Scripture, will
grieve the sage: especially the mayming of the prayer, which first the Holy
Ghost gave for the very syllables, to be a perpetual form in the Church. If
our sacrifice be herein blemished, God will not so willingly hear us.

I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth: and in Jesus
Christ, (...) son our Lord, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, borne of the
Virgin Marie, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crocified, dead, and buried, he
Or, [He went to God.] as all faithful go to God in soul, when they dye.
went to the World of souls: the Christ was to rise the third day to fulfill
the Scriptures: and to be the first fruits from the deall: and after sortie
days he ascended both in soul and body own to the Father. And we through his
resurrection shall at the last day ascend also in soul and body into heaven,
and ever be with the Lord.
third day he arose from the dead, and ascended into heaven, and sits at the
right hand of God the Father: from thence he shall come, to judge both the
quick and the dead. I believe in the Holy Ghost, that there is a holy
Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the forgiveness of sins, the
resurrection of the body, and life everlasting, Amen.

A direct Explanation of the Article of our Lords souls departure from this
world.
THE Holy Ghost teaches plainly, that our Lord his soul went from his body
into the hands of God, for so he says: O Father into thy hands I commend my
spirit. And so the faithful Thief believed, when he said: O Lord remember thou
me, when thou cemest in to thy Kingdom. He as the Scribes and Doctors
believed, that all faithful souls go from this world unto the joys of God,
which place they call Paradise. And that belief our Lord confirmed, saying:
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. And S. Paul speaks to the
Hebrews: that, through the veil of his flesh he went into the holy Place, into
Heaven.

Common speech called the place of the stars, Heaven: and because it is the
beauty of the visible world, they held it the fittest term to expres the
world, where God showed himself, to the blessed in joy, before his throne: And
the cursed which are there, have a place of torments; called by a borrowed
speech, Gehinnam, the Valley of Hinnom; that was properly a place near
Jerusalem, where children were brent to Molesh: and being a most miserable
place was fit to show the seat of them, which have ascended hence to Gods
throne, to abide a judgment unto eternal pains: and be tormented before God
and Lam for ever and ever.

All souls of men ascend: and none ever descended: but as death his inferior to
life, it is termed a descent: and the going from a place lower of esteem, is
called a descent: as, from Jerusalem to Samaria.

That which Christians call, the world to come, is called of the Jews in their
common writings, the world of souls: and of the Grecians of all ages, Hades:
And the Philosophers hield it a most happy thing, for a just man to go from
this World to Hades.

The Apostles Articles of belief was written in Greek, and according to the
Greek it must be expounded. There is Hades, the World of souls: where be
distinct places of joy, (for our Lord, and Abraham, and Lazarus, and all the
holy) called Heaven: and of sorrow, called Hell. The souls of the one place,
know the case of the other. And when we speak of the just, that he is gone to
Hades, we mean, that he is gone hence unto the joys of God. And so would all
Grecians in the world understand the Christians Symbolum, or badge of our
Profession.

When men speak of a horse losing life: they would say, He is dead: when of a
man, that has an immortal soul, He is dead and gone to Hades: the one for
the body, the other for the soul.

And Heathen had no greater ground of encouragement to dye for their Counttey,
then the hope of good in Hades. And hence we must note that our Lord twice
ascended: once in soul only from the Cross: the other time in body and soul
into the air, and unto the place of joy, where all glory shines.

The English, He descended into Hell; is as clean contrary to the Greek, which
is our ground herein, as black is to white: and as we take Hell, therein we
deny our Lord to be the holy one of God, and our foregoer into joy: for he has
said, that none shall pass from the damned, to Abraham. And if we be found to
have contrary rules of faith, God will judge us wicked, for professing as
Truth matter disagreable.

The mainteyners of the translation, He descended to Hell, should be forced to
revoke that, and the high scholars to translate it aright. And as holy Matrons,
many of old were prophets, and openly did good, so always they ought to know
the truth: and to require where they may, the contrary to be removed.

The wicked will be wicked still: and no wicked will understand: But the wise
will understand.
H. B.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in the printing.

Page 3. line 18. and in other place^ for power, read power. Page 11. line 4.
for (...) Page 17. line 4. for holden, read holding.


