POSITIONS OF THE WORD Hades:

THAT IT IS the general place of Souls: and holds as well the Godly which
are in Paradise, as the wicked that are in Tartarus.

WITH A CATALOGVE of our heresies, from which one word handled by a right
Grecian would have saved us.

TO the BB. of England.

BY HVGH BROVGHTON 1605.

OF HADES, THE place of Souls: diverse speches vvher it is.
1. The Greeks universally since their tongue has been in record, holding
truly in speech, that man's soul is immortal, Place the souls of the dead in
Hades. But vvher they should place it, that could not be knovve^ of the^ which
had not faith to perceive that by the word of God two worlds were made.

2. Saturn and Iapetus, sent of Iuppiter into Hades, held the other
Haemisphere. And Plato in Phaedone proves that seeing the earth is in the
mids, Hades under the earth, to our Situation, must be as far as the heavens.

3. Eustathius upon Homer calting Haden for Iapetus the half globe unseen,
shows that some place Haden beyond the Ocean. And Homer, in Ulysses journey
to Hades, places it beyond the gates of the Sun.

4. The Greek fathers follovv the Heathen in Phrase: who term the place of all
dead, (...) under the ground. Yet they know that Abraham and such were in the
Heavenly city. by Eb. XI. and that does Basilius confess upon ps. 15, and 115,
and 116. and many fathers in fragments upon the psalms joined to Athanasius.
And Athanasius in mo places then twenty shows that Hades to our L. was
Holy Adams, and holy Abraham's Lodging. And when the Porters of Hades tre^bled:
in that father, it was not for fear least the wicked should be rid from
Gehenna: but least all the faithful should arise. And Even Gehe^na in
Chrysologus is by abuse of term Abraham's Lodge: whom and the rich man Eadem
regio continebat. What vicinity is to souls in their world we cannot tell.
And as we see the sun so far off better the^ a man distant forty pases: So the
speech passes of Abraham with Eleazar that made God his strength, to the
tormented: as though there were but a dingle, valley, or great ditch betwixt
them: yet their listance may be far: though we must be spoken too: as man's
capacity holds. And, by our Lords vvarrant, Hades has Abraham no less then
the rich man. In that word Luc. 16. The Lord allows the general notio^ of
heathen Greek: That Hades is the place of all kind of Souls: Faithful and
faithles.

5. By Josephus in Photius Librarj The bosom of Abraham is in Hades: and by the
true Philo the Greek Jew of Alexandria, Abraham leaving mortality is joined to
the People of God, enjoying vncorruptio^, made equal unto Angels. And this
sentence a late Jew R. Azarias has translated into Ebrevv: as being the
Jews common opinion.

6. The learned Theodoret commends Platoes judgment for double judgments in
Hades: joy for the just: and prison for the unjust. And he accepts Platoes
terms, though Plato knevv not vvher Hades was.

7. The Jews in Zoar made from Symeon Ben Iochaj, of S. Paul's time, have
Gehenna for the wicked: and Paradise for the Godly. And no third place. And in
Aboth Rabbj Nathan Moses and all faithful are presently carried to Gods throne.
and rest under the throne. as the martyrs under the Altar. Ap. 6.

8. Our L. confirming the Jews term of Paradise, tells the thief This day
shall thou be with me in Paradise. The Jews were taught by Prophets terms
for the world to come: and those would the holy ghost confirm in the new
Testament.

9. Some Greek fathers, not knovving Paradise for souls Lodge used from the
Prophets scholars, thought it opened first to the thief: and so, Hades for the
fathers to be a degree Lovver: as does Basil on pf. 49. yet he checketh himself.

10. S. Paul disputing with Ebrevves in their plain manner, to Greeks was hard
in this Eb. XI. God providing better for us, that they without us should not
be perfected. He denied not to Abel, Enoch, Noe, Melchizedek Abraham, Isaak,
Jacob, Moses, Barac, Gedeon, Iepthe, Samson, Samuel, David his 37 worthies
strong in Battle, the Sareptane, the Sunamite, Elias and vexed prophets,
Ananias, Azarias, Misael and Daniel and the Machabees, who dyed for hope of
the better resurrection, he denied not to these all joy, that tbe Martyrs had:
But disputed how the Law made nothing perfect in doctrine: without the
Gospel manifested unto us, seen to the old fathers far off.

11. S. Paul was not a Lord of faith, but a teacher. And so he was to speak
upon grounds which his enemies could not deny. And he protests he brings
no new Principles. That Christ was to suffer, and being the first from the
dead should show Light unto the world: this was all his difference from the
Scribes. And his Epistle to the Ebrevves in every membre combateth with the
Talmudiqnes: vvhos speeches if the Greek fathers had known, Abraham's Hades
had not been thought, one thought in joy differing from his Iudaique Paradise:
vvherin he was equal to Angels.

12. Josephus Book for Abraha^s bosom in Hades, fathered upon Irenus, Iustine
Martyr, and one Caius elected Bishop of the Gentiles, in Photius, sheevveth the
Greeks common opinion: That they took Hades the General to Paradise dise and
Gehenna. But when they feared speeches to Rabbis for the thiefes Paradise,
and how the Patriarks had not perfection without us. yet Theophilact
vvrestleth well up on S. Luc. 23. with both poincts. But now 1400. years
the Greeks have staggered: Saying well and tottering upon their own sayings.

13. Without knowledge of Rabbis and Heathen Greeks, none can be a fit
Bishop to expound sou^dly the Ebrevv and the Greek Testament: and to show
Constantly that Hades is the General for Heaven and Hell.

14. The Scribes hold universally that Sheol never distinguishes Lots, but
when it is taken for a spedy death, upon wickedness: and yet then no sure
vvarrant, for to be Hell.

15. If any will be heaping Christians for Sheol to be Hell, against the most
Learned Scribes, Rambam, the greatest Thalmudique that ever was: who to. 1.
49. in a treatise of repentance svveateth to find the Metaphores for Hell, and
all notes of it but never durst touch Sheol: if any will make our Barbarous to
teach such Rabbis Ebrevv, that man making us ask off to Turks and Jews,
Labors for Machmad more then many thousands that take his pay. And such
should be bridled not honored.

Of the manyfold Haeresies which Hades, holden The world of Souls, general
to Paradise and Gehenna, does plainly, strongly, and most profitably confute. 1
The Pope thanketh GOD, who sent his S. to Hades, to bring the fathers to
Paradise: This tha^k is foolish. They were and are still in Paradise: the
joyful part of Hades. And they changed not their place, by our Lords passage.

2. Some of ours say: The Church ever held that out L. vve^t to Hell. The
Jesuits of Mentz being demanded of their faith: which is in a Greek Epistle
written by their chief Pater Nicol Serarius utterly deny that our L. vve^t to
worse Lodge then the fathers had. And no old Church went further that way
then the Popish. So our Doctrine fails, and falls. And of reformed Churches
Breame alone or with small company, holds Hell, to be named in the Creed.

3. Geneua made them selves rediculous to all Graecia: teaching imposibilities:
that our L. went to paradise: and not to Hades. As if they were men and not
Animalia.

4. The same in word deny the souls immortality. All Platoniques will tell
the^ that if the soul be immortal, it must needs go hence to Hades. Not only
Theodoret named about: but also S. Luc. 16. allows Platoes speech. So Geneva
tongue denies the souls immortality: though it have a mind vndenying of it:
and a good hope of the world of Souls: better the^ the Jews: which say
Ghola^ haneshamoth Gholam hanechamoth The world of souls is the world of
Solace. But alas they hausmal hop, who deny Christ our only hope.

5. Geneva, saying: To desce^d to Hell is to have the torments of Hell: would
be rediculous to three thousand years Greek: none ever took it so. Therein
they do them selves exceeding great injury: shevving that they miss in
weighty matter: against the Perpetual use of the speech.

6. The same teaching in this order that our L. suffered: was crucified dead
and buried, and suffered: Make the Penner of the Creed to be no Logician: that
knevv not in what order things were to be spoken.

7. The Souls immortality should specially be opened in the Creed: that the
body being declared, how it was crucified dead, and buried: this article was
needful: That our Lord his soul went unto the Father. That does the Greek in
speech of the faithful, signify. This goodly article the Geneveans exclude.

8. The assertion that our L. suffered Hell torments, appears not true by any
Scripture. True modesty would look to Scripture phrases in handling our
redemtion. The WORD tells our L. his danger, shame and reproach, were
unspeakable: and that God left him ps. 22. unto pains and contumelies there
set down. But that GOD forsook him: that is our own term. The word is
Leave. And the psalm expounds the word. And Shabak in the Gospel, Syriaque
and in Dan. 4. is plainly to leave. As to leave the stumpes of the tree in the
ground.

9. Calvin's vncircu^spect words herein gave Papists much adva^tage: and
troubled all Churches. Greek skill for one word would have helped all.

10. Purgatory falls when. Hades Lodges all souls departed: and can have
but Paradise and Gehenna for them.

11. Archb. Whitgift, was wise when he obtained by Sir Julius Caesar Q.
Elizabeth's hand for M. Ieffrey K. fellow of the Kings College to pass over
sea to confess his haeresy: while he denied desce^ding to Hell in the Creed to
mean in a Barbarous and shameful translation a going up to Paradise. And he
was thankful in promise of 400 Lib. per annu^: to his Catechizer. So that he
would stir no more in the matter. Archb. VVhitg. was well Learned in the
common kind: and could see. When he the Arch. yielded, the inferior BB. should
have done so:


