AN APOLOGY IN BRIEF ASSERTIONS DEFENDING THAT our Lord died in the time
properly foretold to Daniel.

For satisfaction of some students in both Universities.

H. BROVGHTON.



LONDON, Imprinted by WILLIAM KEARNEY dwelling within Creeple-gate. 1592.

To the right noble Lord, Sir Peregrine Bertye Knight, Lord of Willoughby and
Eresby.
ARistotle the witty philosopher (right Honorable) notes, that as the eyes of
Battes are affected toward the light in the day: so is the mind of our soul
to those things, which of Nature are very manifest.

That appears in all our studies: wherein, after many years pains, we get
but that which in the end we see to have been clear in the first, if our eyes
had been opened to behold them: and find that we may soon show unto others,
manifold obscure points quickly, which our selves were long in searching.

Your Lordship by experience in my studies, may be a fit example herein. For,
whereas I spent many years labor in searching the Concent of holy Writers,
which have penned for us the Book of Truth, clearing the Prophecies unto their
events, through the right Famylies and course of times, and to compel other
Hebrews and Greeks to serve them: your Lordship learned after little
direction, that which I could not find in pains of long continuance: and that
no less for Scripture, than for old Heathen stories.

And even as I was long in contriuing of them into an order, which soon might
have been seen: so others, in study my Ancients, of great fame and desert,
for matters triable by ey-sight (and thereupon evident unto all, who will rest
upon Gods authority) either will not, or can not see that, which now I behold
as clear as the Sun in his greatest brightness: and I know that your
Lordship does no less.

Yea, who would not be our surety? when the striuer is confuted with the very
title of the Defense, THAT CHRIST our Lord died in the time properly foretold
to Daniel. Also, who would not acknowledge the weakness of man's mind, when this
Apology is found extremely needful, for satisfaction of some Students in
both Universities? One learned man of the one University told me, that an
adversary had turned all against me, all of all degrees: in so clear a case,
that he presently was driven to yield unto me, as soon as he heard the
propriety for which we strove. For when I told him of Gabriels prophecy, I
asked him, whence the time must be counted, and whether? He said, from the
speaking, and unto our Lord his death. I bad him tell their D. that he must do
so too. So he does, so he yields unto me, so our cause had been determined
by the striuer, if the blindness of some had not ben marvelous: who having lost
their hold, (not three days before they perceive it, as the Babylonians) but
three years, yet triumph of a victory: so that some of the other University,
began a little to triumph with them. Hereupon this Apology I write in defense
of my self, of Daniell the wise, of Gabriel the angel, and of mine
Adversary, against himself: that the middle space cannot by religion,
learning, art, or wit, be holden uncertain: neither has he Heathen concent
any thing worth, but in the parts despised, by all Writers upon the Prophets
and Apostles, and also by profane Greeks, the most ancient, and the latest.
These two points end the controversy. I commend to your Lordshippes protection
my cause: which (I think) shall more need authority, than skill to defend
it. Art cares not for the many of Adversaries: yet to bridle many striuers
unseasonable and unreasonable, authority of high personages, (who privately
may deal) is now for me specially requisite.

Your Honors to command: Hugh Broughton.

The Author to the Reader.
TOuching the judgment of those Divines, which I cite, for their exposition of
Daniels prophecy, it were long to bring their whole style: the sum is this,
That from the end of the Babylonian captivity, the first seven must be
reckoned: and the last has in it our Lords death. With that mure adversary
once agreeeth: yet goes against himself, saying, that the Angel meant no
certain time: and that 107. years are betwixt the return, and the building
of the Temple. 75. more than I hold, and 5, less thence to Tiberius than I
make. The whole I make 70. seauens, and stand to that: he once 70. and again
80. and again a number uncertain: which he thinks, that Olympiades can
bring to certainty of, not 490. years, but 560. precisely. And he thinks
for this to disanul the common judgments of Jews and Greeks upon the
Scripture: and that accounts from Olympiades with Romans and Chaldeans can
make his cause good. This I am to overthrow, by that wit, learning, and
religion, utterly forbid to hold uncertainty, where the limits be certain in
Daniel for our Lords redemption. And that particulers from the Prophets, holden
of Church and Synagogue, as I do, are holden aright; and that profane
testimonies fail him. In handling profane testimonies: The fall of Troy,
Olympiades, Cyrus Monarchy, Xerxes war, Lysanders, Alexanders: the
distaunces of these I am driven to handle, and prove that in all these, even
faithles Greeks disprove them, whom mine adversary follows: and also they
whom he most allows, do him utterly confute. He reading among men young in
years, younger in these studies, and not putting in print his Lectures: I
entered abruptly into the cause, to meet with striuers, hasty to broach
streams of errors.

A DEFENSE OF I. CALVIN, our notes upon the Geneua Bible, Emmamanuel Tremelius,
Matthew Beroaldus, Henry Wolphius, and Romists yielding unto them, Gilbert
Genebrard, and others: for the beginning, ending, and certeintie of Daniels
seauens, contained in Gabriels speech, the key of the old Testament, by H. B.
of the same opinion in Conc. Ser.
THeir beginning is so clear by the Text, that the sharpest adversary is
driven to grant this for their beginning, as follows: Quod ad rations
attinet e scriptura sacra, etsi mihi quidem maxim videatur rationi esse
consentaneum, ut verbum existimetur id significare quod versibus superiorib.
Gabriel commemorat, verbum Iehouae eiusque decretum, uti explicauimus: quoniam
tamen referri potest ad illud tempus quores ipsa implenda fuit, non tamen quo
primum enuntiata est, idcirco relinquatur nobis liberum, ut potuisse iudicemus
id tempus designari, quo Cyrus Iudaeis libertatem concessurus erat e Babilonica
captiuitate redeundi, and instaurandi Hierosolyma. Page 150. Taken out of a
Lecture book written.

And also this much for the ending of them: Septuaginta septimanis completis
excisus est Christus. A man would have thought, that he who was driven to
grant such a careful limitation for beginning and ending, should not seek an
impossibility for a greater space in the middle parts than the whole is.

Notwithstanding his strife is against Art, himself, Daniel, all men, and
against an Angel, in these words: Si Angelus dixisset post octies septuaginta
annos excidetur Christus, hic quidem praecise and proprie loquutus esset
Angelus: quoniam precise ab eo tempore intercesserunt anni 560.

This is far worse: Constat per synecdochen certum numerumpro incerto poni,
ita in hoc ipso Danielis loc restatiam nobis confirmandum: non posse praecise
intelligi annos 490: sed alium aliquem numerum, incertum per certum. First take
this much against his uncertainty, for propriety. Afterward against his
account of 560. years.

1 The propriety of Scripture whereupon actions of men must be altered through
all the world, is surer than heaven and earth, which shall pass: but it shall
not.

2 He that grants an Antichristian, that the fulness of time for redemption,
differs 70. years from the Angels speech, turns the propriety of Scripture
against our faith, and shakes Gods word: whereby profaneness only will
bear sway, and the Gospel shall be nothing worth.

3 He makes the Angel a greater deceauer than ever Apollo was: speaking so,
that of two thousand years none ever, Jew nor Gentile understood him until
1590. in a matter touching a principle of faith.

4 He makes Daniel not to understand his own prophecy: who yet says, he
understood, and that the Angel came to teach him knowledge: and professedly
confuteth Daniels meaning. He should have found upon his victory far more
glory, if he had plainly told his hearers, that he would teach Daniel better
to understand the Angel: though he told them not obscurely in disputing that
Daniel understood it not: and grants or must grant that Daniel thought it
properly spoken: and so is the prophet of mine opinion and with me confuted.

5 The charge to understand Daniel Math. 24. were in vain for a time
indefinite: for still the mind would be unquiet, if 70. years before the word
required, that all things should be performed.

6 Seven in a trope signifies many: so seauenty seven must signify an
exceeding great number. So extreamitie of Iudaisme should be established. For
the Jews look yet for Christ to come, and hold him bad that prescribes a
time.

7 The ceremonies have no warrant from expressed words, when they should
end: but clean contrary, are long to continue, for any word of prophet, if
Gabriels speech be indefinite.

8 It were in vain to lay down so exact a Chronicle from Adam to Cyrus, that
Jews or Gentiles of old have rightly held those years plainly, the learned
of them, if from Cyrus to Christ, where most need was, a certain speech
should be uttered, but an uncertain meaning left, and no Scripture handle the
cause.

9 Jews and Gentiles hitherto understood Gabriel in propriety: and a small
Library will afford a hundred several writers witnesses hereof.

10 The deadly enemy Aben Ezra grants, that the time is from the word to
Daniel, until the Messiah is sealed: and also that it is 490. years.

11 The Pharisees might have objected Scripture against Christ, Matthew. 16.
touching the time, if it had not properly fallen out: when our Lord does blame
them for not knowing the time.

12 Herod had not feared: nor the sage Magy come to Jerusalem: nor after,
Andrew, the Samaritans, and they Luke 19. Act. 2. or they that were in
Barcozbas days, looked for a Messiah: but by Scripture. If propriety had bin
cast off 70. years further, some simple, 70. years sooner would have looked
for Christ. But none did.

13 Auctor Chazon Moed and Barbinel should justly accuse all Christians of
extreme ignorance in this text, if all have bin deceived, who thought that
Gabriel limited the time for Christ.

14 To part an indefinite time, reason can not suffer, and no author ever went
about: therefore it passes reason to make not only the seauentie seauens
uncertain, but the 7. also, the 62. also, the one also in his two parts.

15 Daniel knew before Gabriel came to him every point of that which the angel
spoke of, saving the time when our Lord should dye. Wherefore either that is it
which he taught him: or he spoke untruly in promising to teach him knowledge.

Conclusion. Seauentie seauens of errors may be objected against the inuentor
of that opinion: wherefore it must be abolished.

Objections of adversaries.
1 The 400. years Genesis 15. are not exact: so Gabriels years, may be taken for
a number uncertain.

2 Likewise the 300. years Iud. 11.

3 Also the time of the three days, and three nights told by our Lord for
being in the grave, are not just so fully.

4 Likewise many expound the Angel as in his commentary or second spech,
cutting of his last seven in the middle, and some of the above named so do:
therefore it is not precisely. 490. years.

5 As author Concentus makes the three years and half which are in Apoc. 13.
to be spoken by a synecdoche: so may Gabriels seauens be.

Answers.
The first is exact, and always has so ben taken, from since Ismael
persecuted Isaak, until the departure from Egypt: years precisely 400.

Moreover, if by a prophet from the old testament any could prove it contrould,
he should help himself nothing: for God by propriety should tell what he
meant, and give warrant for a trope.

So the spech of Iephte for the. 300 yeresis controld by Scripture, and was
such as the cause required. For whereas the king of Ammon complained of injury
done at the coming from Egipte, not knowing, or not regardinge the. 40. years
continuance in the wilderness, it had been a curiosity for Iephte to be
quarreling for that which nothing altered the pley: and so he speaks of the
time from their own supposition. 305. it was. But who in that case would be
trifling for the od five.

For the three days, and three nights, the Evangelists make the meaning
plain, showing that the sixth day our Lord was buried, and arose the first day.

The fourth objection is twice faulty. For it wounds the obiecter more
sharply. For if the angel said 490. years saving three years and an half, he
calls to a most straight reckoning.

Moreover, how can he make up 560. precisely, if the angel cut of three years
and an half. But that the angel in his commentary crossed not his own text,
many learned old and new show: and to strive for such quirkes it is no gravity.
The use of the text is to show the time of redemtion expressing a redeemer. If
men further will contend, the Church of God has no such custom.

Lastly if the 3. years and half and Gabriels seauens be equal concerning trope
and propriety: by a consequent the Pope should be freed from being Antechrist:
by the general testimony of writers, that hold Daniels spech to be proper: and
so a learned man that so thinks by his own voice should disgrace his learned
works written against the Pope.

THAT THERE WAS NO cause why 560. years should be imagined betwixt the
deliverance by Cyrus, and the death of our Savior.
For the whole time.
IF twenty from Nathan to Salathiel, and much the like in Salomons house: for
that Ezekias might have been a grandfather, at Manasses birth: if these two
houses had but 430. years, for twenty or as twenty: the twenty in Saint
Luke from Zororobabel, by all likelihoode can not without warrant from God come
so far, as to make up Daniels 490. years, much less 560.

If twenty can hardly bring up so much: much less would an heathen gather
from ten Matthew. 1. so much, by ordinary course: none can affirm any omitted.

For the Persians 130. years.
The five generations (from Joshua excluded) unto Iaddue by common succession,
hardly make up one hundred and thirty, much less may man's counters summon
them to double, almost.

And if Nehemiahs gonernement and Sanballats open dealing saw the whole 5. that
are after Joshua: it is strange that his government should be longer than all
theirs, in so small records of doings.

Nehemiah, by all Ebrewes and Greeks, and all that read the Bible as
sufficient in it self, is the same Ez. 2. Ne. 1. So he must see all the Persian
times. For Iaddue who met Alexander and Darius the last of Persian Monarchs is
in his book chap. 12. 22. and his own dealinges against Manasses brother to
Iaddue son in law to Sanballat, who saw Alexanders wars. Joseph. 11. ant.
7. and 8. conferd with Neh. 13. 28.

Objection.
Bellarmine the Jesuit from Beda, says that Nehemia^ numbreth the high
Priests unto Iaddue, because he touched the infancy of Iaddue, who was aged
when he met Alexander.

Answer.
1 Manasses the younger brother of Iaddue, marying Sanballats daughter caused
Nehemias troubles: therefore he saw their man's age.

2 He saw also Darius Codomanus. N. 12. even by the confession of M. F. Iunius.

An other objection in Wolphius upon Nehemias.
It may be that some after Nehemias death wrote the catalogue of those high
Priests.

Answer.
1 We should not imagine one work to be of two auctors, though Deuteronomy. 33. has
the last eight verses written after Moses death: by Iosue Baua Batra page 15.
or some other. For there evident mention of death went before, but no such thing
is here.

2 Also that of Darius and Manasses, does answer him. And thus Nehemias age
controlleth all that extend the Persians rule unto two hundred years and more:
and grant him borne at the first return, as all antiquity, and the late that
I know, do, saving one or two.

A third objection.
Nehemias placed third amongst the names expressly named (Ezr. 2. 2.) is not
he who is near in government, Neh. 1. and of that the Geneua notes authority
might have warned. For that Nehemias was young, as circumstances prove:
specially that he knew not that Jerusalem was destroyed.

Answer.
1 It is strange that Nehemias a Jew, witty and learned, could be ignorant
of Moses, Esaias, Micheas, Jeremy, Ezekiel, Obadias, Psalm. 137. Daniel: whose
prayer he so expressly follows touching Jerusalem: of Cyrus decree, of
Zor^babels company, of Ezras, and after fifty thousand returned to their
country, should not know that. A child seven years old hardly would have
been so simple. Mark what strange expositions a false Chronicle breeds.

2 All circumstances prove him aged: his heaviness of four months for
Jerusalem: his office of trust for the kings life: his policy: yielding an
idean of a politician.

3 The notes on the Bible dedicated to her Majesty, as they now stand prove
the contrary: and utterly resist the citer of them. So unless Romistes and
Protestants, and the old fathers will resist their own selves: Nehemias will
drive them all to condemn the Greek supposed agreement of Chronicle: and to
follow Gabriels. For what a vanity and vexation of study, has it wroght
among men that would seem to commend Scripture as plain? To what inconstancy
has it driven men: to make their own writings to cross themselves: and to
wrest Scriptures, beyond all reason of common judgment.

Of Ezra.
A like strength to the cause brings Ezra. Ebrewes, Greeks. Latins all
commonly, unless some one forget himself, held Ezra son to Saraias; which
was killed when the temple was burnt. So he living nigh to their last times,
controulleth the ouerreachers by their own consent.

So do, Sal. Iarchi upon 1. Chron. 5. Abrabbaneel upon Aggei: Rambam and zakuto
in their successions, and Megilah in the Talmud makes him such: as Baruchs
scholar, and Simeony upon Ezra named Neh. 12, from Talmud Sanedrin, makes him
the Scribe: as nothing further doubting. Athanasius or other Greeks never
moved any doubt. Latins more expressly mention it: as old Jerome, whom
also H. Bullinger cites* as Lyra, Lauater, Pelican, Sixtus Senensis,
Tilemanus Stella, and Romistes, in apparatu Bibliorum and upon 2. King. 25. and
all who like of 4. Esd. 3. Whereas none yet for that point control the auctor:
none that I could hear of. Only the Rabbin zakuto forgetting the text, makes
him son to Iosedek, though in an other place he showing how many of his
ancesters Ezra omitted, places not Iosedek as one. And M. F. Iunius in private
speech with my self (though hereby he overthrows his cause and my
adversaries by his grant) marvelled that any would doubt of it. For his death,
whether we hold with them that bring him to the Persians end of Monarchy (as
they do, who either make him to be Malachie, or to write Nehemias story) or to
dye somewhat sooner: we need not to strive for the extremity of his old age.

Objection against that Esra should be properly son to Saraias.
The term son may be for any posterity: and Esra i^ ^bnepos to Saraias: that
is in the fifte descent from him.

Answer.
1 He is very simple in deed, and knows not Christ to be the son of David,
who is ignorant how son may signify any posterity. But we must hold the
usual signification of terms, unless scripture drive us to seek others that
be further of.

2 It had been a strange dealing in Esra to derive Saraias to Aaron. 1. Chro. 5.
(who is known up to Adam) without omitting any one, if betwixt him and Saraias
he would so pen the matter, as to deceive his own nation continually. Greeks
also and also Latinistes commonly. None heretofore ever thought him abnepotem
Saraiae, nor borne after the Captivity.

3 It can not agree with any man's nature, to have him in record next himself,
who is the first stain of his house if he had any betwixt to record. but to
Efra Saraias was such, the first of his line that died in open wrath, therefore
he would never have him next himself, if any further kindred were betwixt.

4 The lerning and authority of Esra argues that he was of that age; wherein
ebrew was purely kept. For he could not have bin counted a principal man
amongst so many thousands, unless in ebrew studies he had bin of the ebrew
prophets education: as the talm^d makes him scholar to Barue, and the Jews
general consent holds, and the Greeks with Latins much in the same (...).

Touching the objection that as Esra over skippeth in one cataloge certain
generations, (by Zacuto seven, in deed but six) so well he might omit some
betwixt Saraias and himself, it may sone be answered, that as the one is sure
by a scripture, so should the other have bin, if any such matter were. but it
is not. therefore I will no more believe any to be betwixt Saraias and Esra, then
between these, Salmon, Booz, Obed, Iessai. Betwixt them, some have imagined
some: none of account, any betwixt these two.

Objection.
Nehemias should exceed common old age, and Ezra specially.

Answer.
Suppose Nehemias aged but twelve years: according to Josephus record (antiq.
11. 4.) for the youngest in the roules of the returned. So he might see
Alexanders wars under one hundred and forty, younger then Galen. Neither was
that age any where strange. Gesnerus out of Bale^.
David Meneuensis saw years one hundred forty and five. A Beuerley man of
late was reported to dye at one hundred thirty and five years, of whose age
great examination by great me^ was said to be had. Pliny records many aged
betwixt a hundred thirty and five, and a hundred and forty, found together in
small quarters of Italy. By Epimenides of a hundred fifty and seven in
Pliny, Phlegon, Lucian, with Arganthonius of a hundred and fifty, in the^
from Anacreon and Herodotus, and M. Aponius well known of that age in Pliny
lib. 7. cap. 49. by them Ezras case will not be strange. For if profane late
match or pass Ismaels old age: it should not be thought strange that one as
Ezra an other Moses for law, should for old age come near Isaakes years:
when a prophecy from God, zach. 8. 4 had promised that old folk using staves
in their hands, should sit in Ierusalems streets. That prophecy might
warrant us that some should be found very aged. Through Europe a forged Philo
has long ben received, cited in commentaries infinitely, in which Mardochai is
aged a hundred ninety eight years. The countries who received him should not
hold* Ezras years strange. Codomans imitatour that makes Obed and Iessai new
fathers at a hundred sixty one, may not blame this. But I see no necessity
why we may not think that Ezra died some twenty or thirty years before
Alexanders Monarchy, as I have before handled: though for the common opinion
we place him in the last times of the Persians exactly. So his age shall have
no unlikelihood in it: even to an heathen judgment. And thus by two good
witnesses the Persians Monarchy is drawn within the compass of one hundred
and thirty years, from the supposed two hundred or more.

For the space betwixt Cyrus and Aggai, prophesying: that it is nothing near
107.
From the temple built unto Tyberius his eighteenth, D. R. has five years
less than I lay. That space by our agreements is past favor to his part:
wherefore the space betwixt Cyrus and Aggei remains to be tried. That it is
nothing near 107. years, nor more than 32. weigh all proofs, of conjectures
many, some surer and better standing, some demonstrations may be seen.

1 Mardochei is held then alive, captiued with Ieconias: so held all the
millio^s of Ebrewes and Greeks, all that our la^d bred, all simple that are
turned to the text: and that proof, or none, is enough, his age and his uncles
daughter ends the controversy. By my account he should be a little elder than
Daniel was the third of Cyrus.

Bellarmine had rather grant him years one hundred sixty five than to deny
him to be captiued: for which point Paulus Burgensis and Caietanus have been
continually rejected which opinion is revived by Drusius, Scaliger, Iunius and
Pererius: but again rejected of later.

Against that, for Romistes Bellarmin upon Esters book has arguments
acceptable: de verbo Dei.

For Ebricians, these auctors cite the Jews common opinion, Talmud in Megilah,
Midras Megilah, Aben Ezra, Salomoh Iarchi, Ralbag, Maharam Garma. R. Eleazar:
Salomoh Ben Elkabez, Jacob ben Nahum, Geon, Elisai Galico, the large Chaldean
paraphrastes, all these upon Ester: so Bochai upon Exodus 17. bringing Mardochai
of Saul and Kis. None have one syllable showing that any of their nation ever
doubted whether Mardochai were captiued.

It can not stand with modesty to refuse the universal consent of a nation,
for judgment in a narration in their own language, and of their own common
weal: whereof yearly two thousand years they have kept a remembrance and
continual meditation in their common place books and prayer books.

These translaters in the Latin tongue the best in Ebrew skill, Munster,
Vatablus. Pagnin, with Montanus, Boderianies, Raphelengius: Tremelius the most
exquisit of any, whom Iunius in the margent keeps unaltered: and
commentaries all that I have seen, saving the few above named: these cut of
the doubt.

So do many Chroniclers, though to their own whole overthrow for the Persians
two hundred years or more: man's testimony is strongest against himself. Take
these Lucidus, Massaeus, Curio, Bucholcherus, Bunting, Bullinger, Chytreus,
Funschius, Vignier, Schubert. Codoman: all confess either in word or so
placing Mardochai, as with Iechonias he might be captiued. When so many
learned confess that whereby they fall: can one in their company prove that
they confess erroneously?

2 The returned built the temple. Ezra. 6. 14.

3 The children which had been in captivity, priests Levites, and the rest,
celebrate the dedication. verse. 16.

4 Zorobabel and Iosuah are expressly named returners and builders: two in
office together never were 107. years.

5 Aggei (2. 4.) by the judgment of all commenters spoke of man that had seen
the former temple in age of discretion, 90. years aged they should be by mine
account. That I trow is enough, not 160. as for the objection that his spech is
a wish, none ever had such a speech in ure: as who of you: for O that one of
you: a prouoker should not go against the whole stream of learned.

6 It can not stand with reason that God should bring 50000. home in favor
and of 107. years tell them nothing of redemption, but delight in their sons
vnafflicted for his truth: while yet succession of prophets was to continue.
And the like breaking of was not since Adams time: to have times vnrecorded and
without any action touching God.

7 No Jew nor Gentil brake of the succession of prophets betwixt Samuel and
Malachie: but from Daniel to Aggei 107. years should break it of.

8 The Ebrewes generally hold it but as 70. years from Sedekias fall to Aggai.
Abenezra goes fourteen years further as I do. I need not to regard
Sadaias upon Dan. 9. iarring from all his own nation. They be followed by
Greeks, Theophilus, Theodoretus, and Clemens, dashing therein the heathen
accounts of Cyrus and Cambyses, held only for a thing of toleration in talk
to Heathen, not of exactnes.

9 S. Jerome also, and after him Latins full many, follow the Ebrewes.

10 He should not pretend defense of antiquity, which has it more against him
then I am.

11 The whole tenor of Aggai argues a speech uttered to the returned, rather
then to a new age: as their thinking that it was not time to build: and the
famine while they intermitted, and all scarcity, and such: without any one
syllable betokening a new age.

12 It were strange that Aggai should in five prophecies four times record the
day of the month: and one day twice, if 2. of Darius should be straggling, and
have not any for to join it to story. But by the 20. making up 50. from Cyrus
it has, a certain sum: even 32.

Many learned rightly mark and Ebrewes generally cited by Aben ezra upon
Ezra. 6. 14. that Darius and Artaxast are the names of that king under whom
Aggei prophecieth and Ezra returns: and who so think otherwise will make a
strange penning of Ezras story. That being so holden, the troops of them
that join Artaxast his 20. to the 50. from Cyrus first, set his second at 32.
of which point more shall be spoken hereafter. And so Aggei contains as fit a
space both for the returned from Babylon to be yet of actiuitie about his
temple, with their children also of judgment and strength: as the men of
middle age at the stars appearing when our Lord was borne, and with the^
their children of his age, might together see the temple of his body, after
two and thirty years, raised up. God chooses times reasonable, likely, and
like: for his dealings: and easy in story to be considered and remembered.

13 When they built an altar a prophet was to teach them from God: Talmud in
Iebamoth. page 21. b. Abrabba neel flies from the Talmud to a fable of
Josephus Ben Gorion: of fire hid and made like oil: yet he disdained to
accomp^anie thing of the second of the Machabees for his strength upon Aggei.
how without fire from heaven they might sacrifice, by ordinaire fire (I see
no better opening of that action) but in any record none have we amongst them
but Aggai and Zachary, and Zachary is called Naar, a lusty man or young man,
which for one much above fifty would be a strange speech: so he should be
about twenty at his coming home.

14 Zachary tells of their fathers consumed: which to the returned may be
spoken but not of the returned.

15 Also the fasting for Ierusalems destruction, and the naming of the famous
anger for the seauentie years, that will admit none other sense but the
seauenty of captivity: famous to be known by that general name, which if
seauentie more had been past, it had been an unfit speech: that was mistaken
by antiquity to be seauentie from Sedekias, and all circumstances might agree
well with the eighteen years since Cyrus, as Ebrewes, Greeks and Latins
guessed, but that a flat Scripture calls for thirty two years: eighteen
more making up fifty.

16 The people were generally so tractable under Aggai and zachary as never
any such number: and such as captivity might well be thought to tame.

17 As Laertius notes that Epimenides was fifty and seven years a sleep.
So here all Judah shall be longer a sleep, without any one syllable in record,
what any one does all the while: by the hundredth and seven years.

18 Nehemias demanded in what case they were at Jerusalem which were the
remnant of the captiuitye: in the 20. year of Artaxerxes. wherefore the space
thence to Cyrus was such as man's age from the captivity might yet fuffer some
good sort alive.

19 If Jerusalem had bin unwalled above 120. years, Nehemias would not, as he
did, take a sudden grief, for so stale a matter. But for seven seauens now
ending, and touched by Gabriel for the building of Jerusalem, he might by just
lykelihoode take a grief.

It was never found in any auctour, that an whole being laid down, parts
should be joined to in quantity justly making up the whole: and yet should
not belong to that matter, but to an other. Wherefore the Angels partition of
seven seuens, sixty two, and one: from the going forth of the word unto
building of Jerusalem, and thence unto our Lords healtie passion, must not
only make up the whole, but must have some clear reason for the first and
last part: otherwise the partition had bin without judgment. But for the last
part: a defender in common consent is needless: wherefore the troubler of the
first part should seem troublesome, against art.

20 That Nehemias had relation to Gabriel for building of Jerusalem (for which
work seven seauens are set a part Dan. 9.) the whole imitation of Daniels
prayer which Nehemias follows, more then ever Virgil followed Homer, or Tully
Demosthenes, that imitation makes plain, that to Daniels Chronicle he had
relation.

21 No other reason can be rendered, why 49. years should be spoken of alone
Dan. 9. but for the time of the chief work for building Jerusalem: and so
much is granted by many, as by Master Scaliger himself, who yet can not see
how from that partition to make up the whole sum of Daniels four hundred
and ninety years.

22 The 46. years Ioh. 2. for building the temple, which was begone in the
first, and hindered in the third of Cyrus* fitly agrees with this account.
For Nehemias finished great works about the temple: and it is doubtless that
the rancorous Jews which for a four years continued work, bring 46. to cause
our Lord his speech hateful, would omit no whit that touched the Temple,

23 Aben Fzra upon Dan. 9. he the deadliest enemy for Christ so casts the
time: and says that he had record of Persians for that time.

24 Josephus likewise in Eusebius Demon. 8. has the like time: whom Clemens
following, against his account for the second of Darius, gives 49. years to
the last building of the temple. Cedrenus also must so be construed: or to
speak nothing.

Clemens can not otherwise make these words reasonable: That in seven seauens
the Temple was built, it is manifest: for that is written in Ezra. Now what
Oedipus could ever gather that from Ezra, but by referring Nehemias sadness to
Daniels seven seauens: and thereby gathering the chronicle of Ezra? And it
appears by him that this was a common opinion in his age: otherwise no man
can see by any particulars in him how to bring that about.

25 Moreover Cedrenus citing Josephus for 480. years thence to the ruin of the
temple, shows how in losesephus days this account was received.

Objections.
Why admit I not Josephus for further times: agreeing with heathen?

Answer.
Because when he writes in Greek he will often speak as common profane
Greeks record: yet closely in certain places will show what he meant: but if
Josephus testimony may serve, the cause is ended. For he makes Nehemiah to be
of the captiued.

Objection against Cedrenus. He is of as great authority as Legenda aurea.
Answer.
The simpler the man is and in a matter of difficulty agrees with Scripture
against him self for other places, the more it appears that others better
learned left unto his hands a tried account, or shows how the angels words
brought that about, which otherwise man's uncertainty would hardly have found
out: and I dare believe Cedrenus and Josephus, if Daniel and Gabriel be their
surety before 185000. Chaldeans or Olympiques, of whose vanity we will speak
anon.

That none should think it above the space of a Jubilee from Cyrus first to
Nehemias government: twelve men of twenty two returned with Zorobabel living
to Nehemias government, will bring a reasonable proof. These be the men,
chief men in the sacrificers courses. First Seraiah. Second Amariah. Third
Malluc. Fourth Chattash. Fifth Shebania. Sixth Charim. Seaueth Meremoth. Eighth
Ginnethon. Ninth Abia. Tenth Miamin. Eleue^th Bilgai. Twelfth Shemaiah. By a
jury of such twelve men soon might it be tried, whether it could well be above
fifty years that Judah should be at home hindered without the possession of a
walled city. Their sons and more continuing in their office thence unto
Darius the last, and lusty Sanballat having a daughter a match for Iaddues
brother, these may make all agree with Master Scaliger: and M. Iunius my
adversaries: now my partners for the rest of the Persians times, that it can
not be any longer than I make it. Hereby it appears that not the third part
of 107. are from Babels fall to the erection of the temple: nor above one
Iubelie to Nehemias government 18. years later.

And thus much for arguments out of Scripture, some I brought touching Heathen,
as Anaxandrides, Polycrates, Epimenides and other successions of lives. Them I
will clear more brightly. Also I spoke against the credit of the profane
Greeks, and Olympiades, and Chaldeans, and therein of Chronicle from Romes
antiquity, which hereafter I will pursue: and confute some others also.

Of Anaxandrides and Leonidas.
In Sparta Anaxandrides is of Croesus age: his courageous son Leonidas
fights against Xerxes, examine the distance, and first stories. Thales
Alyattes, Laby-net or Nabu (cad) net are of one age. Croesus Anaxandrides and
Ariston also in Sparta settled in the kingdom. Therefore some thirty years
might well be spent betwixt that and Babels fall. Now at Xerxes wars, Demaretus
son of Ariston was yet so young that he could travel to Persia, and Leonid
as a lusty soldier.

Objection.
They might beget them in their old age, and they might also be old.

Answer.
Strange shifts for ordinary examples are needelesse.

Of Polycrates.
Polycrates wealth he was Amasis friend in Socrates old age, was granted
Ismenias. Plat.

Objection.
That Polycrates was a Theban by Suidas, not of Samos: nor the man familiar
with Amasis.

Answer.
If Suidas fragmentes may serve in Anacreon, the Samian Polycrates flourishes
108. years after Cyrus beginning. Wherefore Cyrus must spend much of his
time before Baltasars death: and so by Suidas the conclusion shall come to the
same pass, by Polycrates the Samian, whether plato meant, it may be doubted.

Of Epimenides in Laertius.
Epimenides antiquity matcheth Solons, which may by great argument touch
Nabucadnezars. If his old age reach unto Nicias of Niceratus, who was killed in
the Peloponnesian waries: the space from Babels fall to Nicias can hardly be
more than I cast it.

Objection.
It may be Laertius was deceived.

Answer.
For the record he should hardly be, seeing for it as famous Theopompus is
cited not only by him, but also by Pliny, by Phlegon, and by Lucian. Moreover
Gnosij giving him three hundred years of life, confirm the other opinion. I
grant him one hundred and fifty by my limits, by the same limits the
profane account will make him draw toward three hundred: so this shows that
Theopompus seemed to speak upon some great report.

Other successions of lives.
From Dropides brother to Solon of Josias time are descentes: Critias,
Calaeschrus, Critias one of the thirty tyrants after the end of Peloponnesian
wars. Without great reason we can not give above two and twenty years or
thereabouts to a succession, as shows Eusebius by common course of Examples.
Therefore this example of Platoes kindred may pacify the strife. The very same
which my learned adversary brought against me.

Of Apryes, Amasis, Pythagoras, Lysis, and Epaminondas.
Apryes (Chophra in Ier. 44.) reigned in the eight of Nabucadnezar. Clem. 1.
strom, and Marianus Scotus. Amasis succeeds him, with whom Pythagoras was
familiar. Lysis was Pythagoras scholar, and he taught Epammondas: in youth
fellow with Philip of Macedon. who died but seven and forty years old.
Just. 9. he that would have above two hundred years for five successions,
whereof three seem almost equalles, must seek for strange corners to pick
some colorable matter.

From the same Apryes we may gather how, much of Cyrus times were spent under
the Babylonians. For Cambyses married Apryes daughter Herod. 2. she would have
been a very stale maid for a Persian Monarch, about seauentie years after
her fathers reign. Add unto this, that in Herod. 1. Darius Hystaspis was some
twenty years aged when Cyrus went into Tomyris wars. betwixt which and
Babels fall Herodotus and others place not much time. he lived in all but forty
and three years Cres. Therefore after the taking of Babell about three and
twenty years, would end Cyrus, Cambyses, and Darius Hystaspis reign. where
some have ninety and three: for Cyrus, thirty and eight as Theophilus: for
Cambyses, nineteen as Clemens 1. strom. thirty and six for Darius, as
Herodotus. And we differ but this much.

Of Cyrus.
If this serve not reasonably, see whether Cyrus age only will not end the
controversy by the testimonies of Greeks. Cyrus lived years one hundred by
writers Assyriake, Persike, Onesicritus, Lucian in Macrob. About seven and
twenty he was made General: as Xenophon does teach, us to gather. 1. paed. he
lived but three years after Babels fall. Seder Olam. Scaliger, Iunius,
Schubert, and Chytreus gives him no sole government over Judah. So some
seauentie years he should spend in conquering East and West countries, whereof
Ctesias records many East, Herodotus many West. And as Daniel and he died
much near in time, so full well they might be borne near in time. And this is
agreeable to Gods comfort: that sends a medicine before the sore: as
Mardochai prepared for Haman: so Cyrus, a comfort against Babel. Medes and
Persians help Babel, as somewhat inferiors: and at the last being victors plead
that they were never under the^* Whereby for the monarchs the ancient Greek
writers before Alexanders time count not Babylonians any of power but
Assyrians: and Medes four ages or less: and next the Persians. Dionys.
Halicar. 1. antiq.
Now the Persians reigned little above two hundred years since subduing of the
Medes, which was in Cyrus first dealinges. Wherefore about seauentie years of
two hundred for Persians government over the Jews may be subducted: and then
our number of one hundred and thirty will please heathen.

Lilius Giraldus, in treating of Poets: lives and placing Darius Hystaspis in
Olympiad 80. shows also much of the Persian sway, and the Babylonians to be
soent together: whereby heathen that skant heard of the Babylonians, as I
showed, might well give that time of Empire to the Medes. in Strabo
Nauocodrosor is likened to Hercules* for conquest even to Spain: Geogr. 15*
which thing might well be done when thirteen years his ships besieged Tyrns:
that then Spain rude and unarmed might be somewhat visited by his camps, yet
Nabu^^^nezar as a winged Lion* soon came up: and by his seven years madness was
in such disgrace: that Greeks the babes (as plato records in Timmo) having
not at home in Solons age any story of a graye head, scant could hear of
any great Empire Eastward of his. And Ctesias who pleads Persian
court-rolles for his momuments does pass over the Babylonians as unheard of.
This being duly considered the Greeks will be friends to me, for old
acquaintance: who of a child was more acquainted with them than with Latins:
and will confess that they never meant to trouble me for the Persians rule
over the Jews: but to show what the Persians in their glory claim, since
Cyrus youth, and first success in wars. If they will not stand with me thus:
I will bewray them, and show the world that commonly they deserve but such
credit as Epimenides their prophet and Paul our Apostle gives to the Cretes,
that: Cretes are aey liars.

Of Greeks nullitie.
I might disgrace their skill for antiquity in their great diversity, for
Homers age, who having written forty and eight books with mention of most
towns in Greece: yet has half a score of ancient writers differring some
four hundred years from others when he should live, by gathering his
distance from the wars of Troy, which, Greek divines as Tatianus, Clemens
Africanus, Eusebius, join to Salomons times. But I will combat with them
touching matter most litigious in my case: for their diversity after Alexander
son to Amyntas of Darius Hystaspis age: which Alexander killed Darius
Ambassadors and was with Mardonius Xerxes General. Him Perdiccas did
succeed: of whom Thucidides writes that he died in the third year of the
Peloponnesian wars. That Perdiccas reigned years by Nicomedes forty and one,
by Theopompus thirty and five, by Anaximenes forty, by Hieronymus eight and
twenty, by Marsias and Philochorus but three and twenty. This difference
cites Athenaeus mentioned in a most learned assembly of men most skillful in
Greek auctours. As was Masurius a Lawier, Monius a Poet, famous Plutarch,
Leonides Eleus, Aemylianus Maurusius, and Zoilus a most fine Grammarian. Also
philosophers many: Pontianus, Democritus and Philadelphus: Orators many,
with Vulpian that would not admit one word without authority. If these
heathen Greeks of all countries and professions knew no certeintie nor
regard Greeks for their own age: should we to disturbance of all divines
revive their fame? Never by my consent.

An objection from Thucidides.
Thucidides an Athenian being alive in the Peloponnesian wars makes it fall
out fifty after Xerxes wars: he for so late times might see the truth. Thuc.
bell. 1.

Answer.
M. Joseph Scaliger notes that sometime writers speak against their own
knowledge touching times. In emend temp.
Conceits best known to them selves move them. And Thucidides might hope that
his city of Athens might in time be thought a long ruler of Greece: and
thereupon would not stick to spare some untruths. Or otherwise as men busied
slip much in plain matter, he might likewise. And if all were granted him:
yet from other parts so much may be subducted as we need. But I will bring
an instance from the tripping of a greater man, for times near him. Plato is
the man: even the stateliest of all Greek profane auctours.

Athenaeus brings in one that checketh Plato for mentioning, of Pericles
death as past a little tine while ago: and of a matter in the same speech done
the last year before the telling, which yet was four and twenty years after
Pericles death. If Piato was known to be so negligent in marking times,
Thucidides alone has no great authority: against whom I will have more, if I
see occasion to examine by parts, Eratosthenes account.

Thucidides condemnation of Greeks.
He blames the Athenians as gross for report of late and most famous matters
of Athens: as not knowing and mistaking which of Pisistratus sons was killed by
Harmodius and Aristogiton: yet they were kings in Athens. Likewise he blames
other Grecians for many famous present things, and not forgotten by reason of
time: in which (as touching kings of Lacedemon) writers extremely missed.
There he lays down this sentence: That the most part take no pains in
seeking the truth: And blames even historiques for favoring acceptance of
the hearers more than the truth: amongst whom, his comme^ter notes that he
nipped Herodotus. We might as well think him touched with the errors of his
times.

Pausanias testimony.
He blames them no whit less. For this report he affoordeth them: that Greek
records for the most part differ one from an other: and for the most things
Greeks have sundry opinions, in Arcad. page 280. and Boeot. page 294. and
Messen. page 112. of the Greek printed in 1584.

Plutarchs testimony.
Plutarch in Solon shows that Greek Chroniclers thought by reason of times
difference that Solon could never be with Cresus: whom he answers that
their chronicall cannons could never be brought to agreement (by any thing
commonly acknowledged) for all the pains bestowed in the kind.

And in Numa he shows that times gathered from Olympionicae deserve no credit.

Continual disagreements.
The differences betwixt Phaneas, Ephorus, Timeus, Clitarchus, Eratosthenes and
Duris in Clemens Alexandrinus from Trois fall that is from Salomons reign unto
Alexanders voyage, is tedious to be repeated. By Duris it is one thousand
years, whereof by Scripture about 410. are past by Nabucadnetzars reign: and
so by a consequent the Persians should reign not one hundred and thirty
years, but above five hundred. So Greeks have from Adam to the flood in him
two thousand two hundred forty and eight, for one thousand six hundred
fifty and six, from Sem to Abraham one thousand two hundred and fifty for
four hundred and fifty, from Isaak to the partition of the land years six
hundred and sixteen for four hundred fifty and two. Thence to Samuel four
hundred sixty and three for three hundred and fifty, and for the kings, five
hundred seauentie and two (that came somewhat near. About five hundred and
ten it was) and for the Persians one hundred thirty and five. If when
Scripture directs to a most exact sum, men miss so much: we should hold
only the plainenes of Gods word as in the Ebrewe text it was most purely kept,
and not man's opinion, our square. Neither should we marvel at heathen missing
for the Persians, as we expound them: when Greek Christians who have
scripture to direct them give the judges four hundred sixty and three,
whereas from the Lamb unto the temple all is but four hundred and four
score. 1. Kings. 6. 1. whence must be subducted forty for the wilderness;
seven for conquest, forty for Samuel and Saul, forty for David, and three
for Solomon.

A kind of help.
But as divines have bin deceived for the Judges, reckoning the oppressors
years several from theirs, which were within theirs in deed, and should
nothing have augmented the sum: even so were profane Greeks, as we
understand them. both for reckoning Paras first times several from the
Babylonians, which yet fell out together: and afterward fellow rulers as
several. And the curing is not hard, with tractable judges. Judge what I say.
Ctes. conferred with Herodot.
Darius Hystaspis lived about six and twenty years while Iaddue was under
Persia. After his death two breethren have the famous gentle strife. Just.
Xerxes in wars reigns, Artaxerxes at home, the same time: otherwise
Themistocles could not fly to them both. Artaxerxes reigning one and forty
years, dies in the seventh of the Peloponnesian wars. Thucid. and Diod.
Thereby Thucidides is contrould for making the Peloponnesian wars fifty
years after that of Xerxes: wherein Aristicles the just bare swaye: whose
daughter Socrates married (Suid. in Socrates) and he was but seauentie at
seven and twenty years after that wars when he died. Laertius.
Though by a shift one say that he might beget that daughter in his old age,
at the wars end: yet she should be seven years elder than Socrates.
without any reason of likelihoode. Now to this Artaxerxes Joseph Scaliger
will no^ stick to join presently Artaxerxes Mnemon with Darius Nothus, which
Mnemon comes within nine years (in Clemens) of Alexanders monarchy, and
reigns years but forty and two. Thus scantly will that be made up which might
make the rest under Greeks and Romans three hundred and sixty to agree with
Gabriels four hundred and ninety years. Therefore Plutarch to fill up the
common sum gives him sixty and two years of reign and ninety four of
life. not knowing Daniels vision against the Persians at sharp swift Tigris:
not books opened before the fiery throne judging the Persian bear: nor
comparing Levites a score Neh. 12. Thucid. bok. 2.
with the Persians: nor yet Amyntas king in Macedon the third of the
Peloponnesian wars: whose son Philip reigned but twenty years. Athen. and
Alexander but six before his monarchy.

Moreover Amyntas him self reigned but few years, two of his elder sons not
long: Philip died at seven and forty, who was brought up in Epaminondas
fathers house. Thus the Persians by Greeks will not exceed.

Against Eratosthenes account.
This standing thus: how can Eratosthenes say true, whom in Clemens page 126.
(though Clemens rejects him as deceived) yet some great men greatly follow?
He has these distances. From Xerxes voyage to Archidamus wars eight and
forty years. That ended at seven and twenty. There Athens lost the
superiority of Grecia and Lacedemon, by Lysander gate it. which they lost at
Leuctra, where Epaminondas the Theban victor died after 34. years. And thence
to Philips death, who died 47. years old, he reckons years 35. But how could
he be a fit companion for Epaminondas: or yet son to Amyntas: reigning young
and but a little while. Polybius grants the Lacedaemonians but twelve years
of quiet superiority page 1. and Iustine abridging Trogus Pompeius makes
Amyntas son to Menelaus brother to Alexander who reigned in Darius Hystaspis
days. whereby it appears how little credit old Latins or some Greeks gave
the other Greeks for these times* and how Plutarch had just occasion to
condemn the Greek Chronicles.

Of Olympiades, Romes antiquity and Chaldeans.
This threefold thread was spunne against me: though I had cut the knottinesse
of them: as Alexander did the Gordian knot. For Olympiades Phlegon is the most
famous auctour whom Christians cite: joining his Olympiade two hundred and two
in the fourth year to our Lord his death. If I grant any thing good in this
account I must bring Cyrus reign over Judah unto Olympiade the eightith. For
the use of students I will afford Phlegons whole treatise: that young men may
see what stuff men bring against propriety of Scripture: afterward I will
show further their nullitie: and how the citers of them by their own auctours
are condemned. I will abridge and translate anon so much as I need. The
Grecian may take all.

He shall find their antiquity not greatly far from Hercules: whose son
Tlepolemus was Agamemnons soldier. whereby Cyrus may well be cast to Olympiad
eighty or year three hundred and twenty after their beginning, which thing
will finish this combat. Yet I loath that help, where Apollo is the counselor
of the games: a pestilence joined to their beginning: a spiders web covering
of their garlande: and Choraebus the first man (in Pausanias) whence the
account is fetched. And I marvel at my adversary who counted my doctrine
against Choraebus and him, to be Chorebus harnes. The defense of this Olympike
stuff best deserved that name. But now look to Phlegon.

(...).
(...).

(...)
(...)
(...).
(...) (...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) (...).

(...)
(...)
(...).
(...) (...).
(...).

(...),
(...)
(...).
(...).

(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).

(...)
(...)
(...).
(...) (...).
(...).

Here Lycurgus is the tenth from Hercules: he with Jphitus restored Olympikes.
Koroebus is the first gamester though not expressly. Apollo gave counsel: at
the first they neglected the game. A famine follovved. For that vanity say I
that it was at all begun: for contempt of it, said Apollo: Of whom sundry
counsels they took: of which this was one, that they should not make the
garland or crown of a fruitful tree, but of a vvild olive, beset with
cobvvebs: of which kind one among many was found in a vvood there: and was
vvalled about for to be kept still. When the Printer had set thus much, which
only was in my purpose to abridge and translate: I was further moved by the
request of a learned friend, to make Phlegon (...) of the heathen fol.


OF THE OLYMPIA, by Phlegon, freeman of Adrianus Caesar.
I Think it behooveable to tell the cause why the Olympia chansed to be set up.
And this was it. After Pisus, and Pelops, and also Hercules, the first erecters
of the solemnity and game in Olympiades, the Peloponnesians left off the The
profane were as carefully bent to this vanity, as to a thing divinely
commanded. Wherein wisdom would that Christian should let their memory perish,
and not entangle the bible with such toys.
religion a certain time, for which are numbered 28 Olympiades unto Iphitus and
Choroebus Eleus. When they had thus neglected the game, a sedition arose in
Peloponnesus. Then Lycurgus the Lacedaemonian the son of Prytaneus, of
Europus, of Sosus, of Procleus, of Aristodemus, of Aristomachus, of Cleodaeus,
of Hyllus, of Hercules and Deianira: And Iphitus son of Aemon; or (by some)
of Praxonides, a man of Elis, of Hercules lineage, and Cleosthenes son of
Cleonicus a man of Pisa, willing to restore the people to amity and peace,
derermined to renew the Olympique solemnity, and to keep the gymnike game.
Then some are sent unto Delphos to consult with Apollo, whether he also advised
to do thus. Apollo said, it was best to do it: and commanded to proclaim
truce for the cities that would be partakers of the game. After which
proclamation passing through Hellas or Grecia, a table was written for the Here
he differs from Pausanias in whom Iphitus himself the game, and Ox^tu^
house: and not Hellanodica dica of a long time. Pausonias I will (...)
hereafter.
Hellanodicae, according to which they should keep the Olympia. When the
Peloponnesians had no great mind to the game, but were unwilling; a pestilence
fell, and a corruption of fruit plagued them. Then they The Greek copy
seems to have (...) corrupt for (...) though Xylander follow the copy in
his Latin translation.
send Lycurgus again to seek some end and truce. Then the Pythia uttered
these words.

O dwellers in Pelopeis, the noble castle for all the earth, the Elis gate a
name from Elisa the eldest son of Iavan: of whom also all Grecia in Greek
bears the nam^ Hellas, and the people Hellenes. Iaon and Ladon old named.
Rivers (is) in Di^nis. de (...) Peloponnesus seem to remembrance Java^gen. 10.
and Lud. (...) Strab^ calls Elis (...) the foundation of Graecia, it seems
that there Iavans hou^s;e in Elita: and fame of Lud first settled their seats.
eldest of all mortal wightes, and the best consider from me the oracle of
Apollo, which I will speak. Jupiter is angry with you for the ceremony: and
executes wrath
Because you dishonor the Olympia, among the people of the King
Jupiter Jupiter Ol^mpius was the god of these gamesters. Tull Tusc. 2.
Pausanias records his temple in Achaia. His Image at Olympia in Eliac. and in
Attic. and sundry other places. That Idols Image Antiochus Em^ma^ies erected in
the temple of Jerusalem. Match. and Ios. Bengeorion. Again, that might warn in
left we pollute our holy Prophets with honoring Jupiter Olympius monuments.
The honor of which first Pisus ordained and set up.
Afterward Pelops making Hellas popular, set up a myndey and mastrie for dead
Oenomaus. Third among these, the boy of Amphytrio Hercules made a myndey and
game for his uncle Pelops Tantalides: which since that time I guess that the
corrupt Greek must so be amended.
ye leave: even the Ceremony, for which he (Iuppiter) angered to the heart,
raised famine and pestilence: which you may stay reviving the festivitie a-newe
again.

This being heard was told unto the Peloponnesians. They mistrusting the
oracle, send again by a common decree, to ask more diligently of Apollo
concerning the oracles. The Pythia speaks thus: O Peloponnesus dwellers, go
about your altars,
Sacrifice and obey all your Mantes commandments:
I mean the freers of Elis, keepers of the fathers custom.


After these Oracles, the Peloponnesians suffered the men of Elis to dispose the
Olympia, and to proclaim a truce to the cities. And when afterward the
Eleans would have helped the Lacedaemonians besieging A sea town of the
Lacedaemonians. Hom. odyss. 2. and Pausin Laconic.
Helos, they sent to Delphos to ask counsel: and the Pythia thus answered.

Save their country: but refrain from war.
(Teaching the Hellenes a common friendship)
Until the amiable twelve-moneth coms each The Olympiades kept every fifth
year, have full four years betwixt them. So it is called of Ovid Quinquennis
Olympia.
five years returning.
After these oracles they sure ceased from war: and looked to the Olympikes,
and for five Olympiades no man was crowned. In the sixth, they thought good to
ask the oracle whether the victories should be crowned: and they send King
Iphitus to that Chapel. Then she loosed her mouth into these words.

Iphite bestow not an apple tree like grouth on the victory.
But bestow what a wild Olive bears abundantly:
which now is covered with the fine web of the spider.
He thereupon coming into the Olympia ground: among many wild olives being in
a wood, he found one beset with cobwebbes: about which he made a wall; ^
Strabe his ancient (for Strabo wrote in Augustus and Tiberius time) be says
that until the 26. Olympiad none more crowned.
and of it a crown was given to the winners. Daicles Messenius was the first
that was crowned, who in the seventh Olympiade wanne the stadion: if the
authority of this fragment prevails.

uayleth. 1 Thus by Phlegon, Iphitus Olympiades can hardly be above 300. For
Iphitus is the tenth from Hercules. Now by Herodotus and Clemens, three
generations will not go above 100. years.
years after Troyes fall: or rather hardly so much. Confer with Phlegon
Eratosthenes, who places Lycurgus at 300. after Priamus wars, and then you
may see how he differs from Phlegon one hundredth year in four: whereby also
Cyrus is cast a hundredth years further off Alexander, that is so much more
before him then Phlegons account would place him, and equally the Persians
government stretched 100. years.

2 This evident case moved me to accuse Olympiades of so great deceyte, whereby
Christians have been convicted to make for the very same age near double so
many years for Grecia, when they reckon by profane Greeks, as they do for
Judah, when upon particulers they show their mind upon Ezra, Ester, Nehemias,
Aggai, Zachary, yea and somewhat of the As for Saraias father to Ezra, 2. king.
25. and 1. Chro for Iosuahs family and others.
Kings and Chronicles.

3 Poets in Phaetons guyding of the Sun out of his course, to the burning of
Mountains, and drying of Rivers, never imagined more strangenes, then our
words in deed draw: when the same Sun for Sion makes one hundred of
years: and in the self same time and space for Olympia Pisa, or Elis 200.

4 Under Iosuah and Ezekias, the staying and turnyng back, was not for Chanaan
only, but also for the whole world. The fables of the night made longer for
Herculus birth, and Egyptians records in Herodotus of Senacharib, show that
Heathen kept a remembrance of it. Our dealing makes Jews to reject all
Christianity. Their wrytinges testify that, upon Daniel. cha. 9.

My Adversary herein was to be commended, who saw that either the universal
judgment of Divines, Ebrewes, Greeks, and Barbarians, upon the last Prophets
must be altered: or the Heathen must be rejected.

But his choice I cannot commend: who had rather bring to writers ancient, in
phrases open to all eyes, a new meaning, which former ages never did, and
reason never can admit: then he would relinquish one account of Olympiades,
which he thought uniform. Mark sundry opinions di^gracing one an other.

6 Plutarch in Homers life does show, that their account was taken from 100.
years after the Troik fyghtes. In Romulus he follows an account far unlike:
in Numa, he condemns all gatheryng of times from Olympiades, as I touched.
Where let any Logician judge whether he must mean Olympiades or not, by the
times gathered from Olympionicae? Mine adversary would hane Olympionicas not
Olympiades uncertain. I love not many words, to defend against Anaxagoras,
that snow is white.

7 Consider Phlegons difference from Plutarches, and that of Eratosthenes from
his: both mentioned above: and think that Agamemnon never saw his Nobles so
standing amazed like stagges, as a careful reader wylbe amazed, that men of
rare learning should so forget them selves, as with such reeds to fight: not
as Pigmeanes with Cranes, but as Poulydamas with that which no hands can
resist.

8 Suidas would make Phlegon disgrace him self. Hom. 2. lib. 3. Paus. in
Eliac.
For in him Phlegon places famous ^ hales in Olympiade the seventh. He might
as well place Solon or Iakim king of Judah in the same Olympiade. And Plutarch
touches this, where he brings gatheringes from Solons antiquity, whereby
many artificial Chroniclers judged, that Solon reached not to Croesus times.

9 To fortify Suidas and Phlegon, burning all these records, take Divines
against them selves, even those Divines who have brought first this learning to
the Church: not of an ill intent, but as then the times gave occasion to deal
with Heathen: ^atianus, Africanus, Clemens Fusebius, Theophilus, all from
troops of ancient Greeks prove that Meneiaus came to Chanaan in Hyrams time,
or Salomons. Now Olympiades begin 405. years after that, by their own
account: and by Scripture Babylons captivity 408. after Salomons Temples
foundation. So full well Suidas might place Thales in Olympiade the seventh.

10 Somewhat near this comes that account of Suidas in Anacreon, where Cyrus
and Cambyses are in the Olympiade the 25. But by Phegon he cannot be Monarch,
before the 80. Olympiade. And that would I wyllyngly admit: and for this much
Ellanodicae would give sentence with me, that even my Adversaries testimonies
mar their pley.

11 Apollodorus placing Anaximenes birth in Olympiade 63. by collection places
Cyrus as Ido: Laertius writes that: in whom Chilon the sage, by Pamphila being
Ephorus Olympiade the sixth, by Sosigenes fifty sixth (a full 200. difference)
proves a great diversity received in these accomptes, which being granted,
all this work of Olympiade reckoninges, by fire of judgment wylbe consumed as
straw.

12 Africanus twice strikes him self, For he begins Olympiades 1020. from
Moses. In Eus^b prae^^ and in Them. 8. gives the Macedonians 370. years of
geuernement. With such thorns do they prick their eyes, who mary Scriptures
to profane Heathen, and mar the light of our happy Redemption.

13 Thus it appears what the testimony is worth which so certaynely places
Cyrus reign in Olympiade 55. which is fortified by the names of Phlegon,
Thallus, Castor, Diodorus, and all that handle Olympiades. Eusebius. praep. 10.
Cyrus by Phlegon and Lucian might be borne near Olympia 53. and take Babylon
at Olympiad 80.


14 By some Heathen who make him live 100. years, the matter comes near some
famous reckonyngs for his first princehood, but not for his last years: Where
old Divines cite Heathen against their meaning. For Heathen place Cyrus first
times in Olympiade 55. and not his Monarchy, as does Eusebius. And stories make
him reign 70. before that, as I have touched before: But I will more fully
handle Cyrus, with Olympike confusion, after I have once briefly gone through
unto Alexanders times.

Of Darius Hystaspis.
Darius Hystaspis reign by Lilius Gyraldus, touches Olympiade 80. whereby
Cyrus (after Phlegon) coming to the same time, it might seem by this, as by
other arguments, that Cyrus and Cambyses last years were at Babylons fall.
And they also be holden true, who think that Darius Madai is no other then he
whom Greeks call Darius the first. And reason would gather that his wars
against Scythia in revenge of Cyrus death, and against Athens upon his return,
should be soon after: of which the later was ten years before Xerxes
voyage into Greece. And that will somewhat agree with Ctesias and Horod. conferd
for Darius time, and it may draw Xerxes wars within less then 30. years of
Babels fall.

Of the Olympiade 75. joined to Xerxes war.
1 By the former it may appear that Xerxes war falls not in any agreement
stablyshed, on Olympiade 75. for which time Pausanias has a singular example
of vnpossibility in this kind. For Oebotas an Olympionike, wan the race in
Olympiade the sixth, and fought against Mardonius in the 75. that is near 280.
years after. Pausanias demands: And how can that be? and tells, that he
must record as he finds, but must not believe all. Thus the recorder of them
wounds them, with as great a blow as ever Lygdamis or Poulydamas gave in them.

2 Pindarus scholiast makes him 40. year old at Xerxes war: to live in all
55. years, to dye when Bion, or Abion was Mayor at Athens in Olympiad 86. And
this comes somewhat near the 80. year for Cyrus and Darius.

3 Suidas places Isocrates birth in Olympiade 86. and after the Peloponnesian
wars: whereby the confusion of Greeks appears. But I had rather place
Isocrates birth nigh Xerxes wars: and that by an other collection I can
prove. He lived by his own reckonyng near 100. years, and Plutarch makes
him to speak that apopthegim to Sophocles, the praise whereof Tully gave to
Pericles: 1. Offie.
That a Senator must as well bridle his eyes as his hands: which fitnes of age
would not suffer well done, unless he were borne about Xerxes war.

4 The same Suidas places Socrates birth at the Peloponnesian styrres, who was
borne near Xerxes, and lived 60. years at the least: his death is known:
under the 30. Tyrants: the next year after Lysander at Hellespontus
Aegospotamos, and Attens overcome the nation. Socrates birth by Suidas was in
Olympiade 77. What can we make of such Greek records, which care not what
they utter? Yet this much may be gathered hence, that Xerxes and Archidamus
Peloponnesian troubles, were nothing near 50. years, as I hucidides would
have it, whom Demosthenes against Neaera follows. What they meant, or cared
for truth I will tell hereafter.

5 Lysias birth by Plutarch is in Olympiade 82. the second year, when
Philocles was Mayor: whose maioralty falls out 8. years sooner by Diodorus.

6 Pliny book 35. Cha. 9. blames some who place the paynter Xeuxis opening of
his trade in Olympiad 89. which he would have to be in the fourth year of
the 95. marueylyng at 24. years difference. But he might mark that 24. or
rather 30. years be added more betwixt Lysander in Olympiede 94. and Philip
Macedon, then ever the fyery mass of the Sun lyghtened.

7 So in Pliny himself Mausolus whom Demosthenes commenter makes alive when
that Rhetor accused Timocrates in Philip Macedons days: Pliny places his
death in Olympiad 100. the second year.

8 In the same sort Suidas places Philips agones, or triumphs in Olympiade
100. which by Athenaeus account (in whom Philip reigns but 20. years before
Alexander, whose reign began the 111. Olympiade) should be Olympiade 106. So
in Zeuxis, Mausolus and Philip, the theeuyshe Olympiades falling out, bring
truth to light.

This special matter I would ask, if Antiochus Epiphanes dyed in the 154.
Olympiade, and Alexander in the 114. the first year? How could Antiochus in
the sixth year of his reign set upon Ptolomy Philometor, made king 143. after
Alexanders death, by the Mathematician Ptolemy lib. 6. cap. 4. Philometor
should be king 6. year before Antiochus?

In the same error is the beginning of the Greeks Kingdom from the 14. year
after Alexanders death. For in the seventh year of his kingdom. Match. 1. in
143. of the Greeks he sets upon Egypt: Seeing the same is the number from
Alexanders death to Philometors reygne, the same beginning also must the date
of the same number have: and presently from Alexanders death must begin the
date of the Greeks kingdom, as Codoman ryghtly proves. And here most have
lymp^ades deceived our best learned, the late and aucient.

Also here Liuies copies would Codoman have amended that for 488. the year
before the first Punik war he would naue 476. put in all copies, that the
famous Eclipse which was at Aemylius victory over Perseus recorded when it was,
might have agreement of Antiochus sixth year which is joined to Aemylius
victory. So all copies must be amended, and judgments reformed, and plain
made rough, or Olympiades must be holden but games.

Cyrus, in particularitie specially conferred with Olympiades, disagreeing
extremely.
I Will return to join some of these former times which I have touched, with
others extremely striving, at ancient Cyrus times: whereupon a great part of
our debate stands: that not only by a particular view of all the Greek times
some little in each, but in the chief, unspeakable discord may appear even by
their testimony who have been the principal folowers of them. Afterward I
will show some further store of absurdities bred by them in other matters: But
chiefly must his age be examined.

For the most use of diversity disanullyng Olympiades, wylbe about Cyrus: for
those whole troops that have been thought to agree, that he reigned in
Olympiade 55. Thallus, Castor, Phlegon, Polybius, Diodorus, and all that handle
Olympiades. Africanus in Eusebius is author. Now mark their diversity.

1 Africanus places Cyrus dimission of Judah in the same time, as I mentioned
above.

2 The rare man M. Joseph Scaliger somewhat corrects it. He would have Cyrus
to reign 27. years of his 30. before Zorobabels government.

3 And I showed my mind, that profane writers regarded his first reign, not
his Monarchy, who heard not before Alexanders time the name of any Babylonians,
who reigned over Judah: but otherwise then Scripture does record them, and
far in an other number.

4 By Eusebius admittyng Menelaus to be of Salomons times, and Olympiades about
Nabuchadnezars, (so I proved that the account of Diodorus does cast them) Cyrus
being after Olympiades 220. years in the 55. Olympiade he should be as late as
Alexander. Clemens and Africanus be in Eusebius blame also.

5 Africanus former counters twice mar his sums. And whereas he fortifieth
him self, by making Ogygos and Phoroneus of Moses times, and all three 1020.
years before any Olympiade, by his own collection, and by Acousilaus,
Hellanicus, Philochorus, by Castor and Thallus, by Diodorus and Alexander
Polyhistor: this fortification of his, makes Cyrus to be as lately as Judas
Machabaeus.

6. Moreover, if Africanus former number of the Macedonians 370. years be not
corrupt for 270. while he gives Persians 230. By descendyng from Tiberius, and
by the Romans 60. 60. 230. 370. 660. That should be the 20. year of Ezekias.
Sanacharibs fall was 666. before the resurrection of our Lord. Africanus
should place Cyrus reign where Esaias does name Cyrus.
years of empire, by the Macedonians 370. and by the Persians 230. he will
cast Cyrus to Ezekias days, in their eyes which admit Daniels seauens properly
spoken, as he does, and by mine adversaries grant, of certayntie in the
limittes. Ad thus the Greeks help for times count, being laid in a balance,
wylbe lyghter then vanity it self.

7 Or if we say that Africanus number of 370. be for 270. of the Macedonians,
which from Alexanders death Ptolemy makes to be 294. he does shorten it 24.
years. And more then the Jews in Seder Olamdoe: And so Cyrus should take
Babylon in Olympiade 61. by collection from him.

8 Near that account comes Theophil. 3.
Theophilus, who places Cyrus death in Olympiade 62. where Diodorus lib. 2.
places Cambyses reign.

9 Also near that account comes Clemens by a consequent: in whom as (for an
other purpose hereafter I will show) Iechonias captivity is in Olympiade 48.
This Olympiade 48. shall serve hereafter for diverse purposes.
sixty two years more will make more then other 15. Olympiades, and all 63.
Olympiades. Herodotus brings Croesus fall to that time. For Gyges is king in
Olympiad 18. by Clemens, Olympiad 23. by Tatianus: After 170. years, by
Herodotus or 42. Olympiades Croesus becomes poor Irus: when Cyrus had taken
him.

10 The reader may remember how Suidas places Cyrus with Cambyses at less
then At the. 25.
half 55. Olympiades, and Polycrates at 52. and again Cyrus taking of Sardis
at Olympiade 55. which dealings might well be in Nebucadnezars days. And
whereas Lilius Gyraldus in Anacreon blames Suidas copy: and so does my
adversary, and VVolphius to, though all printes agree: and if they were faulty,
Suidas must be amended not only for Cyrus, but for Polycrates, and for Thales
also: Here it may be seen what force these games have in these saddest wits,
that for them all the course of writers must be altered: but where they best
agree with Scripture, as Phlegons 100. difference from Diodorus, casts Cyrus
fitly for Daniel. I could wyshe that Satan's testimony should stand only
when he is forced to speak for the Sun of God: and not when all truth and
story by it is troubled.

(...) Lastly if Solon was borne (by Suidas) in Olympiade fifty six, and was
doubtless far ancienter then Cyrus Monarchy, how should Cyrus reign in
Olympiade 55?

The conclusion touching Cyrus.

And thu^, I turn for that testimony, thought invincible, of Thallus, Castor,
Phlegon, Diodorus, Africanus, Eusebius, and all: I turn Thallus against
Thallus, Castor against Castor, Phlegon against Phlegon: to set them all on
flame: and all, again them selves all. And the ground of this I laid in my
first Book after the year of the world 3000. under Salomons reign, hereby
well might I despise Olympike numbryng of the Suns iourneys, damned by the
approuers of it.

And if I would descant upon Cyrus name, fitly might I compare the name of
Cyrus with this. For Greeks expound his name to signify the Sun. It
falls out, that men might as well deny the Suns course, as deny the
propriety of Daniel^ Seauens, for the course of the Son of Justice, to shine
to all souls: even from Cyrus first year unto the Redemption. And as nothing
is more enemious to salvation, then gamestery: so experience teaches, that
nothing has hurted the prophecies more, then a gamelyke and negligent account
of prophecies trial, from gamesters accomptes of Olympian Belial-like plays.

Aratus the Greek Poet, prayseth God divinely, for his works of the Creation,
and placing the Stars for a fit use of humane life: for ploughing and
digging, for sowing and planting: and therein holds God a joyful father, a
great help for men.

To Athenianes S. Paul cites Aratus, even in a cause wherein by their wicked
laws he was gilty of most high punishment. For they held it death to speak
against their Gods: and Socrates felt that, though afterward they mourned
for killying of him. Now Athenians only of Greece to account of disturb
(though they disturb them selves also) yet they disturb our accomptes. To
whom I will oppose the wit of the plougher and ditcher, who follow the plain
experience of that, that by nature is planted in them. The same judgment for
propriety of speech in Daniel always holden, should prevail: that he who
never deceived the ploughmen or ditchers in course of the year, should not
deceive them, that from Gabriel and Daniel told when the Fig tree should
b^dde, and the voice of the Turtle should be heard on mountains. I must
depart from these joyful speeches, to the loathsome errors of Olympiades,
whereby our youths have a mind to please them selves, rather then to live by
Moses and the Prophets: while they deem of some deep skill in profane
writers: wherein I trow it will not fall out that they can be thought able to
alter lew and Gentile from the meaning which bytherto they have had, for the
last Prophets, or the ordinary course of lyneall succession of Abiud and
Rhesa. For whom I am sorry that my adversary termed them, A digression to a
collateral matter, of our Lords family.
Autoris (Concentus) obscura sy^era. Where the age of Irus* or Thersites would
serve, if their line were in record for posterity. The sons of Dauides
kingdom, of whom all the world is, and was always Some full badly have taught,
that S. Paul condemns Genealogies of Scripture. That would make the holy
Apostle a blasphemer, and a speaker against God, and a shaker of the stars in
holy writ. He meant no such matter: but to check the Talmudists feigning
genealogies: wherewith they flow full foolyshly.
bound to take notise* they may not be holden obscure* but to shine as the
Moon among the Stars on night: and they do disgrace so many erroneous
authors, that all copyes of those which have been written or printed, might be
thought enough to fill Paul's church all from the floor to the roof. Such
glory and such use the wisdom of Christ has contrived into the line of his
kindred: even for proof of that prophecy which so directly calls us to a most
certain year of his death, and reprofe of all Heathen tyme-rolles: and
specially the Olympike pastymes. But I have more plentifully, then brief
assertions suffer, enlarged this blame of that witness, which would bring
Cyrus and the Son out of his course, and make Phaeton ruler of the Chariot.
Now I will pursue other wandringes, and come to others, of whom Heathen have
store: which live before their elders were borne, or dye themselves before ever
they saw the ey-liddes of the morning.

A Cataloge of further impossibilities in Olympike reckonynges.
1 By this variety of accomptes Clemens Alexandrinus makes Aggai Zachary and
Malachy to prophecy before Ezekiel. For he places Iechonias captivity in
Olympiade 48. (Ezekiel prophesied not until five years after that. Ezekiel. 1.)
and Aggai, Zachary and Malachy, does he also of resolute purpose place in
Olympiade 48. making them elder then Pythagoras, though his familiarity with
Amasis might have warned him better. Yea Thales also is hereby made their puny.
These be the wonderful words of Clemens. It is clear, that they who
prophesied under Darius Hystaspis in the second year of his kingdom Aggai,
Zachari, and he who amongst the twelve is called Angel (Malachi he means) in
the first year of the 48. Olympiade, are elder then Pythagoras, which was in
the 62. Olympiade, and elder then I hales, which was in the 52. Clemens runs
into this blame, no less culpable then yfa man should place queen Mary before
king Richard the third: or (to spe ke prouerbially) all the Carts in London
before their Horses. But Clemens must be spared. Come to Heathen records.

2. Parmenides floryshed in Olympiade 29. But his ancient Anaximenes saw not
the Suns light until the Olympiade 63. nor Pittacus the old sage, until the
54. nor Thales until the 56. though by other he dyed before he is borne, by
some. Laert. Solon also by Laertius florisheth when by Suidas he is yet
unborn. Dracon also by ^atianus being in Olympiad the 30. the old lawmakers
should be as late as Parmenides. So the Poet Sophocles far elder then Plato,
should floryshe with Eudorus Platoes scholar at the 73. Olympiade Laertius and
Suidas.

3 Zenon was a boy, and Socrates a young man, when Parmenides was very aged,
that is 65. years old, and at the solemnity called Panathenaea, they dispute,
in Platoes Parmenides. Yet Socrates is borne in the 77. Olympiade (as before I
touched from Suidas) and Zeno the younger in the 70. by Laertius.

4 But Plutarch has no fellow for this purpose: for in one man's life of a
time well known, and course of life, differyng twyse, from common reckonyng.

5 Lysias by Plutarch is borne in Olympiade 82. the second year, when
Philocles was Archon at Athens. The Olympiades by Diodorus were 80. under
Philocles. In Plutarch the same Lysias after 63. years, is in the 90.
Olympiade. 40 years would have brought him from the 82. unto the 92. He little
cared for that account, that so does speak. Neither may the print be blamed,
unless the Basil and Stephens in the life of Lysias be blamed at once. A Chaos
of confusions have Greeks in this kind, that Apollo the wicked spirit might
well be counted witty, in appoynting a Tree beset all with Spiders nets, for
a garlande of these games. For the house of a Spider will be their confidence,
which entangle Divinity and humanity with these toys.

6 A great deal of foul play about Alexander the great has this gamestery
wrought in sad writers. Our country man Florentius VVigoriensis burieth
Alexander in Olymprade 110. By Diodorus at 111. he enters Asia: and by 114.
the first year, by Arrianus he dies, And hereupon belyke Duris places his
death (in Clem. 1. Str.) where others place his voyage first.

7 And upon this confusion also it may be said, that some make Alexanders
reign after the Persians to be of 18. Ptolemy has 294. year from Alexanders
death to the last Cleopatars and Clemens also elsewhere: but by ^06. he must
gieue Alexander 18. years.
years, where Clemens makes the whole Macedonians unto Cleopatras fall to be
306. Ouides Jupiter was never so frighted with Phaetons running of the Sun
out of his course, least all should be brought by flames into the old Chaos:
as the course of the holy story is disturbed by seeking help at these forlorn
Olympike records. But I must haste to end this Olympike differing
absurdities. Yet Pindarus the harping Poet, who wrote of the Olympian
gamesters, and his commenters, they may not be omitted: He, as he thought, no
Star bryghter then the Sun on the day time: so he thought no gamestery
better then the Olympike.

1 First for Pindarus, if in his Herodotus also mentions many nobles,
Olympionicas, but not having any number of a certain Olympiade.
time any account had been known of their number, the Poet so witty, and so
far fetchyng antiquities, would hardly have omitted that.

2 The commenters upon him bring a reckoned number of the Olympiades upon two
gamesters: Xenophon and Psaumis: Xenophon Corinthius wan the stadion, by
Triclinius in Olympiade 79. yet the same Xenophon Corinthius in Pausanias wan
the stadion in Olympiade the 29. when Archimedes was Archon, not Archidemides,
whom Diodorus brings. And yet the same Pausanias for the 29. Olympiade
(which he makes to be soon after Gyges reign, when Ardys graundfather to
Croesus reigned) makes Miltiaden to be Archon. But the print may not be
blamed. For Pausanias him self bryngyng unreconcilable word^s of Olympiades,
tells what he must record: but must not believe. Besides the Latin
translater in both places fo^oweth the Greek, as little caryng for the
authority of the games. Thus for Xenophon the commenter and Pausanias disagree.

3 For Psaumis the gamester two commenters, more fall out. Pindarus does
commend him, of his town Camarina: which town he termed the New-towne.
Thereupon thus does the commenter speak. Camarina was buylt in Olympiade 45.
destroyed in the 57. buylt again in the 85. lately before Psaumis gam^stery.
This the same speaks also: Camarina was buylt of Gelo in the 42. Olympiade as
Timaeus writes. But Philistus says, that in the third Olympiade Gelo buylt
it. So Gelo should be about 160. years differing from him self. Trichinus
says thus: Camarina was buylt first in the 45. Olympiade, and was ou^rthrowen
in the 57. and was buylt in the 82. Olympiade at Psaumis victories. Now the
former commenter joins the taking of it to the time of Darius us Hystaspis
wars. And how could that be agreeable to Cyrus 55. Olympiade, or to Xerxes
wars in 75. which was but ten years later then the former of Darius?
Cornelius Agrippa might fitly have brought olympike records into the vanity of
sciences. For nothing can be so vain.

The causes of differing by Olympiades, sundry games, and sundry game-rulers
1 Pausanias in Eliacis does show, that a full dosen of several games were set
up, at several times far distant: and yet he omitteth some that others have.

2 The Stadion or foot race was the first: whence of late men took their
account.

3 But the most ancient reckon from other gamesters. Thucidides declares that:
the most ancient to my remembrance that takes any note of time from them.
Thus he notes the fourth Summer of the Peloponnesian wars. It was the Summer
in which Dorieus Rhodius the second time wanne. What game they wanne
Pausanias teaches, who says, that Diagoridae, the sons of Diagoras, whereof
Dorieus was one, practiced Championry. Now this family of Diagoras was most
famous: whence two sons in one day wan games, whereby Diagoras their father
was counted an happy man. Tully records it, and Pausanias: yet none of this
family practiced runnyng. Tusc. lib. 1. Eliac. lib. 2.


4 Likewise he marketh the Summer of the twelfe year thus: It was the Summer
in which Androsthenes Arcas the first time wanne the Pancration. Pausanias of
late, not of old, has a number kept of it.

5 The Race was the basest, and fit for poor men: others were of more
estimation: wherefore the Race being an obscure play no reason moved the most
ancient to keep account of it.

6 Isocrates commending Alcibiades* Isocrates de Bigis.
shows that he and Alcmeon his mothers great ancestour wanne the game of the
two * Horses, and held that worthiest for Nobility. Neither does Isocrates any
where bring any number of that* or mention of the foot^ race: yet his argument
would well enough have suffered hyme. And I think y^ an account had been kept
and known, it would have helped the glory of his client, Alcibiades the
younger, to have Alcmeo^ in such certain record.

7 So Au^us Gellius record^th from some Chronicles, Gell lib. 15. cap. 16. An
Olympiad^ 18. from stadion, called the first. See Paus. Eliac. 1. where
Euribatus, not Milo is victor.
that Milo Crotoniensis the wrestler, was crowned in the first Olympiade. Now
the first Olympiade for wrestlyng, as of late accomptes go is 18. Olympiades
about 7^ years after the Stadion. And thus diverse pleyes ma^re the Chronique
pleyers:

Of sundry game: rulers.
1 And other cause of the diversity is, that the rulers were much altered.
Pausanias also records that. And in the very records accomp^^ (...)
untunable confusion. His letters do speak thus.

2 The order of the Game-rulers which was at the first, continued not
unchanged, unto our age. But Iphitu^ alone did rule the Game: likewise after
(...)

3 In the fyftieth Olympiade; two chosen (...) of Elis did rule: and so for
along lyme the number of two Game-rulers continued.

Nor mark the cart before the horse in^ Pausanias reckonyng.
4 In the 25. Olympiade (...) ruled. The (...) Olympiade after that, a tenth
was added. Here the 25. ^an not be understood, but from a new beginning after
the fiftieth. So Pausanias holds on.

5 The 103. Olympiade, twelve of the several twelve tribes of Elis ruled. But
when soon they were oppressed by the Arcadianes, and lost part of their
ground, they were diminished, of so many tribes, as dwelt in that lost ground.

6 And in the 104. Olympiade, their tribes being brought into eight: the
Ellanodicae were eight, out of them.

7 In the 108. Olympiade, they returned again unto the number of ten^e: and
that continued until our times. Thus Pausanias writes. He, and Phlegon, both
lived under Emperor Adrianus: in which age Pausanias had as suer records of
number in Olympiades, as Ovid had of Actaeones hounds: or the Chaldeans for
monumentes of four hundredth thousand years, or 70000. more by Diodorus and
Tully. Or the Egyptians in Laertius for the time betwixt Vulcane their
Philosopher, and Alexander Macedon, of years 48063. Or Arrianus and Pliny for
the Indianes 153. kings (betwixt Dionisius and one Pliny has the same number
of kings and years from Bacchus, or Dionysius to Alexander the great, and
three months forsooth. lib. 6. cap. 17.
Androcotus) and their years 6042. Men acquainted with deceyuing, can put in
^ummes odd, to make babes chinke that they have cast it so exactly, and have
sure testimony for all.

Pausanias utterly overthrown by himself.

1 By Eratosthenes Lycurgus floryshed 300. years after Hector. By Pausanias no
less then by Phlegon Iphitus, and Lycurgus were both of one age, in Eliac.
lib. 1. Yet Pausanias follows Eratosthenes, who makes Iphitus later by an
hundredth years. Strom. 1. Dionysius also and Diodorus agree with Eratosthenes,
whom Pausanias following, differs an hundredth of years from him self.

2 Also Pausanias brings a monument of a son of Iphitus, saf returned from
Ilion, buried at home. Schedius his other son dyed at Troy. Paus. in Ph^. As
possibly as they could be buried 300. years before they were borne, by the
former testimony: so easily can Olympiades be brought to a certaynty, and
agreement in Pausanias.

3 And if the testimony of two can serve against their own trade, Pausanias
and Phlegon disanull Eratosthenes, Dionisius, and Diodorus, and prove them more
differyng from them two, them mine adversary does from me. And Pausanias no
less then Phlegon casts Cyrus to Olympiade 80. whereby fitly the Olympiade
202. may end 400. years for our Lords redemption. And so Pausanias disgraceth
all this olympian doctrine, no less, or rather much more apparently, then
Plutarches testimony in Solon does cast off all Grecke Chronikes: And yet
Pausanias is the special man that plentifully writes of Olympiades. But of
those famous Olympionikes whom Herodotus handles (without any number from the
first game) he I trow, has none but Clisthens of Sycion, in, or near
Olympiade 48. in Phoc. 223. But let us come to the first recorder of them, to
Hippias Eleus, of them, and him, Plutarch in Numa thus writes.

Plutarch of Hippias.
They say that Pythagoras Spartiates, winnyng the Olympian game the Stadion in
the sixteenth Olympiade (in the third year whereof Numa reigned) came to
Italy, was acquainted with Numa, and help him for the orderyng of his
Kingdom. And a little after. It is a hard thing to bring the times exactly, and
specially them which are gathered from the game winners Olympi^^ike: the table
whereof ( they say) was but a late invention of Hippias Eieus, grounded upon no
argument that might forte credit unto it. That Plutarch, by times gathered
from the Olympionicae, means Olympiades, it is clear by him self: which
calls that, the sixteenth Olymprade, which he gathers from Pythagoras
victory. Of Hippias worthynesse Plato has pretty floutes.

How Plato sets out Hippias.
Socrates in Plato disputyng with Hippias, tells him, that he heard him bost,
how coming to Olympia he told, that he made with his own hands all that he
had about his body: his Ring he had engraued, his Shoes he had sowed, his
Coat and Shirt he had wouen, yea and platted his Girdle Persianlike for
bravery, and had works poetical, tragoedies and dithyrambes, and prose of all
cunnyng. This Hippias may as well be thouht to have Olympiade accomptes of his
own making: as Plutarch recorded. And if he were alive now, to answer again
to all demaundes he should be asked: not as he was by Socrates, whether
Achilles or Ulysses were the better, but what authority he had for his Olympian
table? And not Plato only for him should make a Diologe of lying, but others
also, unless he gave a better answer, then the matter seems to suffer.

Of the authority of others of Elis, citizens to Hippias.
Pindarus commends gamesters from their towns fame. So can I commend
Hippias authority from his townsmen. This of them Pausanias reports. Elei
worship Bachus most of all the Gods, and for him keep a feast called Thyia,
Outrage, and say, that their God comes to their feast. Into a chamber they
put three empty pannes; (...) the presence of such as will behold: they seal^
the doors: on the morrow they find the pannes full of Wine, the seals being
whole: and this they swear to be true. So true do I hold their reckonyng of
Olympiades.

Objection.
But Xenophon reckons by a certain number.

Answer to Xenophons Olympiade 93.
1 Xenophon in deed seems to countenance Hippias Eleus a little. For he
reckons Ellanic. 1. the Olympiade nynty three. But with a great number of
other notes: and by the game of two Horses coched, first set up for a game: and
called Xynoris.

2 The next Olympiade after, he forsakes all numbryng, and barely by the
gamester Crocmas Thessalus, describes it.

3 His number either was not of old in his copyes, or of small estimation: if
Suidas followed authors of account, by whom Philips triumphs fall to Olympiade
100. or, rather Philip was nygh the supposed 93. Olympiade, how so ever to
others it can truly be joined, and both, for so much, may well stand the 93.
and the 100. Olympiade, to show the mean time, to be but little above 24.
years.

4 Timaeus and Philistus for times not long before, whom for Camarina I cited,
little regarded olympian sums, after Xenophons reckonyng. Neither can later As
Dionys. Diod. Plut. Athen. Laert. Gell. etc.
men bring any authority for them, when Hippias never found two of his age
embracers of his Olympian table.

Of Solons age, and Philip Macedons, to be of the like distaunce by Heathen, as
Iakim and Iaddue are cast from scripture to be.
A Gaynst such as like of Olympiades. Solons lawgeuing, and Nebuc. 1.
I may bring them, and that well for Solons age, whom Tatianus places in
Olympiade 40. Now in the 48. Clemens does place Nebuchadnezars 8. year, and
captivity of Iechonias. Wherefore Solon should be of Josias time.

Laertius places Solons Lawgeuing in Olympiade 46. that is, about Iakims
reign. Let us hold on then to Athens fall, in these iourneys.

Pisistratidae ruled Athens 40. Pisist. of Sedekias time.
Isocrat^de biga.

About Euilmerodachs twelfth year they might be* cast out, and Miltiades made
by them ruler of Chersonelus, might be then some 40. years old.

Marathon field 20. Marathon field about the 13. of Zorob. and Xerxes war was
about 23. of Zorob. or not much more.
years after that, when Mardonius was there: soon after for envy Miltiades
banishment of ten years seems to follow. That Andocides mentions.

Xerxes war was ten years after that. There the principality of Athens grew:
which I would reckon* from Xerxes praeparation, when Grecia consulted of
defense, and knew that which way Athens took, all would fall.

Miltiades in his ten years banyshment, Andocid. de pace.
is a mean of truce betwixt Athens and Spart. And this can hardly be 7. years
after: but grant seven.

Thuc. 1. Helen. 2. Andocides of Pisistratides times spoke for it, the
grandfather to the orator.
Thence the truce kept of 13. years ensued. Then sone after a peace of 30.
kept, 14. by Thucidedes, 15. by Xenophon: yet Aeschines and Andocides speak,
that Athens kept that peace 30. years, but Thucidedes and Xenophon expound
their meaning. And they expound Thucidedes and Demosthenes, who make 50. years
betwixt Xerxes wars, and Archidamus: which in propriety was little more then
half so much: and Isocrates gives all Athens principallity but 65. Isocr. in
Panath.
which principallity ended not until Lysander of Lacedaemon took Athens,
after 28. years war.

In that war, That was in ye 1. of Pelop. war. Thuc. 1.
Atrometus father to Aeschines the orator, lost his wealth belike through
Archidamus, when Attica was ouer-run. So he might well be borne at Xerxes
wars, and yet he was but 94. when his son pleaded for his life against
Demosthenes. Aeschines also served under Alcibiades. Socrates and Alcibiades
were killed near that wars end. Aeschines by the judgment of As Demetrius
and others in Apollonius.
some, heard Socrates. He should be as Pamphilus in Terence past minority that
heard Philosophers. Grant him some twenty five years of age then. He died
after Alexander, about 75. So Philip should dye after Alcibiades about 40.
years: Alcibiades and Socrates died nere together after Lisanders victory,
over Athens.
then was the father of Aeschines alive and his mother, who had fled at
Lysanders victory: his elder brother was alive, his younger, his Children were
yet but young, and then Demosthenes reckeneth but 240. years from that time a
little before Philips death unto Solon: who by the way sticked Against Neaeram.
not to take 50. for little more then half fifty.

To Solons last times, about 200. by Scripture compared in Iakim and Iaddue,
with Solon and Demosthenes, may well be granted, and the whole 240. unto
Solons first years.

Yea the general speech of Greece in Socrates time makes Solon very ancient:
whereby he might well match Pharao Nechoes antiquity. Yet the The Greek term I
keep: not having another certain.
hulkes of Nechoes ships made by his authority, abode unto Herodotus days:
which argues somewhat the shortness of the time, to be not above a man's old
age of 150. years, when Henodotus might write that.

So by Olympiades, the best that they afford, best agrees with Scripture.
Otherwise they appear to be nothing worth: and I may justly blame my
adversary, for defending that they are not most v^certaine.

Of Romes Chronicle noted in latin A. V. C. anni vrbis conditae: the years
since the City was built.
ROmes antiquity also is as one thread of the three: which can not soon be
broken. But Clotho the daughter of Night in Hesiod, seems to be the first
spinner of it. Or as Penelope twisted and untwisted her thread, to keep aloof
Homer in Odiss.
her lovers: so is the antiquity of Rome spun: What one twindeth another
vntwindeth, and for any purpose some thing hence may be brought: Dionys. 1.
antiqui.
The oldest Roman writer being about 500. years later then Romulus is,
supposed and recorded builder of Rome: and extreme disagreement arising herein.

Onuphrius wondreth at the variety of opinions, by whom and when Rome should
be built: and cites a full tedious sort. To him I refer young students.

Ennius in his time, from since Romulus built Rome, holds it about 700.
years.

Varro in Tullies age begins a new account, and makes it then scant 700.
years old.

For comparison, after Troy and before Alexander: and by subduction with Cyrus
take this.

Gellius by Cornelius Nepos and Cassius, makes it built about 300. years
after the Troyan horse, and 400. before Alexanders birth. Now Trogus in
Iornandes makes Cyrus to be in Tomyris war 630. after Priamu^ death.
Wherefore Cyrus should be about the 300. A. V. C. and about 100. before
Alexanders birth: and that should I grant. Thus Rome helps nothing.

So we may compare the Roman kings with Iakim king of Judah, and with Cyrus.
For by 300. years from Priamus to Romulus, and Commonly noted upon Liuy.
244. from Romulus to Tarquinius and Brutus death: Romes kings shall be found
to end before Iudahs, whereby Cyrus shall be nothing further from Alexander then
I place him.

Iornandes is helped by Democritus in Laertius, who was borne in Olympiade the
80. and when he wrote Micron Diacosmon reckons it after the Troikes 730.
years. How true it is, I will not dispute. By the same account I made Zeno
Iumor to Socrates, though In Parm^nide.
by Plato he were elder: and for to dash here again humane authority lyfted
against God, I may cite Democritus, no less helpyng me then Iornandes.

Ephorus Cumaeus helps more, who makes 750. from Heracliae, returnyng unto
his time: later a little then Democritus. So Iornandes has a dooble help. Now
Heraclidae came to Peloponnesus the 80. year^ after the Troikes by Thuci^ lib.
1. and by Eratosthe^^^in (...) strom. 1. Apollodoms, and Diodorus* lib. 1.

Isocrates giving Lacedemon 700. Confer Panegyric and Panathenaic.
years (...), since Heraclidae there seated, of whom they^ kings came, runs
in the same way with the other Greeks, to place Cyrus no ancienter then I
place him, by Iornandes accomptes.

Extremities in shortness.
1 Vergil the Poet, the glory not only of Mantu^, but of Rome also, he coming
after M. Varro, whose account (I think) mine adversary follows, controlleth
him, aeneid. 1. and Chytre^^^ Chron.
and makes Rome younger then Hectors end, not 430. years but 360. as
Chytraeus notes: whereby Iornandes placing Cyrus in 630. and Gel^ius placing
Alexanders by (...) 400. V. C. 70. not 100. shall be left betwixt Cyrus end and
Alexanders birth. So Vergils account should favor the Jews.

2 Julian the Emperor, though profane, yet learned, and compelled to honor
Christ, even in his destruction, he also dasheth all Heathen honor.

In his Saturnalib. Iulians Caesar's.
Romulus makes a feast for the Roman Emperors, and some others. All their
notable saultes he sets forth in that discourse. And in speeches of the
Emperors, Julius has a principal place. He commends himself of his city
Rome: that it beginning of 3000. men within less then 600. years came by
conquest to the earthes end: he means his own conquestes.

Now if we grant Alexander to be A. V. C. 400. the space thence to Julius
will be far les then the very Jews in the other extremity of shortness do affirm.

3 Hector Pintus* who boldly defends Daniel in plain propriety, Hector
Pintus upon Dan.
and for that shorteneth the Greeks, where he thought that the Persians could
not be shortened, he may have lulian against his will to fight for Daniel.

4 The same Hector deserves this commendation: that where Heathen neither
deserved nor sought glory of skill in times before Daniel, he would grant them
none, where God in letters to be seen lays a certain number of years, with
a most heavenly preparation diuidyng and subdiuidyng the whole sum. Who so
herein will not like of him, never could reverence Scripture.

For, although he knew not wherein to cross Heathen by heathens best consent,
yet in castyng of all authority of Heathen, who never agreed for two kings
together in all this time: he did that which true learning commands and
shows Gods word to be above humane controlment.

5 I am sorry that I must so much blame mine own friend, one of my old
familiarity, who calls Daniel to trial of his truth before Heathen writers:
of whom that may be spoken commonly that Aeschines speaks of Demosthenes,
that they can not speak true, neither unawares nor by compulsion. And when would
he think to make our ploughmen skillful in particulers so many* and yet
unknown to profane Heathen? Shall we, as Israel loathed Manna ready for them,
loath Gods word for tellyng plainly the truth?

6 Quintus Fabius Labeo in Tully off. 1. being vmpire between Neapolitanes and
Nolanes for limittes of ground, leaves that which was in the myddle for Rome.
The arbiterment there was not for a mean between two extremities. He^e not
Labeo, but just vmpires would go safest in, the middle: neither with the
oldest, nor latest age of Rome: but as old Cassius with Nepos and Virgil cast
it, having extremities on both sides.

Of Iakim, Solon Pisistratus, Tarquinius superbus, and Cyrus chyldhood,
touching the same times.
MY adversary helps me in all distress, not only for beginning and endyng
ryghtly Daniels seauens, whereby my cause has enough by any Logicianes
judgment: but also in particulars, where he most fyghteth, he most casts
down him self. Thus he compares ages in Mardochai. Iechonias, Cyrus, Kis:
Salathiel, Cambyses, Semei: Pedaiah, Darius Iair: Zorobabel (by him Prouepos
Iechoniae) Xerxes, and Mardochai. And this fitness he compares with
Archimedes measures. Thus any may see that he makes Cyrus first years match
Iechonias, and Zorobabels with Mardochais, full soon to see Xerxes fall.
Aeschylus^^ Perfis.
For Aeschylus told him and me, that Xerxes was young in his wars of that
great overthrow And what needed he to broche a new opinion for Mardochai, which
Greeks, Hebrews, Englysh never knew: when by him self he concludes for me.
For soon after Xerxes fall, the Temple arose. And that must be in Zorobabels
years, or Mardochaies few after the return, Xerxes their supposed equal yet
being young.

Now Tarquinius Superbus being later then Solon, and as ancient as Pythagoras,
familiar to Amasis, equal in Clemens to Iechonias: the end of Superbus, and
Cyrus first times, fall out most fytly to serve Daniel. So when Heathen studies
be thoroughly tried, they as Gybeonites, are glad to serve the Temple.

A digression upon occasion of the adversaries phrase.
Whereas I followed, in making a Concent of Scripture, not only truth, but
also famous agreement of Jew and Gentile: mine adversary continually crossyng
me, is found also to cross truth likewise, and common agreement: The
prouoker fails in all his gainesayinges.
to omit other points, where in all differynges from me I hold him deceived:
for Zorobab^ one phrase did flee through the hedge of his teeth, which might
mar all Religion. This was the speech. Fuit (Zorobabel) vt audiuistis
Pronepos Iechoniae. Iechonias was great Grandfather to Zorobabel. Least his
hearers hereby appear enemies to their own faith, I will largely clear the
cause: and mine adversary, by his exposition. I was grieved to see Zorobabel
made of Iechonias blood, for these causes.

1 God swear that none of Iechoniahs seed should sit upon the throne of
David. Ier. 22.

2 S. Luke brings Zorobabel to Nathan, not to Solomon: whereby if he were of
Iechoniahs, S. Luke missed in brynging CHRIST from David: and his Gospel
should perysh.

3 Moreover, it is the deadliest point for story of al Iudaisme. For the Jews
make this an article of faith, that the king (Messiah) must come of Solomon:
and that, who so deny that, deny Gods word. Talmud San. art. 12.

4 Besides, S. Matthew has been commonly mystaken: by not regarding a term:
which he was to use as commonly it was spoken, and to mean^ as his nation did.
it has been our common error, and crept into our notes: which I redressed,
not only by skill, but by public approbation. For I wrote particularly of
that to the chiefest of Subjects, dealer in this kind, that upon full
aduisement, the correcting of the error came forth: not as one thing shuffled
amongst many, but examined carefully.

5 Hereupon I by message demanded of mine adversary, what he should mean to
speak so? who answered, that he meant succession, not natural lineage: which
he might I allow not his phrase, but take his yeeldyng, and fight not forwords.
well do: Quid Metan^. 15.
As Augustus Caesar is the progeny, the seed, the begotten of Julius: though
he be not of his line, but in succession. Now least his hearers should by his
manifold injurious and erroneous controlments herein also follow his words,
and not his meaning, I thought good to warn them, and wish them due care
oftime, place, and person, in all narrations, least they soon pull down all
their own buylding. But now let us return to our care over Rome, that it
work no harm in this behalf to the Gospel.

Causes why Roman testimonies should be rather loathed, then honored, to
control all antiquity for holy prophets.
Special causes should move to refuse Roman late writers, in this case.

1 They being near our Lords days in the flesh: (when Jews noysed over all the world, their expectation of the heavenly Monarch) they were to be given up
unto further error, that would not love the light kindled: and enquire, as
touching that king of glory.

2 When Tully proflac. and prouin cons. mentionyng Jerusalem, calls the Jews
religion a barbarous superstition: and them a nation borne to bondage: he can
not deny but he had herd of their religion, and of their long bondage. And he
might have found his paradoxe true: that the wise man even in torments is
happy, if he would have read the 70. The Greek translation of the 70 matched
the most ancient Latins, and might be read of the.
and Esaias. 53. as he did Demosthenes. His tongue Dion. Romans hist. l^b. 47.
was worthy to be pricked with needles, that so dispitefully would speak of the
nation of our Lord, who gave him all his eloquence and worthily suffered he
all that punishment, which in Plutarch befell him.

3 Vergil Aegl. 4.
the Poet, that heard of a child coming from heaven to bring a golden world:
sinned against his conscience, in drawyng that to Rome, which all rumors drew
to Jerusalem.

4 Augustus jesting, Macrob. lib. 2.
that Herodes hog was happier then his son: and knowing Herodes murdering:
which was to prevent, the king looked for of the Jews, could hardly be
gyltles. And Carneades might have taught him, if not the Magi, to have left the
Jews a King of their own nation, and right family.

5 After open mention to Tiberius of our Lord his resurrection, Eusebius. Joseph.
Cedrenus. Tacitus Su^tonius.
and a plain prophecy, by which all the east, at that time, looked for a king,
and after, of the name of Christ, kilde under Pontius Pilate, all dealinges of
Roman writers were much to be suspected: either as more forlorn of God: to
cross unawares that prophecy famous every where: or of malice fortifiying with
a conspiring rancor such Greeks as might wholly disturb yt prophecy of the
time of the general monarch.

6 If they dealt not maliciously, how could they being late men, agree in the
same syllables, for the times betwixt Xerxes and Alexander, In Panathaen*
contra Leocrat
precisely: though Isocrates and Lycurgus, men of that age, differ 25. years:
where they make the whole but 48. and others after the Peloponnesian wars
differ about half in half?

How the common table of Archontes, though forged, yet was exquisitely honored
of the Antichristian Philosophers, not without suspicion of malice.
The late Greeks under the Roman Emperors, Pausanias, Plutarch, Phlegon,
Laertius, for the yearly Archontes or Majors of Athens: and under which of
them famous men were borne or dyed: do so agree, as though they had lived in
their old times, and had been recorders of purpose: yet old writers have (as I
think) not twenty of those 140. Archontes, but full many others in their
rooms: as Demosthenes in one De corona.
oration has 8. Maiores of his own town: whereof the table which the
Emperors scholars would fortify, has not one. Lysias has some of his time
likewise there not found. And Greeks, Christians, as Suidas and other
commenters, utterly disgrace them. I find in Thucidides two: Pythodorus,
beginning the wars and Alcaeus: Xenophon has a Pythodorus ending it: and
Lysias the same. Also Euctemon is in Xenophon, Euclides in Lysias, in
Demosthenes about Socratides, Astias Polyzelus, Cephisodorus Chion, Timocrates,
Chariclides, Euander, and Charondas: but no two of these can be certain for
our purpose. Tully seems to settle Charon. 4. 7. before Philips death.
9. two Themistocles and Theophrastus.
I find in Aeschines: other may have some, or they some more. Therefore in
late men this agreement can hardly be void of suspicion of malice.

1 Those open enemies are more openly gylty, in admitting things by them
selves impossible. For Plutarch casting Lysias borne under Philocles, and to
live 72. years, and admittyng his oration for Iphicrates when Elpinicus was
Mayor 103. off: that shall deserve true credit when 72. can be 103. This might
then tell that about 30. Majors and years are forged: and malice, not dulnes,
has authorized these records.

2 When Ptolomy mentions Eclipses under Phanostratus, Lib. 4. cap. 11.
and the next year under Euander: here their conspiracy fails. Diod. lib. 5.
page 457. Them. contra Timocr. see his commenter
For in Diodorus, Mena^der is, not Euander at all. Euander is a Mayor in
Demosthenes, but as, near the time of Timocrates affairs, and a late Mayor.
Besides, al Greeks know that Euander and Menander be too far off in force, to
take the one for the other.

3 Touching Apseudes in Ptolemyes Eclipses, lib. 3. cap. 2.
I trow, saving from Diodorus table, never no man was so called. As never no
Englysh man was called Vn-lying, and the name might tell, that the autour
iested.

4 Who would not suspect forgery, seeing those three Majors together,
Lysi-stratus, Lys-anias, Lysi-theus: and nere, Lysi-crates, Lysimachides, and
Lys-anias again. Or these, upon A, half a dosen together, Amynias Alc^us,
Ariston, Aristophylus, Archias, Antipho, and next save one, Aristomnestus. Any
may think that an open forger, turning to some Alphabete table bred these.

5 Like are these in the termination rare in ides. Theagenides, Archidemides,
Phasiclides, Timarchides, Lysimachides, Myrichides, Glaucides: and all these
near together. Where both Isocrates and Lycurgus differ so much: and I show
the time shorter by the one half, or there about, then the forged tables
account. Wherefore Gellius, Plutarch, and such, who by Gods curse, cannot
speak the truth (as Aeschines taunteth Demosthenes) no not unwilling, Enemies
of Christ should not be cited against him.
that is unwitting, or do of malice repress it: let them pack. But their
malicious forgery will most notably appear, for kings which are feigned to
live with the kings of Judah, from autours never heard of till the Roman
Emperors kilde the holy Martyrs. They are the third thread. I will put the
simple reader in mind against them, what holy prophecy is wounded for them.

Of the Chaldeans.
CFrtayne reports of supposed Chaldeans in our age first have been of
estimation, to teach men how to expound Daniel, touching that text whereupon
we are termed Christians. For in Daniel first and only of the old Testament,
the term Christ is mere proper: in other places 32. the skillful in Adams
tongue know the term to be appellatiue. For to understand Daniel the better,
some late would seek help from men whom they think to be Chaldeans. And by
an account from them, my adversary would make me believe, that Gabriel
appoynting 70. seuens of years for all the world to look for Christ his death,
meant not 70. but 80. seuens. His dealyng is strange: strangeness yet herein
made some men boisterous: But the aged and learned knew before, how in the end
the matter would fall out. In London Prentises marvel at University Scholars,
Certain of and in an university reported to two of Innes of Court lately, that
I was ashmed of my cause, and relinquished the defense of it. They knew not
that they condemned our whole state and religion, otherwise they would not
willyngly nor could wittily have done so.
for thinking that Chaldeans might force them to an other meaning of bibles
sold in Paul's, then ever was known either to Jews who wrote the Prophets,
or to the Queen of England and Burgesles of our Parliament: who thought that
all might and must adventure their souls upon the propriety of Gods word,
and thereby settled us laws for Religion. We may not dispute against our own
grounds, our own frame, our own pyllers, our own whole buyldyng, for trial
or bravery of skill, from colored old Astrologers.

This matter shall be made so plain, that even the simplest may see the
weakness of that judgment, which leans upon such rotten reeds. Ptolomy
was a man cunnyng in the course of the year: which men are taught to measure
by the course of the Sun. His dexterity was late. For his days were about
130. years after our Lord his redemption: yet to make his art honorable, he
brings to us records not heard of before his time of Chaldeans, coming
near the antiquity of a thousand years. For he names not Robbin-hood, but
Nabonassar, yet one of Vtopia, or no place, matching in ancienty Ezekias king
of Judah. His first year of government he places 424. years before the
death of Alexander Macedon. The same Ptolomy has an account from Nabonassar to
one Darius the first, whose year of reign 31. he makes to be 256. from
Nabonassar, and by a consequent 168. before the death of Alexander. Thus
stands Ptolomyes testimony.

How an adversary does cite this against the propriety of Scripture.
Thus the adversary does reason. IF from Darius that followed Cyrus son
Cambyses, who reigned 7. years after Cyrus took Babylon unto Alexanders death
years be 168. it must needs be granted that the Persians reigned above 130.
years over the Jews: and seeing 360. thence are agreed upon to our Lords
death: and the limits of Daniels seuens agreed upon also, betwixt both
parties: it must needs be that the Angel meant vncertenly.

Answer.
Many things for this testimony must be explaned. Simply this will stand:
That never any Darius was beginning to reign 7. years after Cyrus took
Babylon, whose reign was 168. years before Alexanders death. But for showing
how the testimony is nothing worth, these points may be laid down.

1 A testimony unknown or despised near 1000. years, and afterward despised
more then 1000. years, is more vain then vanity. Such is this of supposed
Chaldeans.

2 Christians may admit no testimony (where propriety must bear sway) against
Scripture. For plain ought that to be, which playneth the rough. But by
Daniel, Darius the first came none after Darius the Mede* who took Babylon.
(...) who then was 62. years old. But his age (...) not (...) this account of
32. years reign (...).

3 The Queen of England sworn to the Gospel, They who blame in me nouelty,
where all our Church was and is of the same mind, must be warned of gross
daeling.
is to satisfy her subjects, and they in obedience to satisfy her by
propriety of Scripture. To regard the most lying nation of Chaldeans (never
before cited to cross propriety of Scripture) it is no part of the learned
and godly. This might have warrented me.

4 A Shypmans hose will not elegantly distinguyshe and set forth the legs.
But this Chaldean testimony is such. For of Nabonassar, and Nabopollasar Scal.
1584. condemns al former opinions. Christmannus holds them forged names. In
Alfrag.
Genebrarde thinks them forged or corrupt: In Chronal
H. Wolphius learnedly damneth all such help from Heathen for Scripture. A
sound judgment should not trouble his Country with such stuff.

Objection.
But Clemens 1. Strom. has a Darius the first after Cambyses: Therefore
Chaldeans only are not to be blamed.

Answer.
1 The Grecians could not so well take notise of Chaldean kings, as Chaldeans
might: For whom Daniel had penned his sixth Chapter in the Chaldy tongue: but
they meant the first Darius that they heard of.

2 That Darius Hystaspis cannot be meant by Darius the first, Herodotus
conferred with Ctesias will prove. For Ctesias a Physician in the Persian court,
and having (as Diodorus writes of him) the court rolls for warrant, records
that Darius Hy^taspis lived but forty three years, and reigned from his
princehood at twelve years of age but 31. years. Now Herodotus in Clio makes
him about 20. years old when Cyrus presently upon Babels conquest prepares
Tomyris wars. And this utterly overthrows my Adversaries cause.

3 Maximinus Monachus somewhat following Greeks, A Greek writer, which I have in
written hand somewhat of him M Scaliger has put forth.
yet more reuerencing the open phrase of most holy Scripture, and lothing
rediculous distinctions, where playnenesse ought to be, he makes Darius that
follows Cambyses to be Darius the Mede. But to differ from the Chaldeans,
either forged autours or forgers, gives him in all but twenty eight years.

4 Aben Ezra upon Daniel the 9. testifies, that he saw records for the
Persian kings, by which he found from the surprysing of Babel unto the
twentieth of Artaxerxes forty nine years. These be his words: And behold,
Ninteene years were of the reign of Cyrus and Achashuerosh, and two of
Darius, and he reigned twelve. And so it is written in a Book of the Kings of
Paras, and (...) years of Artaxasta the king: So behold the whole is (...)
seuens until Nehe^ias came, as it is written in the book of Ezra. Thus
testifies Aben Ezra, who lived above 400. years ago: a great Astronomer in
Sebastian Munsters judgment, whereby he could not be ignorant of Ptolomyes
Chaldeans. A deadly enemy he was to Christ, and therefore deserves better
credit, speaking for us against his own purpose, then Chaldeans, more wicked
and perpetual haters of Daniel.

5 All they who make 49. The one spe^he of seven seuens Dan. 9. granted
commonly the time separated for buylding Jerusalem (which must be the first
part in the partition) forces an yielding to a plain declaration of Gabriels
Chronicle for our redemption.
years for the buylding of Jerusalem, who are full manv, will be found as well
damners of these Chaldeans: whereof amongst Romistes in Spain Hector Pintus
gave the same reverence to Daniels playnnes as did John Calum in Geneuah, and
cares not for humane credit, where Greeks thought them selves strongest. And
the Divines in the last French edition, have despised this Chaldy dream.
Genebrard for the French, Romistes is no small man (honored now as I heard at
Rome) whom Adricomius followed in the Chronicle joined to his Mappes. Henry
VVolphius is a learned, godly, and zealous reuerencer of the Scriptures
playnnes, who friendly controlleth M. Scaliger, and confirms Beroaldus,
departing even from his own Fathers judgment for the holy truth. Against all
this must it be my particular lot, in so many of mine opinion, to be only
counted new?

6 Learned men by them have gone too far. For I. Sc. condemns all the
thousands of Divines, who do think that Darius the Mede. Dan. 5. gate Babylon
by conquest. A strange thing. Such writers should be hated, who deceive so
learned men, as M. Scaliger is known to be of all Learned men.

Two more deceites from these Chaldeans, deceyuing him and an other Scholar well
deserving of learning, should make us think no better of these sta^e Chaldy
forgery, then ^^iamus should have done of Epeus wordy Horse, and hurtful
Sinons tale. Cateles Vcalegon his house, with others, was not more overtaken
thereby of Vul^anes flames, then our wrytinges should be, if those Babylonians
might bear sway. Take first an example, of Ezekiel where he writes in this
manner, Ch ^, 1. In the thirteth year I was in the Captivity. From whence he
begins his reckonyng it may soon be discussed. For this was in the fifth
year of the Captivity of Ioachin, add unto that all Iakims time, eleven
years, so we have 16. and of Josias 31. so many as will with 16. make 30. that
is 14. then you climb up unto the 18. of Josias: that most famous year the
middle of a Iubilee, having that noble Passover, and Moses copy hid from
Manasses, found again and read before the king, by which it was known that
captivity was at haude: which when Jews captiued would not believe, but that
they might have shunned it, Ezekiel has relation to a famous denouncing of it
30. years before, and by that testimony would both calm the captiued, and
advise Zedekias not to resist the Babylonian. And this of ancientie Jews did
see, Ionothan, Iarchi, Kimchi, Abrabbaniel. Old father Jerome taught the same
among Latins, and Theodoret among Greeks, yet M. Sc. thinks that Ezekiel
had relation to Nabopollasar, whom his Chaldeans in Ptolomy have. In defense of
my self, whom some by him would disgrace, this much I will say.

Chaldeans deserve small thanks for playing fast and loose, if that which by
plain reason for Scripture, Hebrews, Greeks, and Latins, have hitherto
held fast, now must be holden loose.

If for the first verse of Ezekiel all Divines have been bereft of judgment,
how great is our darkness? and who will ever regard our skill? The regarding
help from Assure has wrough^ us this disgrace.

Whereas H. Wolphius his friend, the next year after he wrote, corrected
that, and he seems to like well of it: He first should defend his Chaldeans,
and not his folowers, where he is silent.

For an other Learned man: M. F. Iunius is deceived as much. Mark what he
writes upon those textes. Ezra, 4. 5. and 24. They hired counselors against
them, to disslolue their counsel all the days of Cyrus king of Paras, unto
the reign of Darius king of Paras. This Darius is (in the learned man's work)
Darius Hystaspis, and him be makes to reign ten years after Cyrus first
year. Now for the verse 34. of the same Chapter mark Ezra. Then was hindered
the work, and continued hindered until the second year of the reign of
Darius king of Paras. Though it has been doubtless with Jews and Gentiles,
that one and the same Darius is meant in both places, yet he makes the later,
an other, Darius Nothus, later by 98. years. So these Chaldeans make us breed
of one Kis two, of one Ezra two, of one Nehemias two, of one Darius the first
two, of one other Darius three: and for two years in him to make 100. D.
Artaxerxes, D. Hystaspis, and Darius Nothus.


The saw wherewith Manasses did cut Esaias the just into pieces, had not worse
teeth then these Chaldeans, who make us rent with our teeth the holy word,
from that playnnesse which is in Christ. The Troianes which did pull down
their own Walls to receive enemies to burn their City, are not simpler then
they who wylbe triumphing against a defender of their own nations Divines, and
will pull down their own Walls, made not by Neptune and Apollo, as Homers
Pergama, but by Divines of all learned languages. And this for Chaldeans, being
not a dead Horse, but in Scripture language, dead Dogs.

I could have wyshed that Learned men had not been brought against me: whom I
turn more enemies to my adversary, then I am, upon his grauntes, and turn
them to be upon condemners of his judgment. I would have been loath to cast
any blot of their own Incke upon their Papers, if I might have been
unprovoked. This any may see, that M. Fr. Iunius upon Hosea, differs little
from mine account, where he makes 680. years from the sixth of Ezekias unto our
Lords death. I make seven less then be, less, because I hold that the
Captivity was but 70. years, which begun from lech^nias by him should be 77.
but no syllable of Prophet will warrant that. After I have him with me against
my adversary and him self also. Let them for that thank the Chaideans.

He had need of a bold courage, Oppose this to al their rumors, who by their
own testimony blame a cause which they know not.
and many tongues to speak for him, that would have all the world to shrink
from an Angel and Daniels meaning, for so vile, base, obscure, tryflyng rags
of Vtopian Scriueners. And this for them, or nothing is enough.

This harm is not little, that our common people* to whom Bibles are propounded
as plain upon often readyng, must be carried to mistrust the plain text. But
herein I must not be vehemet against my Adversary, who less regarded Chaldeans
then Olympiades. For staying of such as will needs win him avictory, against
his hope I have written, and must, more then I wyshed.

Whereas some stumble at Divinity for diversity of minds in plain Stories,
Papists blame us for differing, though Bellarmin and Genebrard differ in the
same rate, without particular blame of them.
wherein the striuers know that any upon pains due, may see the truth:
Such stumblers may soon find their condemnation just. It was always usual
to try truth by disputyng. And as no man thinks Arithmatique hard: nor law:
For Merchauntes pleading upon accomptes, when sums with their authority are
brought together: So none should here think the Bible hard, when the sums
of it are clear, if they will examyne Heathen, how their testimony is nothing.
The Christians that follow them deserve report of humane readyng. But all
writers upon Scripture may not be disgraced Protestants Romistes, and Jews,
and even they that Who grant some points which subdue al their dissension to
the truth.
strive, all may not be counted senseless, when Scripture is clear, and upon
Scripture they speak. And Heathen should not ouerrule Religion, when even by
other Heathen Scripture preuayleth:

THus I have sufficiently cleared the speech of Gabriel: in defense of the late
Divines, of England with Scotland: of Spain, France, Hiderbeg, Tigurin,
Geneua: checking the old error of Greeks, making the Sun go back 100. years.

1 The matter has been so polished: that for the limits, the adversary
yields unto me: and for the parts to be greater then the whole: he fights
not against me but against himself, art, all men, and possibility.

2 Touching the reason that drove him into these straits: the opinion that the
Jews were under Persia 70. years more than Gabriels portion 130. of 490. upon
examination that is found more unlikely, than any thing in any count of time.
For we both, and the two famous learned M. Iunius and M. Scaliger, (the only in
that on his side) we all four, grant the excess of years not to be after
the building of the Temple. Now, that it cannot be 107. before, betwixt Cyrus
and Aggeis Prophecy, but 32. only, whole streams of reasons I have showed:
and Ebrewes, Greeks, Latins make it but the sixth part of this time, that is,
17. or 18. years. Now, to blame another for not going six fold beyond the
common opinion, this dealing might be counted strange.

3 This one argument amongst whole troops, this one alone might quiet all:
that the returned, which were once 49000. built the Temple.

4 Touching the profane, by particulers it was showed, that from Cyrus
Babilons war to Xerxes, (even by heathen) 30. was the most that likelihood
would grant: that from Xerxes war to Alexanders, of the supposed 140. by
Greeks of that Age, in sure and plain reasons 40. full clearly might, to the
satisfaction of any heathen, be quite cut off.

5 Touching heathen disturbances, I turn them to serve the Church: in
Olympiades, about Rome, and such. Phlegon fights for us: whose whole
fragment, because few had it, I caused to be printed, for Scholars use.

6 Pausanias likewise against himself exactly for my sum: and the Greek
Divines I brought against their cited Olympiades: yea, Julian and Lucian are
brought to serve Daniel.

7 The table of Archontes, the malice of Philosophers, the vanity of the
Chaldeans have been detected.

8 These points he that holds not profitable for helping to join Moses,
Daniel, Matthew, Paul, and all together: and specially the Jubilees, beginning
from the partition of the Land by Jesus, upon driving out the heathen, ending
at the entering for us into heaven, by our Lord and Savior Jesus, by texts
clear and plain: he that would despise this, has courage not following, but
running before learning: and I think, with none well advised can find
commendation.

Objection.
But this should not be put in print to the disgrace of a learned man: private
conference should rather end the matter.

Answer.
This Objection may be cast off for many causes.

1 Mine adversary conferred privately with me, before I wrote of the Scripture
concent: and upon occasion of some strange points in his Author, whereby his
account made years threescore for bare three: he told me that he had not
studied these points: and requested me to write of them.

2 Presently upon the coming forth of my Book, he falls a confuting it in
open lectures, amongst young students unable to judge: who as Nero sang the
destruction of Troy, when he set his own City on fire: so those young students
triumphed, when Daniel, and Gabriel were in confuting. If this partiality be
tolerable in him: to speak to young men, and not to print that all may judge:
they will grant me good leave to defend that truth in print, which the
Adversary did request me for to print at the first.

3 My learned friend told his Auditorie, that he was bound to honor the truth,
more than our friendship: and therefore would not spare, even a follower of a
universal opinion. He that will not think the same as lawful for me, will
seem blinded with finister partiality.

4 Upon a short Epistle to one A. T. proving Mardochai captiued, whose life
would discuss our controversy: mine adversary promised to take the blame on
him, rather than I should print more: yet soon after falls on confuting it,
with some dealings, that none indifferent would like off: and his admirers
being called to their own judgment upon Ester, saw that they were deceived:
and said that the fame of the learned man carried them to conclude as he would.
Now, all such as condemn all Ebrewes, Greeks, English and their own heart, must
be warned to deal better: and other warning would they take none, till I came
to this, many did I send them.

5 Another D. of Divinity, who abridged Codoman, flowing with errors: yet
condemning mine Adversary in all our chief differences, and granting me full
many points, whereby mine Adversary would tell him that he overthrew himself:
upon certain demands dashing all his pains, took a right course: he confessed
that he had no skill in these matters, and would yield unto him whom he
provoked. One Master Jackson a merchant, can testify that to him it was
spoken: and the Gentlemen of Grayes-Inne know reason why that was his best way.
And this mention would I have spared, but that one D. Chapter would have him
answered, as though he had won the spurs: the man himself took the best
way. I dare assure mine Adversary that he ought to have done so: if ever by
resistance he make his cause good: let the Reader think me of small judgment.

6 So many are infected with error upon his Lectures, to hold the Scripture
uncertain: that not only Printing must correct them, but also he must be
moved to acknowledge his oversight.

7 It is great pity that one so well deserving of the Church, should be
suffered by unreasonable reverence to build up Jericho: whereas in friendship just
reproof bears great sway, which must be given gravely, and taken patiently.

8 We took Vmperes, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of London.
By their arbitrament he does know or some may, that neither he nor any will
soon foil any joint of that Scripture Concent, but for going about will take
foyles many. When after their censures young men shall sing as at Neroes
flames, what man of courage with learning would abide it.

He that wrote of Scripture Concent to her Majesty, unless for ioining Ebrew
and Greek studies he knew himself commonly holden inferior to none: he might be
blamed of imprudencie, with taking away the first letter of Rhetorique: that
which Tully said, Demosthenes could hardly pronounce, for the boldness of his
enterprise, taken before BB, and DD. as a Doctor of Cambridge answered for him:
upon commending the weight of the matter, when one demanded, why then the BB.
or the DD. meddeled not with it. He that in so weighty a cause would suffer
rumors to quel the truth: and yield to men not acquainted with his studies,
should not be thought of judgment or love of the truth.

Thus I trust the godly will be satisfied, the fame or infamy from the bad,
should move none of judgment.

FINIS.
The amending of faults escaped.
THe number of sheets are not duly marked by the letters, by reason that a
fragment of Phlegon printed in Greek was the work of a Printer dwelling far
off, and of another then the other: and latelyer printed then the sheet of the
Which was printed in Octoebr, the other in February.
Chaldeans, which by the vnheedines of the Printers, both have their reckoning
amisle, the one A. the other I. But for amending faults they may be noted thus:
Phleg. and Chald. the other leaves be in order. Through all, thus amend faults,
D. page 6. line 12. and 13. twenty three years while Iosue was under Persia.
In In the Greek the first note of the text corrupted, must be referred to the
former page.
Phlegon line 25. read end and cure of the plague. In the next page in the
margent read Homer Iliad. 2. 595. for Odiss. 2. F. 1. the second page in the
margent read Homer Iliad. 3. for lib. 3. In G. 2. line 1. read sun of
justice for son. on the next page line 13. read sun for son. In H. 3.
page 2. line 16. read the mede Datis for Mardo^^^s. In the next page in the
marget read Demetrius Phalereus. In I in the margent read 4. y. that is years,
for 4. 7. In Called. line 7. read places, 30. for 32. and line 20. read either
known, for known either: And line 21. read or thought upon to the, for or to
the, and in the margent wittingly, for willingly. And page 7. line 29. open,
for upon. In L. line 3. read Hidelberge. And page 3. line 9. read sinister
for sinistred. And line 10. for prouink, read proving. And page 4. line 14. in
some copies read sone may, for some may. Let the gentle reader of him self
amend other scapes by the matter.


