TEARS OF JOY SHED At the happy departure from Great Britain, of the two
Paragons of the Christian world.

FREDERICK and ELIZABETH, Prince, and Princess Palatines of Rhine, Duke and
Duchess of Bauaria, etc.

By R. A.

Iam redit and virgo, redeunt Saturnia regna.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Archer, and are to be sold at his shop in the
Popes-head-pallace, near the Royal Exchange. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR THOMAS ERSKENE, LORD VICOVNT FENTON, Baron of
Dirrilton, Captain of his Majesty's Guards, Gentleman of his Highness
Bedchamber, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
MY heart abhorres ungratefulness, as hell,
Yet how to clear my self, I cannot tell.
I do not plow the fertile plains of Inde,
Whose fruitful gifts may match the giuers mind;
I reap no harvest, from rich Arabian fields;
Nor drink the golden streams, that Ganges yields.
My greatest gift has nothing to commend it,
Except the giuers grateful mind that send it,
The least in means, but not the last in love,
If equal power could poor goodwill approve.
Which, if your honor, do but rightly weigh,
A grateful mind is more, then gold can buy;
In sign whereof my simple Muse affoords,
A worthy subject, drawn in worthless words;
A base-borne sister to the sacred Nine,
Which never yet did taste Castalian wine,
Nor sund her self upon Parnassus side;
But lived obscurely on the bank of Clide,
A flood, beyond Permessis streams in pleasures,
But unacquainted with the Muses measures.
The field from whence these fruitles gifts do flow,
But new broke up, in time may riper grow.
Which if it do, if by excess of toil,
This barren field may turn a fertile soil;
Unto your Honor (though their use be small)
I Will consecrate the field, the fruit, and all.
Which once, I wish, may yield some greater worth,
Or still be barren, and bring nothing forth.
Mean time, take this, not as the total sum,
But as the interest of the rest to come.
Your Honors, Most obsequious servant, Robert Allyne.

Tears of loy.
SHall Britain then forgo her other eye,
And lend her rarest gemme, to enrich the Rhine?
This spacious I Will, though all too straight for three,
Yet large enough, wherein two lamps may shine.
Why then? though heavens have robbed us of the best,
Shall distant rooms, divide the two, that rest?
If nearness of the one, make both obscurer?
Can distance add more brightness, then before?
Is virtue, by it self sequestered, purer?
Then, when obumbrate by another glore.
O sure it is! Nor can this Northern clime,
Sustain two Suns together, at one time.
This little world, within it self, confined,
(Which Neptune from the greater world diuides)
Whose lamps gave light, beyond remotest Inde;
Must now divide them, with the world besides;
And that, which late enjoyed three lamps, alone,
Now robbed of two, must be content of one.
Go then (great Phebe) one half of our hope,
And lend a new light, to an ancient land;
A light; that neither raging seas can stop,
Nor Tagus quench, nor Tibers streams withstand.
A light, a star, a fire, that shall consume,
And dim th'adulterate light of Spanish Rome.
Fear not worse fortune, in a foreign part,
Or loss of parents sight, or lack of friends,
With one that caries more, then half thy heart,
Whose breath, or death, upon thy love depends.
And one, that glories more in being thine,
Then being great commander of the Rhine.
Behold a mighty land, a martial soil,
(Whom Caesar had so much ado to dant,
And to contain in duty; of whose spoil
Victorious Rome had little cause to vant)
To thee (great Dame) do greater homage yield,
Then Caesar could enforce, in armed field.
The soil it self, a fertile glebe of ground,
Where golden Zephire pleasant air inspires;
Where grass, and grain, and Bacchus gifts abound,
And all that nature needs, or use requires.
Where crystal brooks, and mettall-sheering strands,
Infect their silver streams, with golden sands.
The fields, no less delightful there, then here;
The plains, irriguat with another Thames,
A river, no less delicate, and clear,
Deriuing, from the steepie Alps, his streams.
Adorned with spacious parkes, in pleasant ranks;
And many Londons built upon his banks.
A thousand tributary torrents falls,
And in his bossome buries all their state;
Who like a mass, made up of many smalles,
Obscures their memories, that made him great.
By whose augmenting help, grown monstrous huge
He braues the Ocean, with a fresh deluge.
Right over, and against, where stately Thames,
Disburdens in the maine, his borrowed grouth,
There changing both their natures, and their names,
Each has a prospect, to the others mouth.
That, if a way lay through the boundless brine,
The English Thames should touch the Germain Rhine.
And sure it seems, the gentle, favoring waves,
Have yielded passage, to these friendly floods,
While winds, retiring in their trembling caves.
Did leave calm seas, to welcome Neptunes broods,
And father Ocean himself consented
To have his mighty sons made more acquainted.
Where, after some short parley past between,
They both did swear a solemn league of love;
A league, that shall not end, till Thames and Rhine
Leave off to run, or heavenly orbs to move:
And as they swear, that so they meant to do,
The Water-nymphes were witnesses unto.
But least succeeding ages might aledge
Some friuole reasons, to infringe their oath,
Each did confirm the friendship with a pledge,
Two rarest Jewels, that adorned them both.
And for more surety, 'twas agreed upon,
That both the Jewels were conioin'd in one.
In whom, and in their sacred seed, for ever,
That loving league shall undissolved stand,
Which times, nor fates, nor death, cannot disseuer,
Nor all the force of hels confederate band.
Whose date (but new begun) shall never expire,
Till first, this threefold frame dissolve in fire.
Let Tiber, Iber, Rodanus, and Seine;
Let Tygris, Tanais, Euphrates, and Nile,
Despise the heauen-bread-peace of Thames and Reine,
In whose proud eyes these precious gems seem vile.
From these united floods shall spring a flower,
To ruin Tibers pride, and Ibers power.
Let Ganges glory in his golden sands,
Pactolus spread his streams in stately ranks:
Let Indus lend his name to neigbouring lands,
And throe despised pearls upon his banks.
In your vnequal'd worths (O peerless pair!)
The Thames and Rhine are rich above compare.
Nor thou (O Forth) must be exempt, in this,
Whose merit equals either of the two,
From thee proceeds the ground of both their bliss,
Thou bred these Gemmes, that Thames enjoys now.
These lights, these stars, that now adorn the earth,
To thee, do owe their blood, their breath, their birth.
Join with the two, and make the number three,
(Three famous floods, as earth cannot yield such)
That so in number, ye may equal be,
To those three Lamps, that graced you once so much.
To whom (since one has changed earth for heaven)
One more succeeds, to make the number even.
Our Henry-Fredricke, lies in timelesse toome,
Whose double name expressed not half his worth;
A Fredricke in his loss, supplies his room,
And bearing half his name, one half sets forth
Of him, whose all, is hardly matched by two,
And therefore is too much, for one, to do.
Yet thou (brave youth) of all the sons of men,
Was only worthy, to be one of three,
Ranck'd in that room, by him, who brook'd it then,
And dying, did resign the same to thee,
Who by a high instinct of heavenly grace,
Left not the world, till thou assumed his place.
Go then, great Prince, and thou his other half,
Grace of his youth, and glory of his age,
Key of his secret thoughts, his second self;
Joy in his care, and comfort in his rage;
And each, in others debt, so deep inuolued,
That Gordius knot can sooner be dissolved.
Go (royal pare) and let the Rhine augment,
What Thames has now so gloriously begun,
And while, that lamp of life is yet unspent,
As Phaenix burns herself against the sun,
That from her dust may spring another one,
To grace the Arabian bounds when she is gone:
So now, raise up a world of royal seed,
That may adorn the earth when ye are dead.
R. A.

To FREDERICK, Prince Palatine of RHINE, Duke of BAVARIA, etc.
GReat offspring of a high Imperial Race,
And now allied with a Royal kind,
whose worth exceeds thy years, whose glorious place
Is more then matched, by a generous mind.
Whose outward grace, and inward gifts are such,
As highest veins cannot express too much.
Yet neither does thy race, nor place, nor worth,
Nor these rare parts of body, and of mind,
Nor all thy merits, half so much set forth
Thy happiness, as being now combined
In love, and life, with one, whose virtues shall
Add new renown, to race, and place, and all.
Great Caesar-maker, thou whose powerful vote,
Can raise a subject to the Imperial hight;
Thou can make Emperors, and have thou not
In creating an Empress equal might?
Express it then upon thy better half,
And in advancing her, raise up thy self.
That both together gracing Caesar's chair,
Thy son may be Arch-sewer to his sire.
TO EIZABETH Princess PALATINE of RHINE, Duchess of BAVARIA.
Mirror of virtue, Beauties blazing star,
Whose worth amazes earths remotest ends,
A piece, which nature to adorn so far,
In skorne of Art, her utmost skill extends.
Where Pallas, Venus, Juno's gifts are such,
That skarse they have reserved themselves so much.
And must thou th^e (great dame) withdraw these beams,
And dark this I Will, fr^o whence thou draws thy stamp,
Is all the circuit, betwixt Tay and Thames,
Too strait a limite, for so great a Lamp?
That so to give thy glory greater vent,
Thou must possess the spacious continent.
Yet though thy body be removed to Rhine,
Thy name shall still thy native I Will adorn,
Thy glory in the furthest North shall shine;
And (as the Sun, through vapors seen, at Morn,
Appears a larger body, to the eye,
Then when he mountes the high Meridian sky)
Thy beams shall from beyond the Belgicke shore,
Shine still as bright, and brighter then before.
Collatio.

What wonder was it, that Mortalleies did weep,
When heavens th^eselues could not abstain fr^o tears?
What course in mourning, could the loosers keep,
When those, that gained so much, so sad appears
But when times altered, with a milder turn,
Then heavens, and earth did both leave off to mourn.
What wonder was it, that mortal breasts did groan,
When winds, and waves, could not contain their grief?
Or what could still the chiefest mourners moan,
When sympathyzing things found no relief?
Till wedding joys, did weeping woes exile,
Then sea, and air, did both begin to smile.
What wonder is it that mortals leave their mones,
When heaven themselves have changed their mourning cheer?
What wonder is it, that earth forgets her groans,
When sea, and air, are grown so calm and clear?
O happy change! that heavens and earth does turn,
And seas, and air, to mirth, that late did mourn.
Heavens, at our sorrows, seemed not half so sad,
As now they joy, to see such joy on earth,
Nor winds, were at our mourning half so mad,
As now they are pleased, and partners in our mirth;
Nor at our grief, the seas grieved half so much,
As now made calm, they joy, that our ioye's such.
This lower element, is but the center,
To which, the other's dregs, do downe-ward move,
That in the same, nor grief, nor joy can enter,
But what the other three effect above,
And mortal things that on the base earth breed,
Move by superior powers, as by their head.
But thou that swayes this lands Imperial Mace,
Whose spirit does inspire, and move this I Will;
And ye, his royal Queen, and Princely race,
Though earth confine your persons for a while,
Yet more then earthly is your sacred power,
Which bears a kind of rule over all the four,
For as ye seem too grieve or joy on earth,
Fire, air, and seas, incline to grief, or mirth.
FINIS.

