JOB. TO THE KING

A Colon-Agrippina study of one month, for the metricall translation: But Of
many years, for Ebrew difficulties.

By Hugh Broughton.

Anno D. 1610.

TO THE MIGHTY Prince, JAMES, King of Albion France and Ierne, defendour of the
faith in power and learning: Supreme governor under God, in his Lands.
THe Eternal testified of Abraham, how he would teach his house to keep holy
ways. That has story in Jobs book: where most learned Princes, five of his
house, show Gods ways for Christ: in such eloquence, that may argue applying
of all knowledge and their days that way. The style is in his language for
verse, shortness, and strange words, as Pindarus in Greek: and fuller of
difficulty, then all the other books of Adams tongue: And has cost me time
and pains accordingly: more then my translation of the Prophets volume into
Greek: which work I think your Majesty has: and more then my showing of
Scripture concent: and defending of it, against D. Reinolds and Mr Livelie,
having 2000 years Libraries on their side: and more then my clearing of Daniel,
and Apocalypse, to admiration of thowsands. God would have this book as a Jewel
hid in the ground, not seen plain without pains. What I have done for your
nations use, the King should judge and recompense accordingly.

Your M. m. h. ^ H. Br.

To the Christian Reader.
THe names of God in the holy tongue have in them deep notation: and argue the
speakers knowledge. Job only of all the disputers, and he but once, utters
the holy name, Jehovah. The penner of the story does often: in preface and
conclusion. The Poetry of the work seems by Arabique terms Jobs own. Many
names of God are in this book, beside Jehovah, which is of so large force and
majesty that the Lxx never express the letters: nor the Jews commonly
pronounce it. Our English Psalm. 83. does: I still, as the French, put Eternal,
for it: for Elohim, God, and sometime for Eloah, and El: But for better note:
in Eloah, seldom in others, often here, Puissant: for El, commonly omnipotent:
for Shaddaj, all sufficient, and, almighty: Adonaj Job has chapter 28. and but
once: which to show I set Adonaj: as the Lxx in Ezekiel. Abraham first Genesis 15.
utters that name: but Job brings God the autour. Elihu expresses Abraham
for the trinity in plural speech Job. 35. 10.
Ghosaj, My makers. A translater should not hide so golden a matter. This one
word had broken Arius and Machomed: that Christ should only be Machmad, delight
it self: and Daniel as Mary chamudoth by grace.

JOB.
THere was a man in the Land of Uz, named Job, and that man was perfect and
upright: and feared God, and eschewed evil.

2. And there were borne to him seven sons, and three daughters.

3. His Cattle also was seven thousand sheep, and three thousand camels, and
five hundred yoke of Oxen, and five hundred asses: with a very great family:
and that man was the greatest of all the sons of the East.

4. And his sons went and made a banquet, in the house of each one his day:
and they sent and called for their three sisters to eat and to drink with them.

5. And when the days of their banqueting were gone about, Job sent, and
sanctified them, and gate-vp-early in the morning, and offered for every one of
them a burnt offering: For Job said, it may be my children have sinned, and
little-blessed God in their heart. So did Job all the days.

6. And upon a day, when the sons of God came to stand before the Eternal,
Satan came also among them:

7. And the Eternal said to Satan, whence co^mest thou: Our adversary the Di
vel goes about like a roaring lion seeking who^ he may devour. 1 Pet. 5. 8.
And Satan answered the Eternal and said: from serching about the earth, and
from walking in it.

8. And the Eternal said to Satan, have thou set thine heart upon my servant
Job: how there is none like him in the earth: a man perfect and upright,
fearing God, and eschewing evil.

9. Then Satan answered the Eternal and said: does Job fear God for naught?

10 Have not thou hedged about him, and about his house, and about all that he
has on every side? thou have blessed the work of his hands: and his cattle
increase in the Land.

11. But send forth now thy hand, and touch all that he (...) Devil, false
accuser, Genesis 3. and here, is taxed.
has, and then he will litle-blesse thee to thy face.

12. And the Eternal said unto Satan: Behold all that he has is in thine hand:
only upon him send not forth thine hand: So Satan went forth from the presence
of the Eternal.

13 And upon a certain day, when his sons and his daughters were eating and
drinking wine in the house of their eldest brother,

14 A messenger came to Job, and said: the Oxen were plowing and the Asses
feeding beside them:

15 And Sheba fell on and took them: and the servants they smote with the edge
of the sword: and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.

16 While he was yet speaking, an other came and said: a fire of God fell from
heaven: and brent up the sheep and the servants, and ate them up: and I only
am escaped alone to tell thee.

17 While he was yet speaking, another came, and said: The Chaldeans made three
troops, and set upon the Camels, and took them away: and the servants they
smote with the edge of the sword: and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.

18 As he was yet speaking, another came, and said: thy sons and thy
daughters were eating, and drinking wine; in the house of their eldest brother:

19 And behold, a great wind came form beyond the Bildad, chap. 8. 4.
wilderness and touched the four corners of the house: and it fell upon the
young folk: and I only am escaped alone to tell thee.

20 Then Job arose and rent his cloak, and shaved his head: and fell down upon
the earth and worshipped:

21. And said, Naked came I out of my mothers womb; 1 Timothy 6. ^
and naked shall I return thither: the Eternal gave, and the Eternal has
taken-away. Blessed be the name of the Eternal.

22 In all this Job sinned not: nor laid any blame on God.

Chap. II.
ANd upon a day, when the sons of God came to stand before the Eternal, Satan
came amongst them also, to stand before the Eternal.

2 And the Eternal said to Satan: whence come thou? and Satan answered the
Eternal, and said: from serching about the earth, and from walking in it.

3. And the Eternal said to Satan: have thou set thine heart upon my servant
Job, how there is none like him in the earth: a man perfect and upright:
fearing God and eschewing evil: and yet he holds his integrity: yet thou
movedst me against him to undo him without cause.

4. Then Satan answered the Eternal, and said: skin for skin, and all that a
man has, he will give for his life.

5 But send forth now thine hand: and touch his bone, and his flesh: and then
he will litle-blesse thee before thy face.

6 And the Eternal said to Satan: behold he is in thine hand: only, save his
life.

7 So Satan went forth from the presence of the Eternal: and smote Job with
sore boyles, from the sole of his foot, to the top of his head.

8 And he took him a potshard to scrape him withal: and he, sat down among
the ashes.

9 Then said his wife to him: Do thou still hold thy integrity: blessing God
and dying?

10 And he said to her: as a foolish woman would speak, thou speak: Shall
we receive good from God: and evil not receive? In all this Job sinned not
with his lips.

11 Now three friends of Job heard of all this evil which came upon him: and
they came each one from his place: Eliphaz the Themanite, and Bildad the
Shuchite, and Zophar the Naamathite: as they had agreed together to come to
solace him and to comfort him.

12 And they lift up their eyes a far off, and knew him not; and they lifted
up their voice and wept: and they tent each one his cloak: and sprinkled dust
upon their heads, into the air.

13 And they sat down with him on the earth, seven days and seven nights: and
none spoke a word unto him; for they saw that his grief was very great.

Chap. III.
Afterward, Job opened his mouth and cursed his day.

2 And Job spoke and said.

3. Lost be the day when I was borne: and that night He pleads for this as
well said, Chap. 7. And Bildad blames this, Chapter 8.
whenas it was said: a male child is conceived.

4. That day be turned to darkness: the Puissant regard it not from high: nor
light shine upon it.

5. Darkness and shadow of death stayn it: that cloudiness dwell upon it:
swartnes of day make it terrible.

6 Myrknes take-away that same night: joy may it not in days of the year: nor
come in the count of months.

7 Yea that night be turned to sorrow: I wish no joyance come to it:

8. Curse it may they who do curse day: who will hunt the Livjathan:

9. Dark be the stars of that twylight: look may it for light, and none be:
neither, let it see the mornings eyliddes.

10. Because it did not shut the doors of the belly which did bear me: and hid
not sorrow from mine eyes.

11. Why did I not die, from the womb, starve coming out of the belly:

12 Why were knees ready to hold me: and what meant breasts to give me suck:

13. For now I had layne down quiet: had slept, and then had been at rest:

14 With Kings and Counselors of the earth: which built them desolate places.

15. Or with Princes which had the gold: who filled their houses with silver.

16 Or hid, as one borne out of time, should not have been: as young infants
that saw not light.

17 There the unquiet leave vexation: and there rest the wearied in strength.

18 The prisoners are all at ease: they hear not the oppressors voice.

19 Little and great are there all one: and servant free from his master.

20 Why gives he light to the miserable: and life to the bitter in soul.

21 Which long for death but find it not? yet would dig for it more then (...)
Mat. 13. ^4.
hid-wealth.

22 Which joy til they do skip again: be glad if they may find the grave.

23 The wight whose way is hid, over whom the Puissant casts a covering.

24 For before my meat my sighs come: and my roarings gush like water.

15 For a fear I feared, and it arrived to me: and that which I dreaded is now
come upon me.

26. I had no case, no quietness, no rest: and now comes a vexation.

CHAP. IV.
THen answered Eliphaz the Themanite, and said:

2. If we make a speech to thee, will thou hold it wearysome: and who can
refrain from speaking?

3 Behold thou have instructed many: and strengthened the weary hands.

4 Thy words have lift up the falling, and thou have confirmed bowing knees.

5. But now, it comes to thee, thou faintest: it touches thee and thou art
troubled.

6 Is not thy religion thy hope: and thy right ways thy confidence.

7 Remember now what innocent has perished: or where the upright have decayed.

7 As I have seen: plowers of sorrow, and the sowers of misery, do reap the same.

9. By the breath of the Puissant they perish: and by the blast of his anger
they consume.

10 The roaring of Arjeh, Shachal, Cephir, Laish, Laby, be names of Lions,
sundry in age and condition, plain in Ebrew notation: which I touch. Of Laish,
in Greek (...) comes, a Lion; and of Laby, Low, in Dutch.
the renting-Lion, and the voice of the fierce-Shachal, and the teeth of the
Lion-ceaux are brought to nothing.

11 The hardtwasting-Laish perishes for want of prey: and the whelps of the
hart-strong-Laby are scattered.

12 A speech came by stealth upon me: and mine ear caught somewhat of it.

13. In thoughts of visions by night: when sleep falls Uirgil Aeneid. 2. so
expresses a dreams time: Tempus erat quo prima quies mortalibus aegris
incipit: et dono serpit gratissima divum.
upon sorrowful-man.

14. Fear and trembling laid hold on me: and made all my bones afraid.

15. And a wind passed before me: which bristled the hayres of my flesh.

16. It stood up, and I could not mark what kind of visage it might have: An
Image was before mine eyes: Silence was: then I heard a voice.

17. Can the sorowful-man be holden just before the Puissant: can the
humane-vvight be clear before him that was his maker.

18. Lo he holds not As God is only good, and only has immortality, so
light, and truth, and all, in perfection.
perfection to be in his own servants: and in his angels he judges not
cleare-light to be.

19. Less in dvvellers The body made of earth, is 2 Cor. 5. 1. the earthly
house of our tabernacle: S. Paul calling us to this oration of man's baseness.
``Moses touches this, Psas. 90. teaching us our misery: and repeateth Eliphaz
term, Dacca: Thou turnest man to Dacca, to bruising misery: and say,
return ye sons of Adam. Psalm. 90. 3.
in houses of clay: whose foundation is in the dust: ``beaten to powder as a
moth, be they.

20. Betvveen a morning and evening, they are waste: without guide they
perish for ever.

21. Man in honor continues not: is made like the beasts that perish: and
all gift^^ of reason above beasts come to nothing. This oration should teach
Jews and Gentiles to reject all thought of justice by the^^ works: seeing they
are dead in sin: that they may receive the abundance of grace of the gift of
justice, to reign by Christ, Romans 5. 17.
Iourneyeth not their excellency with them* They do die, but without vvisdome.

Chap. 5.
CAll now whether any will will like of thy grudging against God.
defend thee: and to whom of the holy Chapter 36. 20. In that thou desire night
of death, Elihu will not like of it.
will thou look.

2. (...) 4. 5.
Aey does anguish kill the evil: and indignation bring death upon the sot.

3. I have seen the evil fastening root: but presently did I curse his dwelling.

4. His children shall be far from good-case: and shall be brought low in the gate:
and Deuteronomy. 32. 39.
there shall be none to succor them.

5. The hungry shall eat up his harvest: which he had gotten through the
thorns: and the thirsty shall swill up their wealth.

6. For sorrow issues not from the dust: nor does misery spring from the
ground:

7. But (...) *
earthly-man is borne to misery, as sparks of fire flee upwards.

8. Doubtless I would seek unto ``the Omnipotent: and dispose my talk unto God:

9. Who does chapter 9. 10. Romans 11. 33.
great things, past serching out: wonderful, past number:

10. He gives rayn upon the face of the earth: and sends waters upon the
open fields.

11. To set the humble on high: that the sad be exalted with salvation.

12. He defeateth the purposes of the subtle: that there hands bring nothing
soundly to pass.

13. He catches the wise in their subtilty: that the counsel of the froward is
made rash.

14. On the day time they stumble at darkness: and as in night they grope at
noone:

15. And he will save the poor from the sword: from their mouth, and from the
hand of the strong.

16. And the needy shall find confidence: and Psalm. 107. 42.
unrighteousness shall stop her mouth.

17. Behold, blessed is the sorowful-man whom the Puissant reproves: Then,
despise not the chastisement of the Almighty.

18. For he makes the sore, and binds it up: he wounds, and his hands
heal.

19. In six afflictions he will succor thee: and in seven, wrong shall not
touch thee.

20. In hunger he will save thee from death: and in war* from the edge of the
sword.

21. When the tongue whippeth, thou shall be hid: and thou shall not be afraid
of spoiling when it comes.

22. At spoiling and famine thou will laugh: and wilt not be afraid for the
savage-beasts of the field.

23. For the stones of the field shall be at covenant with thee: and the
savage-beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee.

24. And thou shall perceive that thy tent shall have peace: and thou shall
look to thy dwelling and not misprosper.

25. And thou shall know that thy seed shall be much: and thy offspring as the
grass of the earth.

26. Thou shall come (...)
in lusty old age to the grave: as corn is reaped in due time.

27. Behold this: we have tried it, so it is: hear it, and know thou it for
thy self.

CHAP VI.
THen Job answered and said:

2. Oh that To Chap. ^. 2.
mine anguish were rightly weighed: and that my calamities were lift in a
balance together.

3. For then it would be heavier then the sand of the seas: therefore my words
Ebr. are swallowed up.
come short.

4. For the arrows of the almighty are in me: whose venom drinks up my
spirit: the terrors of the puissant camp against me.

5. Does the wild ass bray Ramba^. He means that he cries and complains
not without cause: as the wild or tame beasts do not: when they have all that
they need. But he cries for his calamities. Aben Ezra says, he spoke this of
his fellows which were in quietness: how the quiet roar not, or co^playn.
at the grass: does the ox low at his fodder.

6. Shall Rambam. Your speech is not seasoned with salt: I cannot abide it.
the unsavory be eaten without salt: or is there taste in the white of the yolk.

7. Those things which I would have lothed to touch, are now And can I chose
but cry in this case?
the very sickness of my Lechem, is flesh in Arabique.
flesh.

O that I might have my request, and that the Puissant would give me my desire:

9. That it would please God (...) Phil. 1. 21. Death would be a gain to me.
to bring me to dust: that he would loose his hand, and make an end of me.

10. So I In all this pang if God would make an end of me, it should be my
comfort: and I would take courage in my sickness to bear it: by my joy that I
should dye: because I professed the religion of God. Abr. Ben. Peritz. Here is
a close touch of Jobs faith: for the immortality of the soul: by his desire
of death: to go from his pangs: and that he should dye without sin to be
worthy of the life of the world to come.
should yet find comfort: though I parch in pain: when he would not spare. For
I kept not close the words of the most-Holy.

11. What is my strength that I should have any hope: or what can be my end,
that I should To see prosperity. Chapter 5. 26.
prolong my life.

12 Is* my strength the strength of stones? Is To ch ^. 18
my flesh steell?

13 Have not I When I said, the beasts would not complain but in lack: and that
your words were unsavory. Ra^bam.
my defense: and is judgment driven away from me?

14 By him whose mercy is molten toward his neighbor: and who leaves the
fear of the Almighty.

15. My brethren fail me as a brook: as streams of brooks that pass away.

16 Which once are In winter when water is plentiful, ice and snow make them
deep: But in summer they are dry: that waters be scant in Thema. Esa. 21. and
Herodot: and all stories.
black by ice: in which snow hides it self.

17 At the time of parching-weather, they are dried up: when it is hot, they
are quenched from their place.

18. They turn aside from the passage of their way: they come to nothing and
perish.

19. The passengers of Thema had respect to them: the companies of Sheba had
desire to them.

20 They blushed that any had hope: they came to the place and were ashamed.

21 So now, you are become (...) the double reading abridging the similitude,
given of God, may well be translated: as S. Luke, chapter 4. translateth Esa. 61.
The Chaldy translated the Margent: knowing that both have Gods authority.
like that, even nothing: ye Tireu ve Tyrau: Here first comes in sweet
sounds: from hence very often in the Law: specially the Psalms.
see dread and are afraid.

22 Have I said, Ye need not to fear in a cause wherein ye have no harm: But
ye may quietly reason^ and find, that I am not to be condemned for wickedness.
Might in words cannot overcome right.
give for me: and reward for me of your wealth.

23. And save me from the hand of the afflicter: and redeem me from the hand of
the violent.

24 Teach me Touching my complaint, Chap. 3.
and I will be silent: and wherein I have erred let me understand.

25. How strong are the words of rightfulnes: and what can your blame soundly
blame.

26. Do ye think Because Eliphaz, Chapter 5. 1. replied upon his words, he
requiteth that here.
to reprove words: and hold the terms of the forlorn a wind.

27 But In that ye count me wicked: ye lay a trap to make me fall. (...) in the
new T. expresses this.
ye lay a snare for the orphane: as ye dig a pit for your neighbor.

28 Now therefore be content, regard me: for it is before your face if I do lie.

29 Change your mind now: Let not unrighteousness be objected: (...) in the text
is referred to Jobs soul: which by a pathetical gesture of striking his breast
he expressed: and then turns his speech to his friends* Because this was hard
for the simple, God gave in the margent a repetitio^: (...) change ye your
mind, yet.
Be thou (my soul) of an other mind still: my justice is in it.

Is there any evil in my tongue? cannot my palate declare
all-kind-of-heavie-sorowes?

CHAP. VII.
IS there not The labors of our life have an end by course of nature: so I may
wish my sorrows and life ended. Chap. 3.
a set time for sorowful-man upon the earth, that his days be as the days of
an hireling.

2 As a servant does breath unto the shadow, and as an hireling would see his
works end:

3 So I, So I justly wished to die. Chapter 3.
of force possess ioylesse months: and nights of misery are numbered unto me.

4 When I ly down then I say: when shall I rise? and the Evening, that is,
night. Genesis 1.
dusky-time be measured out? and I am full of tossing too and fro unto the
dawning.

5. My flesh is clothed with worm, and rubbish of dust: my skin is rent and
become loathsome.

6. My days are swifter then a weavers-shuttle: and are spent without hope.

7 Remember that my life is but a blast: mine ey shall What is our life? a
vapor appearing, and presently gone. Iam. 4 14.
see no more pleasures:

8. The quick ey shall no more view me: let thine eyes be upon me: that I be no
more.

9. A clowd consumes and passes away: so he that goes down unto the grave
shall no more come up:

10. Nor return any more to his house: neither shall his place know him any
more.

11 Therefore I will not spare my mouth: I will speak in the distress of my
spirit: I will sigh in the bitterness of my soul.

12 Am I a sea? am I a whale, that thou have set me in prison?

13 When I say, my couch shall comfort me: my bed shall lessen my sighing:

14 Then thou fear me with dreams: and frightest me with visions.

15 That my soul had rather be choked to death, then to remain with my bones.

16 I loth-live: I would no longer live: cease from me, for my (...) Lxx.
commonly, and Iam. 4. 14.
life is but a vapor.

17 What is sorrowful-man that thou do make account of him: and that thou
do set thine heart upon him.

18. To think upon him every morning: to try him every moment.

19. How long will thou not look away from me: not leave me till I swallow down
my spittle?

20 I have sinned: what should I do unto thee, (...) Lxx. Thou that look to
the mind of men.
o thou keeper of men: why have thou made me thy mark, that I am a burden unto
my self.

21 Why do thou not pardon my trespass, and take away my iniquity: whereas
To be pitied of the keeper of men:
I ly now in the dust: why do thou not I would by a quick death be rid from
these pains.
quickly seek me out, that I should no more be.

CHAP. VIII.
THen Bildad of Shuach answered and said:

2 How long will thou talk in this sort: that the words of thy mouth be a
vehement wind.

3 Is (...) Ro^. 3. 5.
God unjust: or is the Almighty unrighteous?

4 As Chapter 1. 19.
thy children have sinned against him, so he has sent them into the hand of
their trespass.

5 If thou would betimes Act. 17. 27.
seek unto God; and call for pity of the Almighty.

6. If thou would be blameless and upright, then would he now raise thee
up, and prosper Thy soul. Aben Ezr.
the dwelling of thee being just.
of thy righteousness.

7 And thy former state should be little to thy latter: that should increase
exceedingly.

8 Wherefore Chapter 32. 7
inquire now of the former age: and search among their fathers.

9 For we are (...)
but of yesterday: and without experience: our days are but a shadow upon the
earth.

10 They will teach thee, tell thee, and utter words from their heart.

11. Can segges grow without mire? can great rushes increase without water.

12 While it is yet in the stalk, not cut off, it withers before any herb.

13 So are the paths of all that forget the omnipotent: and the hope of the
hypocrite shall perish.

14 His That which he hops for shall still flee from him.
hope shall loath him: and his confidence shall be a spiders house.

15 He shall lean upon Eb. his house.
it: but it shall not stand: he shall fasten on it, but it shall have no stay.

16. He is iuice-full before Sunrising, and his suckers sprowt over his
orchyard:

17. At the wall his roots wrap: he platteth about the house of stone:

18 If the Sun Ramban.
root him up from his place: then one may deny him: I see thee no more.

19 Lo such is the gladness of his way: but Others shall prosper in the place of
the wicked, taken away.
from the ground others will grow.

20 Lo, the Omnipotent will not loath the perfect: not mainteyn the hand of the
mischievous.

21 Until he fill thy mouth with laughter: and thy lips with showting.

22. Thy foes Psalm. 132. 18.
shall be clothed with shame: and the tents of the wicked shall come to naught.

CHAP. IX.
THen Job answered and said: To chap. 8. 3. That God will destroy the wicked.


2. Truly I know it is so: and how can a man be just before the Omnipotent.

3. If he delight to plead with him: he cannot answer him to one thing of a
thousand.

4. He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength: who has hardened himself
against him, and found quietness?

5. He Seas are where moun taines have been: as betwixt Rhegium and Sicilie.
Eust. upon Divnysius.
removes mountains, that men can not mark how he has removed them out of
their place in his anger.

6. He makes the earth quake from her place: that her pillars tremble.

7 He speaks to the sun, that it rises not: and seals up the stars.

8. He only can spread the heavens: Mat. 8. 26. and 14. 26.
and walk upon the high waves of the sea.

9. He made Eb. Ghas
Arcturus, Eb. Cesil.
Orion, and Eb. Chima.
Pleiades: and the chambers of the south.

10 He does great things, Romans 11. 33.
even unsearchable: and wonderful, without number:

11 When When he shows his judgments in the world I cannot mark his counsel.
he passes by me, I cannot see him: when he flitteth by me, I cannot perceive
him:

12 When Chapter 1. 14. and 17.
he takes away, who can make him restore? who can say unto him, what do
thou?

13. When the Puissa^t will not stay his anger, the Dan. 2. and 4. Nebuchadnez
zar, etc.
proud helpers stoup under him.

14 Much less can I answer him: can I wish to have pleading against him.

15 Who if I were just, I would not answer him: I would crave pity of my judge.

16 If I cry, will he answer me? I cannot believe that he will give ear unto my
voice.

17 He will (...) Genesis 3. 15.
bruise me so with tempest: and will multiply my wounds That none can blame him.
freely.

18. He will not suffer me to take my breath: but fills me with bitterness.

19. As for force, behold he is valiant: as for judgment, who will be my pleader?

20 If I will justify my self, Luke 19. 22. Romans 2 1.
mine own mouth shall condemn me: If I will be perfect, it will prove me That
is, imperfect.
perverse.

21 If I be Elihu, chapter 33. 9.
upright: I know not mine own soul: I am weary of my life.

22 This is uniform: thereupon I speak: Chapter 35. 3.
perfect and wicked he consumes.

23. For with the scourge he kills suddenly: He scorneth at the melting away
of the innocent.

24 The earth Chapter 8. 11
is given into the hand of the wicked: who condemns such as would defend
their country. Est. 7. 8.
covers the face of her judges. Now if not he, who does this?

25 So my My prosperous days: ``Aba. 1. 8
days are swifter then a runner: they are fled, and saw no good thing.

26 They are flit as the Pirates ships: as ``the Egle fleing to meat.

27. If I say, I will forget my sighing: I wlll leave my woful-sadnes, and be
of comfort:

28 Then I am afraid of all my sorrows: I know that thou will not For holding
my peace: for I tried that long.
clear me:

29 I shall be holden as wicked. Now why do I To have any long hope of goodness.
labor in vain.

30 If I wash my self in (...) and (...) In waters: In snow water: The double
reading has a sweet allusion.
snow: and clear my hands in soap:

31 Yet thou will deep me In the grave:
in the mire: and When I go naked to the grave: as though my clothes did loath
me.
my own clothes shall loath me.

32. Because he is not a man, like me: that I might give him an answer, that we
should come together to judgment:

33 There is no Umpire.
dayes-man betwixt us: to lay his hand upon us both:

34 Let him To this Elihu speaks, chapter 33.
take away his rod from me: that his terror fright me no more.

35 I would then speak and not fear him. For I am not As Gods scourge seems
to make me: and your speachet would.
such with my self.

CHAP. X.
MY soul is weary of my life: when I leave my sighing for my self: I will
speak in the bitterness of my soul.

2 I will say unto the Puissant: condemn me not: Let me know wherefore thou
pleadest with me.

3 Does it please thee to oppress: that thou do loath the labor of thine
own Eb. palms of the hands.
hands? and shinest upon the counsel of the My unjust blamer^
wicked.

4 Are Thou know the heart: and need no further trial.
thine eyes of flesh? do thou see as sorowfullman?

5 Are thy Thou want no time, to teach thee knowledge^ as men. Chap. 8. 8.
9. 10. to be changed in sundry opinions.
days as sorowful-mans? are thy years as earthly-wightes years.

6 That thou seek out my iniquity: and inquirest of my sin.

7 Thou know that I am not wicked: yet Deuteronomy. 32. 39.
none can save me from thine hand.

8 Thy hands have fashioned me: and have made me in every poinct: and will thou
destroy me?

9. Remember now, That as the clay thou have made me: and unto dust wilt
return me:

10 Have thou not powered me as milk: and crudded me like unto cheese.

11 Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh: and thou have covered me with
Ribs desending the belly.
bones and sinews.

12. Life The immortal soul have thou given me: and mainteynest the powers of
body and mind.
and loving-kindnes have thou dealt with me: and thy (...)
providence praeserveth my spirit.

13 And these things thou have laid up in thine heart: I do know that this is
with thee.

14. When I do syn thou do watch me: and will not clear me from my
iniquity.

15 If I be wicked, woe is me: if I be just, I dare not lift up mine head: Be
satisfied with confusion, and behold my affliction.

16 How it flees up: as the ramping-Schachal thou huntest me: and still art
wonderful against me.

17 Thou bring new witnesses against me: and augmentest thine ire upon me:
changes and stayed-army have I.

18 Why broughtest thou me out of the womb: Oh that I had dyed and no ey had
seen me.

19 I should be as if I had not been: brought from the belly unto the grave.

20. Will not he leave off a little in my days: cease from me for some
refreshing:

21 Before I go whence I cannot return: to the earth of darkness and shadow of
death:

22. Earth obscure as myrknes it self: shadow of death, void of order: (when
light shines) myrknes it self.

CHAP. XI.
THen answered Zophar the Naamathite and said:

2 Should much speech be unanswered: and the One of lip labors with out right
of judgment.
lips man be justified.

3 Should thy lies make mortal-men silent: should thou Chapter 10. 3.
mock and none confound thee.

4. For Chapter 6. 10. and 10. 7.
thou say, my speech is blameless: and I am pure in thine eyes:

5 Now truly I wish that the Puissant would speak, and open his lips with thee.

6. And would show thee, the mysteries of wisdom: That thou should have
double by ` justice: and know, (...)
that the Puissant will call thee to account for thine iniquity. Chapter 6. 13.


7 Can thou Romans 11. 33.
find the depth of the Puissant: can thou find the scope of the alsufficient.

8. In the high heavens what can thou work: it is deeper then the lowest part
of the earth, what can thou do?

9 Her met is longer then the earth: and is broader then the sea.

10. If he Chapter 9. 11.
pass by, to Ro^. 1. 24. 26. 28.
give over, or to Act. 11.
assemble, who can stay him?

11. For he knows the vain mortal-men: and seeing badnes, must he not mark it?

12 That vain man may be made hearty: borne a wildasse colt.

13 If thou prepare thine heart: and lift up thy palms unto him:

14 Where thy hands have badnes: Sin no more.
cast it away, and suffer not unjustice to dwell in thy tents.

15. So then thou will lift up thy face: that it shall be without blemish: and be
(...)
settled and fear nothing.

16. So thou should forget misery: remembering it as waters passed by.

17. And thy time should pass the noon day: obscurenesse should match the
morning.

18 Thou should be bold because of hope: and entrench to ly down safely.

19. And couch thee down, without all fear: and many should seek unto thee.

20 And the eyes of the wicked shall fail: and their refuge all be forlorn:
and their hope naught but pangs of soul.

CHAP. XII.
THen Job answered and said:

2 Out of doubt ye are the People: and wisdom must die with you.

3 I also have an heart as ye: I am not inferior to you: and who has not such
things as these.

4. I am one mocked of his friend: praying the Puissant and heard: the perfect
just is a mockage.

5 A base lamp to thoughts of welthy, is he that is nere to tottering of feet.

6. The tents The wicked are not always punished: Against Chapter 11. 20. Paul from
this kind taught wicked prosperous Felix, that a judgment remains for the
world to come.
of robbers do much prosper: and they that anger the Omnipote^t, have
securitie-void-of-all-fear: to whom the Puissant brings it to their hand.

7 Wherefore The Ebrew is a general speech of earnestnes, omitted in our
English B B.
in sagenes, ask These men take rules of nature, to teach as Solomon from other
creatures, men's affairs. So Hesiod the Poet says: Fish and beasts and fowls
eat the weaker: and tyran^^: But just men should not do so.
the beasts, and each one of them will teach thee: and the fowls of heaven, and
they will tell thee.

8. Or speak to the earth, and it will teach thee: and the fish of the seas;
and they will show thee:

9 Who does not know even by all these: the hand of (...) is only here used by
the disputers.
the Eternal does this:

10 In whose hand is every living soul: and the spirit of all men's flesh.

11 Cannot the ear discern speeches: as the palate tastes it meat.

12. Is wisdom in th'aged? and understanding in long life?

13 He has wisdom and mightines: counsel and understanding are his:

14. If he In cities destroyed. Genesis 7. the toure. Genesis 11. in mind. Jer. ^
pull down, it will not be builded: in prison, grave, or mind.
shut one up, it will not be opened.

15. If he Genesis 9.
with hold the waters, they dry up: If he Genesis 7. and. 8.
send them forth, they overwhelm the earth.

16. He has the force, and all that is: (...) Romans 11. is expounded to all
these.
from him, and by him, and for him are deceivers and deceived.

17 He brings counselors to badnes: and judges unto stark-madnes.

18 The Chains. Targ. Ieru.
band of kings he makes loose: and binds (...) astewardes girdle: as a
purse: and Kings stewards wear in the East. Aru^. of Kings they shall be Kings
servants. But the simpler sense is, of Kings they shall be captives.
a girdle upon their loins.

19 He brings Dukes to badnes: and he perverteth the mighty:

20. He bereaveth Orators of lip: and takes reason from Elders.

21 He powers baseness on Nobles: and weakneth the * sway of vehement.

22 He reveals As by Joseph to Pha raoh, for plenty and dearth: by Daniel to
Judah, for the afflicting image: by John to the Church, for Rome in two sorts;
open profane, and subtle wicked.
deep things out of darkness: and brings to light the shadow of death.

23. He augments nations, and destroys them: he spreads nations, and governes
them.

24. He takes heart from heads of people of the earth, and makes them wander in
wild-ground waylesse.

25 They grope in darkness without light, when he makes them Esa. 19. 14. and 24
20.
wander as drunk.

CAHP. XIII.
LO, mine eye has seen all: mine ear has heard and understood:

2 So much as ye do know: I know I am not inferior to you.

3. Chapter 12. 7.
Assuredly, I would speak to the alsufficient, and reason with th'omnipotent.

4 But assuredly ye are Psa. 119. 69. The proud have forged lies against me.
forgers oflyes: bad physicians are ye all.

5 Oh that ye could be still silent: and that this might be your wisdom.

6 Hear now my reasoning: and mark the pleading of my lips:

7 Will ye speak unright of th'omnipotent: and for him will ye speak deceit?

8 Will ye respect his person: plead with the Omnipotent?

9 Will it be well, when he tries you: will you (...) Gal. 6. 7.
mock with him, as man mocks with man?

10 He will surely reprove you: for secret respect of person.

11. Will not his highness make you fear: and will not his dread fall upon you.

12. Your memory is like to ashes: and your bodies to bodies of clay:

13. Be silent for me, and I will speak: and let come on me what may come.

14 Wherefore Think not that I speak as one desperate: whosewords fleing
through the hedge of my teeth, should rent my flesh, and cause me destruction.
No I am sure to speed well, if I might plead with God. Trem. Or, wherefore have
I saved whole only the flesh about my teeth: and am at deaths door. Or this,
I could be content that I bite my flesh with my teeth: and have my soul in
danger in my sickness: for I do not deny him.
should I take my flesh in my teeth: and 1 Samuel 19. 5.
lay my soul even in my hands?

15. If he kill me, (...) and (...) Abraham Ben Peritzol: expounds both
readings. As S. Luke does, Es. 61.
should I not hope? if he kill me, I will I will hope for souls life: for he
will be my salvation for life eternal.
hope in him. So I would plead my ways before him.

16. And he would be my salvation: But the hypocrite shall not come before him.

17 Hear diligently my words: and let my talk come to your ears.

18 Behold now, I order the cause: Chap. 34. 5.
I know that I shall be found just.

19 Who is he that will plead with me? If now I speak not, I should And so
Chap. 3. 11.
starve.

20 Chap. 33. 6. 7. 8. etc.
Only two things do not to me: then I will not be hid from thy face.

21 Draw away thy hand far from me, and let not dread of thee, fright me.

22 Then call, and I will answer: or, I will speak, and answer thou me.

23. Chapter 33. 13.
How many are my iniquities and sins? Let me know my trespass and my sin.

24 Wherefore do thou hide thy face, and Chapter 33. 10
take me for thy enemy?

25. Will thou break a leaf betossed? or will thou pursue dry stubble?

26. To write against me bitter things: and make me heir of my youth sins.

27 And put Chapter 33. 11
in the stocks my feet, and watchest all my paths; and leavest thy print in
the roots of my feet.

28 And my body, a dry stubble.
it wastes as with a rot: as a garment moth eaten.

CHAP. XIIII.
EArthly-man borne of a woman: is short of life and See Chapter 7.
full of vexation.

2 As Psalm. 90. 5. 6. and 103. 15. 16.
a flower does he shoot forth: and is cut off: and he flees as a shadow: and
continues not.

3. And upon this do thou open thine eyes: and me do thou bring into
judgment before thee.

4. Who can make clean of unclean? not any.

5 Seeing his days are decreed: his months are numbered with thee, his limits
thou have made which he shall not pass:

6. Turn from him that he may rest: till he pay his days work, as an hireling.

7 For a tree has some hope: that being cut down, it may yet sprout: and his
suckers shall not leave.

8 Though his root be old in the earth: and his stock do die in the dust:

9 At sent of waters it buds, and bears branches as a young plant:

10. But the earthly-wight, dies without strength: Adams son starves, and
where is he?

11 As waters pass out of the sea: and rivers are spent, and dry up:

12 So man lies down, and rises not: till the heavens be not: they wake not
nor be raised up out of their sleep.

13. Oh that thou would, If it were possible I would be dead from this
pain: to be raised up, afetr a set time.
lay me up in the grave: would hide me until thine anger rested, would
set me a time, and remember me:

14 Can the earthly-wight dead revive? Ram. I will wait all my set time: until
my passage away come, and that I die: for as I know that I shall afterward
live, I would dye to plead there with thee: Then thou would favor the work
of thine hands: But in this world thou will not call me to judgment.
all the days of my set time I would wait: (...) (70) (...) Aquil. Sym. (...)
until my change were come:

15 Thou would call, and I would answer: thou would tender the work of
thine own hands.

16 But now Chapter 33. 11
thou do count my goings, and keep them not for my sin.

17. My trespass is Deuteronomy. 32. 34.
feald in a bag: that, thou ioynest to present iniquity.

18 Even Mountains shaken with earthquakes lose usually great pieces of their
rocks: broken unto small dust: and water overfloweth their growth.
an huge mountayn waisteth: as the rocks remove from their place:

19 Water wears the stones: thou overflowest the growth of the dusty earth: So
thou destroyest the hope of sorowful-man.

20 Thou prevaylest against him, and he passes: tho^ changest his face, and
sendest him away.

21 If his children be in honor, he knows it not: o^ if they be the least,
he can not understand of them.

22. Only his flesh is grieved for it self: and his soul Chapter 5. 4.
will mourn for himself.

CHVP. XV.
THen answered Eliphaz the Themanite, and said:

2 Will a wise man U. 13. and 14.
utter knowledge of wind, and fill his belly with an eastern blast:

3 Reasoning in speech unprofitable, and in words of no gain.

4 Yea In that thou pleadest justice: and seek not to Gods mercy.
thou diisanullest godlynes: and hinderest prayer before the Omnipotent.

5 Thy Luke 19. 22.
own mouth shall argue thy iniquity: how thou chosest the tongue of the subtle.

6 Thy own mouth Chapter 6. 24
shall make thee wicked: and not Chapter 4. Eliphaz spoke of patience, to abide
Gods chastising for ordinary oversights: but did not hold him flat wicked: Now
he goes further.
I: and thy own lips shall witness against thee.

7. Wast thou borne the first earthly-man: or formed before the mountains?

8 Have thou heard the counsel of God: and drawn unto thee wisdom.

9 What know thou that we know not? perceivest thou that is not with us?

10 Both Chap. 12. 12.
gray headed and all gray is amongst us: greater then thy father in days.

11. Are the comfortes of God a small matter with thee? and is the That thou
complaynest of injury and crooked judgment.
matter hid with thee?

12 What doctrine can thine heart give thee? or what can thine eyes aim at.

13 That thou turnest thy spirit against the Omnipotent; and vtterest words out
of thy mouth.

14 What is woful-man to be cleared? or the borne of woman to be justified?

15 Where he holds not his holy ones perfect: nor they of heaven be clear in
his eyes.

16 Much less the unclean, and loathsome: drinking unrighteousness as water.

17 I will show thee, hear me: and what I have seen, that will I declare.

18 What wise men have told: and hid not what their ^athers left.

19 To whom alone the land was given: and no Wise sage men: peaceable: that no
other were chosen to check them. as Rome is blamed for often change of policy.
stranger came amongst them.

20. The wicked kills himself all his days: and soon numbered years, are
stored for the Tyrant:

21 A noise of much fear is in his ears: in peace the ^obber will come upon
him.

22. He looks not to escape from darkness, having watch he thinks upon the
sword.

23 He wandreth for bread, where to find it: he knows that the day of darkness
is ready round about him.
at his hand.

24 (...) * Romans 2. 9.
Distress and affliction will fright him: It will prevail against him, as a
King furnished with an army about him.

25. Because he stretched forth his hand See 21. 14
against the Omnipotent: and would be valiant against the almighty*

26. He will run upon him: upon his neck: upon the thick bones and nerves.
bodies of his shields.

27 Though* A description of wealth.
he cover his face with his fat, and make playtes upon the panch.

28 Though he make dwellings of cities ruinated: of houses vndwelt: which were
coming to heaps of stone.

29 He shall not continue rich, nor his wealth stand* nor that which they have
brought about, spread over the earth.

30. He shall not depart out of darkness: fire shall dry up his suckers: and he
shall depart by the spirit of ver. 25. and 21. 18.
H(...) mouth.

31 Let not the misledd trust in vanity: for vanity will be his recompense.

32 Which will come to the full before his day: and his branch shall never be
green.

33 God.
HE will snap off his soure-grape as the vines: and cast off his flower as the
Olives.

34 For the congregation of the hypocrites shall be solitaric: and fire eats
the tents of bribers.

35 By Psalm. 7. 14
conceiving sorrow, and breeding misery, s^ their belly gets guile.

CHAP. XVI.
THen Job answered and said:

2 I have heard many words as these: Miserable comforters are ye all.

3. Is there any end of windy words? and what make^^ thee so vehement to reply.

4. Would I speak as you Eb. Your soul in place of my soul.
if you were in my place? would I compose bare words against you, and nod
Mock. a^, 2 King. 19. 21.
upon you with my head?

5 I would strengthen you with my mouth: and my lips comfort.
moving should bring ease.

6 If I speak, my grief will not be eased: or if I leave of, What will it be the
less.
what will go from me?

7 As now it wearieth me. THOU have made me desolate of all Chapter 1. Thou have
marred all part^ of my body. have bereft me of my children and friends: chapter 1.
and now of health in all my members.
my company.

8 So thou have made me all wrinkled: That is a proof: and my leannes rises up
against me: it speaks to my face.

9 His Chapter 17. 3.
anger renteth: and he Chapter 33. 10
bears me a grudge: he gnasheth his teeth upon me: he is become my foe: Eb.
He sharpeneth his ey at me
he looks sharply at me.

10. Men open their mouths against me: with reproaches they smite my cheeks:
they come by full troops upon me.

11. The Omnipotent has given me over to the Chaldaea^ and Sabean.
godles: and has cast me into the hand of the wicked.

12 I was welthy, but he has undone me: and he lays hold upon my neck and
still buffeteth me: and has ^et me for a mark unto himself.

13 His Sicknesses and sores.
archers compass me: he has cleaved my ^eines: and Lam. 2. 2. 21.
spared not. He has powered upon the earth my gall.

14 He has breached in me breach overagainst breach: He runs upon me as a
giant.

15 Sackloth my sackcloth* Chapter ^. by boyles broken cleaves unto my si(...)e.
sow I unto my skin: and wallow mine horn in the dust.

16 My face is become fowl by weeping: and upon my eyliddes is the shadow of
death.

17 For no misdoing of my hands, but my wish is clear: saying.

18 O earth cover not my blood: and let there be n^ place for If there be any
injury in my hands let the earth reveal it: and let God never hear my prayer.
my cry:

19 Even now, behold, in heaven is my witness: and my record on high:

20 My friends scorn me: but unto the Puissant does mine eye drop.

21 That he would decide the cause for earthly-wight before the Puissant: as
the son of Adam does with his neighbor.

22. For the soon numbered years be arrived: and a path must I go, where I have
no return.

CHAP. XVII.
MY breath is corrupt: my days are quenched: graves are for me.

2. Surely mockages are bestowed upon me: and in these men's vexing Night and
day they vex me.
lodges mine ey.

3. Set me now an vmpire with Whom thou allowest.
thee: who is he? Let my hand be stricken.

4. For thou have hid the heart of these men from judgment: therefore thou will
not give them honor.

5. who so speaks (...). Romans 16. 18
vaine-goodly-speach to neighbors, the eyes of the given that way shall be
consumed.

6 That makes me a byword to people: and I They play upon me as a tabber:
am openly a taber.

7 Wherefore mine eye is dim by anguish: and all my members be like a shadow.

8 Let the upright wonder at this: and let the innocent encouraging him self
and others not to faint for afflictions by-Iobs example.
bestir himself against the hypocrite.

9 And Rev. 22. 11.
let the just hold on his way: and let the clean in hands increase courage.

10 Now, all ye, change your mind: and To Jobs opinion.
come now. For, I find not a wise man amongst you.

11. My days are past, I hoped for much good* but all that hopeis gone.
my purposes are plucked up: the possessions of my heart.

12 The I watch and taken no rest all night: and delight little in day by dark
afflictions.
night they change into day: light is short because of darkness.

13 As I desire the grave my house: in the darkness I straw my couch.

14. To the pit I cry, o father: o mother, o sister to the worms.

15 For where now have I my hope: yea my hope who can behold it?

16 To the Bars that carry to the grave.
mids of the grave all shall descend: when we go down together to the dust.

CHAP. XVIII.
THen Bildad the Shuchite answered, and said.

2 When will ye make an end of speaking: Mark ye: and after we will speak.

3. Why are we counted as Chapter 12. 7 and 17. 4. and 10.
beasts, are Dull.
unclean in your eyes:

4. O he that teareth his soul in his Chapter 16. 9
anger, shall Shall the whole government of the world, so constant as any rock,
be removed for thy opinion.
the earth be cast off for thee, and rocks be removed from their place.

5 Yea the light of the wicked is soon quenched: and the sparkle of his fire
shall not long shine.

6 Light is darkened in his tent: and his candle is put out in him.

7 His violent passages are distressed: and his own counsel will make him fall.

8 He is sent into the net by his own feet: and walks into the platted grin.

9 The snare shall catch him by the heel: the savage shall lay hold on him.

10 His Eb. gable or cord.
snare is hid in the ground: and his pitfall at the way side.

11. Terrors fright him on every side: and press him, Whither soever he goes.
at his feet.

12 His strength shall come to hungar: and woe is ready at his side.

13 A strange death shall eat the branches of his skin.
body. All his children.
branches, shall it eat.

14 His confidence shall be plucked up from his tent: he shall be conveyed to the
king of terrors.

15 It shall dwell in his tent, when it is not his: Genesis 19.
brimston shall be scattered upon his dwelling.

16 Beneath, his roots shall be dried up: and above, his branch shall be cut down.

17 His remembrance shall perish from the earth: and he shall have no name in
the streates.

18. He shall be drvien from light to darkness: and he shall be chased out of the
earth.

19. He shall leave no child, nor nephew among his people: nor remnant in his
pilgrimage.

20. At his day they that come after shall wonder: as the present took an
horror.

21. Even these are the habitatio^s of the unrighteous, ^^ this is the Eb.
place.
case of him See Chapter ^1.
that knows not the Omnipote^t.

CHAP. XIX.
THen Job answered and said:

2 How long will ye greive my soul: and fret me with words.

3 Now five times I spoke, and five times you, crossing my good speches. or,
Ten, that is many times.
ten times ye have reproched me: nothing ashamed: But ye harden your selves
against me.

4. Suppose in deed that I have erred: let my error continue with me.

5. But truly you deal stately over me: `* and bring my wretched case an
argument against me.

6. Know then that the Puissant has wronged, or, wringed me.
overthrown me: and compassed his net about me:

7. If Elihu blames this, Chapter 34. 5* etc.
I complain of wrong, I cannot be heard: if I `Ch. 32. 13.
cry, no sentence will be given.

8. He has Lamentations 3. 7.
hedged in my ways that I cannot pass: and has set darkness over my paths:

9. He has bestript me of my honor: and taken away the crown of mine head.

10. He has pulled me down on every side: and I go away: and he has plucked
up my hope as a tree.

11. And his anger is kindled against me: and he holds ne as Chap. 33. 10.
one of his enemies.

12. His afflictions.
hosts come together against me: and cast up their trench against me: and camp
about my tent.

13. He has alienated my brethren from me, and they my acquaintance
who honored me are become mere strangers unto me.

14 My kinsfolk cease, and they whom I favored have forgotten me.

15 The hirelinges of my house, and my maidens, take me for a stranger: I am an
alliant in their eyes.

16 I call my servant; but he will give no answer: though I entreat him with my
mouth.

17 My breath is strange unto my wife, though I pray her by the children of my
belly.

18 Even Princockes do despise me: when I arise they talk against me.

19 All men of my counsel loath me: and, they whom When I was in health.
I loved turn against me.

20 My bone cleaves to my skin, as to my flesh: and I am whole only in the
skin of my teeth.

21 Pity me, pity me, o ye my friends: for the hand of the Puissant has
touched me.

22 Why do ye persecute me as the Omnipotent: and are not satisfied with Be
content that my flesh is wasted: and go not about, as savage beasts, to break
my bones.
my flesh.

23 O that Because Job was termed one that knew not God: he protests his
faith: in the incarnation and resurrection of Christ, author of our
resurection. The strict propriety of Ebrew bears that: and Gods spirit
always reached to the best sense.
my words were now written: o that they were drawn in a book.

24 Graven with a pen of iron: with lead, were in stone for ever.

25 How I know My redeemer in the nature of man, is the Ever-living: (...)
shall arise from death: and by him I shall rise: and be made like his glorious
body.
my redemer lives: and at the last shall arise upon the dust.

26 And after this my skin is spent: yet from my fle(...) shall I see the
Puissant.

27. Whom I shall see, even I, my self: and mine ey(...) view, and No other for
me.
no stranger: when my reins and boso(...) be spent.

28. Thus, ye should say, Seeing this poinct it the main; not to doubt in the
heart, who can go up to heaven to bring Christ down: or who can go down into
the deep to bring Christ from the dead: but to beleve that Jesus is the
Eternal: and that God raises him from death: Job could not be said not to
know God.
why pursue we him: when the things root is found in me.

29 Be afraied your selves of the sword: For ire upon sin has the sword.
Therefore know there is (...) and Shaddin: might seem to be Sh^ddin Devils* in
the vn^oincted Bible. The margent reading helps therein.
a judgment.

CHAP. XX.
THen answered Sophar the Naamathite, and said.

2. For this my thoughts make me reply: and therefore my have is in me.

3. A Chap. 19. 28. 29.
reprofe to my shame I hear: and the spirit of my conscience will that I
answer.

4 Thou do know this much, how of old, since Adam was set on the earth:

5. The joyance of wicked is short: and hypocrites gladness for a moment.

6. If his height ascend to heaven: and his head reach unto the clouds:

7. Turning a little he falls for ever: they who saw him.
his beholders ^ay, where is he?

8. As Esa. 29. 7. 8.
a dream shall he flee, past finding: and pass like a vision on night.

9. Eyes viewed him: but shall no more: nor his place behold him again.

10. His children must content the poor: and his hands recompense his wrongs.

11. His bones shall feel full pay for his youth prankes: which shall lie with
him in the dust.

12. Though wrong be sweet within his mouth, and he hide it under his tongue:

13. Though he cherish it, and leave it not: and hold it within his palate:

14. His meat in his bowels turns into gall of aspes within him.

15 Wealth devoured he shall cast-vp: The Omnipotent will drive it out of his
belly.

16. He shall suck the gall of aspes: the tongue of serpents shall kill him.

17 He shall no more see rivers, streams, brooks of honey and of butter.

18. He shall restore what men's pains gate: and not have time to devour it:
and never rejoice in the wealth for which he must make recompense.

19 He oppresses and leaves poor; robbed of house: which he shall not build
up.

20 For he shall feel no rest in his belly: by that which Psalm. 59. 15 and 69.
22.
he desired he shall not be safe.

21 There shall be no remnant of his meat: therefore his goods continue not.

22 When he has filled him with sufficiency, then he shall be distressed: each hand
of grieved.
injuried will come upon him.

23 When he would fill his belly, God will send his hot anger upon him: he will
rayn upon him into his flesh.

24. When he flees from the iron armor, the bow of steel shall shoot him
through.

25. The arrow shall be drawn and come out of Chald. and Ab.
the quiver; and the head shall be in his gall: terrors shall come upon him.

26. All darkness is hid up for his For his store of sins. Romans 2. 5.
store: a fire Eb. Which needs no blowing.
unquenchable shall eat him up, and the remnant of his tent shall be wringed.

27 The heaven shall reveal his iniquity: and the earth shall rise up against
him.

28 The As oil and wine. Chald.
fruits for his house shall pass away: and flow away in the day of anger.

29 This shall be the portion of the wicked earthly-man from Elohim.
God: and the inheritance appointed him from the (...), in the Lxx.
Omnipotent.

CHAP. XXI.
THen answered Job and said:

2 Hear diligently my words: and let that be your consolation.

3 Suffer ye me and I will speak: and after I have spoken, mock thou:

4. Is I complain not to you: but unto God. I plead with God: and sorrow that
I am not heard.
my sighing unto man: notwithstanding I have my sighing: then why should not my
spirit be discouraged.

5 Mark me, and be amazed: lay the hand upon the mouth:

6 When I bethink me, I am troubled: and a quaking takes my flesh.

7 Why are the wicked lively, continue long, and be mighty in riches.

8 Their seed is settled before them with them: and their issue before their
eyes.

9 Their houses have peace without fear: and the rod of the puissant is not
upon them.

10. Their ox gendreth and loses not seed: their cow calveth, and loses
not the young.

11. They send forth their children as flocks: and the^^ Chapter 15. 30.
prinkockes dance.

12. They bear with the tabret and harp: and rejoice a^ the sound of the
pleasant instrument.

13. They spend their days in wealthinesse: and in a Chapter 15. 24.
moment they go down But in Haides they are pa^ged in flame, Luke 16. 19. 23.
to the grave.

14. And they say to the omnipotent, depart from us: for we desire not to know
thy ways.

15. What See Chapter 15
is the almighty that we should serve him: or what profit shall we have if we
pray to him.

16. Lo their wealth comes not But from God.
by their own power: here I am far from the judgment of which never thank God
for their wealth but think their own wisdom found all: as Assure, Esa. 10. 12.
13
the wicked.

17. (...) is, how often? or how seldom. Ramban.
Not so often is the candle of the wicked put out: that their woe does come upon
them: that HE imparteth pangs in his anger.

18 That they become Psalm. 1. 4. and 35. 5.
as straw before the wind: and dust which a tempest steals away.

19. Does God lay up his injuries for his children: does pay himself that he
does feel it?

20. Do his own eyes see his ruin: that he drink the ire of the omnipotent.

21. Otherwise what cares he for his house after him: when the number of his
own months shall be shortened.

22. Can a man teach the Omnipotent knowledge, how he shall judge the lofty?

23 One dies in his very perfection, all in prosperity and ease:

24 His He has all prosperity of health and wealth.
payles are full of milk: and the marrow of his bones are moist.

25 An other dies with a bitter soul: and never ate good thing.

26 They shall lie alike in the dust: and the worm shall cover them.

27 Behold, I know your thoughts, and your injurious imaginations against me.

28 When ye say: where is the house of Or, rich Tyrant.
the noble? and Chap. 20. 19.
where is the tent and pavilion of the wicked?

29. Cannot ye ask them that go by the way? so ye would not make their signs
strange.

30. How the bad is spared unto the day of heavines, the day when great wrath
is brought.

31 Who dare tell him of his ways to his face: and reward him that which he
does?

32. But he is brought unto the grave, and still abides in the tumbe.

33 The vale clodds be sweet unto him: and he draws all earthly after him: as
innumerable went before him.

34 And what do ye comfort me with vanity: when great offense remains in
your disputations.

CHAP. XXII.
THen answered Eliphaz the Themanite and said.

2. Can the humane-wight teach the Omnipotent? If he would teach, would he
regard it?

3. Is it a pleasure to the almighty, that thou pleadest justice: or gain, that
thou would make thy ways perfect?

4. Would he reprove thee for thy religion; would he come into judgment with
thee?

5 Nay doubtless thy evil is great, and thy iniquity endless.

6. For thou have taken a pledge from thy brother vv(...) Mat. 25. 35. etc.
out cause: and bestript the naked of their clothing.

7 No water to the weary have thou given to drink and thou have kept away
bread from the hungry.

8 But the stronger in arm held the land: and (...) Ma. 10. 42.
he estimation would dvvell in it.

9 True devotion is this, to visit the fatherles and widows in their adversuy:
and to keep himself unspotted of this world. Iam. 1. 27.
Widovves have thou sent away empty: and the arms of the fatherles were
broken.

10 Therefore snares compass thee: and suddayn fear frightes thee:

11 Or darkness, that thou can not see: and much w^ ter does cover thee:

12 Is not the Puissant in the height o^ heaven: and be hold the loftynes, the
stars how high they be.

14 So thou say, what knovveth the Omnipotem can he judge through the dark
cloud?

14 The clovvdes be a covering to him that he cannot see: and he walks upon
the compass of the heaven.

15 Do thou hold.
Have thou marked the way of 2 Pet. 2. 5.
the old world vvherin ungracious men have vvalked?

16 Which were made away before their time: vvho^ * The middle of the book by
the Massorites.
foundation became a water of deluge:

17 Who ^^id unto the Omnipotent, depart from ^ and what should the Almighty
do unto them?

18 For he filled their houses with goods: and I am far from the judgment of
the wicked which holdth: stars their Gods and givers of blessing.
the opinion of the wicked is far from me.

19 The just did see and rejoiced: and the innocent (...) mock them.

20 As our state is not yet destroyed, that the remna^ of the other, The world
reserved to fire. Es. 66. and 2 Pet. 3.
fire should eat up:

21 Reconcile thee now unto him, and be at peace: S(...) prosperity shall
come unto thee.

22 Receive now the Law at his mouth: and lay up his ^^ordes in thine heart.

23 If thou tuine unto the almighty: thou shall be built ^p: if thou cast far
off unrighteousness from thy tents.

24. So thou shall set by gold as dust: and Ophir, as ^he stones in rivers.

25 And the Almighty will be thy plentiful gold: and ^ilver of strength unto thee.

26 For then thou shall delight in the Almighty: and ^^ft up thy countenance
unto the Puissant.

27 Thou shall crave good of him: and he shall hear ^hee: and thou shall pay
thy vows.

28 And thou shall decree a matter: and it shall stand so ^or thee, and in thy
ways shall the light shine.

29 When Pride will have a fall.
others shall be humbled, thou shall speak ^f exaltation: as the humble eyed he
will save.

30 He will spare the innocent: who shall be spared for Chapter 42.
^hy pure hands.

CHAP. XXIII.
THen Job answered and said:

2 Yet this day Chapter 22. 3
my sighing is holden a rebellion: though my stroke be greater then my ^roning.

3 O that I knew how to find him: that I might come into his throne.

4 I would lay the cause before him: and fill my mouth with arguments:

5. Would know what words he would answer me: and would perceive what he would
tell me.

6 Would he by great power plead against me? No, but he would help me.

7 There the upright does plead with him: so should I ^e quit for ever by my
judge.

8. Go I cannot mark Gods judgments in any part of the world
I Eastward, there he is not: or westward, I (...) not mark him:

9. On the left hand when he works, I cannot vi(...) him: when he covers
the right hand, I can not see him.

10 But he knows what way is with me: tried he m^ I should come forth as gold.

11. My foot has held his right path: his way have kept, and not turned away.

12. And his lips laws I cast not of: More then m(...) daily bread have I
laid up the words of his mouth.

13 Yet He is unchangeable.
when he is against me, who can stay him? h(...) soul wills, and that does
he.

14 Because See Chapter 10 ver. 8. 9.
he furnished me with my daily bread^ and many such graces are with him.

15. Therefore I shrink at his presence: I consider an^ am afraid of him.

16 For the Omnipotent has loftened mine heart: an^ the Almighty has made me
shrink:

17 Because Because I found neither death, nor ease of sickness.
I have not dyed by thick-darknes: nor H(...) yet That I should not seel these
afflictions.
hides gloomynesse from my face.

CHAP. XXIV.
WHy should not The affairs of me^ in their times.
times be hid by the almighty, for none that know him see his ways.

2. Men remove landmarks: rob away herds, and feed them.

3 They drive away the ass of the fatherless: and t(...) the ox of the widow
for a pledge.

4. They make the poor turn out of the way: t(...) meek of the land hide
themselves together.

5 Behold the wild in the wilderness go forth to their (...) and (...). The
margent expounds meek by helpless. Some translate the margent: and well may:
But none may think the Line-reading corrupt.
york: rising timely to spoil: the vast-ground gives him ^read for his young.

6. They reap the field that is not their own: so the wic^ed snap of the
vineyards grapes.

7. The naked they do cause to lodge without garment: and without covering in
the cold.

8. They are Poor dwell in high rocks, in many showers of rain: and in holes
of rocks, they lodge.
moistened with the streams of the moun^aines: and for want of covert, they
embrace the rock.

9 Of mischievousnes they rob the fatherles: and take ^way as a pledge that
which the poor has upon him.

10 The The naked in part they make more naked
naked they cause to go without garment: and ^hey take away the sheaf of the
hungry.

11 Men The laborer has not (...)is pay.
make oil within their walls, and tread wine^resses, and are thirsty.

12. In the city, folk do groan: and the soul of the ^layne As Rev. 6. 10.
cries: and the Puissant marketh not the vnsa^orie dealings.

13. They are of rebellers against the light: They know ^ot his ways: nor keep
in his paths.

14. With the light the murderer rises: he kills the ^eedy and poor: and
on the night he will be a very ^heife.

15. The ey of the adulterer watches the twylight, saying: No ey shall see me:
and lays a visard upon his face.

16. Ramban thus: In dark places he diggeth houses: which he seals up on the
day time: And that seems the right sense: so this: They can (...)i would no light.
In the dark he diggeth houses: which he mar^ed on the day time: they know no
light.

17. For altogether the morning is unto them the shadow of death: if any spy
them, then come terrors of the shadow of death.

18 He is lighter then the face of waters: their porti^^ is cursed on the
earth: none will look unto the way of the vineyards.

19 Drought and heat quickly take away snow waters: the grave them that sin.

20 The Raban. His wife: others, his mother; or friends; all of compassion.
womb shall forget him: he is sweet to the worm: he shall be no more remembered:
and wickedne^ is broken down as a tree.

21. HE The wicked man's life shall have the husbands lot.
adioyneth the barren which has not borne child: and to the widow HE shows
no good.

22 And HE draws the stout after him by his might: while each stood, none was
sure of his life.

23 HE would give them security to stay upon: But his eyes was upon their ways.

24 They were exalted a short while: but come to nothing, so they are brought
low: every one are made to skip away: they are cut off as an ear of corn.

25. If it be not so now, who will prove me a liar: and make my words nothing?

CHAP. XXV.
THen answered Bildad the Shuchite and said:

2 Dominion and fear be with him: he makes The majesty of God is too
terrible for base man to plead with: says Bildad: and all Gods doings are in
judgment and justice: the judge is just, and the judged a sot: unable to know
the secret of thus matter. At this Job mocketh in the next chap.
peace in his high places.

3. Can his armies be numbered? or None of his Angels have light of themselves:
but all from him.
over whom The Chaldy upon v. 2. Sultanship and fear be with him: he makes
peace in his high heavens. Michael is on his right hand: and he is of fire: and
Gabriel on his left hand: and he is of water: and the body creatures be part of
fire: and part of water. Such fables S. Paul forbids: and ^ewes making
Michael a created Angel, holp out Machomed: and ever Zohar graun^eth the truth,
that Michael is Jehovah.
does not his light shine?

4 And what should sorowful-man plead justice with the Omnipotent: or the borne
of woman look to be cleared.

5 Look unto the moon: and it will not be bright: and the stars are not
clear in his eyes.

6. Much less sorowful-man, a worm: and the son of Adam a vermin.

CHAP. XXVI.
THen Job answered and said:

2 What helpest thou to no strength? and savest with an arm having no force?

3 What do thou counsel without wisdom: and make advice known
abundantly.

4 With whom have thou uttered speech: and whose ^oule admired thee.

5 (...) Ambre, and pearl, and such. God his providence reaches to the
furthest places: even to the bottom of the sea, and lowest earth: which places
seem to be as cast off.
Things without life are formed under the waters: * * * Job shows that he can
speak more of Gods strange works then Bildad.
and places near them.

6 The lowest earth is naked before him: and the That which seems to be lost
and contemned.
lost has no covering.

7. He stretches out the North upon the empty: and hangs the earth upon
nothing.

8. He binds waters in his thick-metcores: and the clowd is not broken for
them.

9. He Ramba^: He makes the face of the heavens for an house.
fasteneth the face of the throne: He spreads beawtifully his clowd over it.

10 A bound He brought the sea about the Land: to abide while day and night
continue.
he has made for the face of the waters: unto the end of light with darkness.

11. The Mountains, as Atlas, said to hold up the heavens, by earthquake
tremble.
pillars of the heavens shake: and are amazed at his check.

12 By his strength Of a general water, he made many seas.
he divides the sea: and by his wisdom he parted the Eb. Pride* That is the
proud sea: that threateneth to drown the land.
maine-water.

13 By his spirit he garnished the heavens: his hand has formed the long
serpent.

14 Lo, these are part of his ways: and what a small thing can we hear of
him. And the thunder of his power who can understand?

CHAP. XXVII.
ANd Job proceeded to continue his Oration, and said:

2. As the Omnipotent lives which has removed my cause, and the Almighty
which has brought my soul to bitterness.

3. Surely, all the while that my breath is in me, and the spirit of the
Puissant in my nostrels:

4. My lips shall not speak the unright: and my tongue shall not sound
untruth.

5. Be it far from me that I should justify you until I give up the ghost: I
will not remove mine integrity from me.

6: I will lay hold upon my righteousness, and I will not leave it: my heart
shall take no shame from my days.

7. Mine enemy shall be as the wicked: and my adversary as the unrighteous.

8. For what can be the hope of the hypocrite, that he If I were wicked I durst
not plead with God.
should bring it about: when the Puissant would shake off his soul.

9. Would the Omnipotent hear his cry: when distress comes upon him.

10. Can he delight in the Almighty? will he call upon Phil. 4. 6.
the Puissant at all times?

11 I will teach you of God his hand: that which is with the Almighty I will
not hide.

12 Lo, ye all have seen it: and why do ye then vanish in vanity.

13 This shall be the lot of the wicked earthly-man, with the Omnipotent: and the
portion of tyrants, which they shall receive from the Almighty.

14. If his children be many, it shall be to the sword: and his offspring shall
not be filled with bread.

15. His remnant shall be buried as conte^ned slaves. (And so Beth is taken, Dan.
2. 44. presently after the days of these kings, the God of heaven shall set up
a kingdom.)
as soon as they are dead: and his widows shall as glad to be rid of them.
not weep.

16 If he heap up silver as dust: and prepare him ga^ments as clay:

17 Well he may prepare it: but the just shall wear i^ and the innocent shall
part the silver.

18 He builds his house as a moth: and as a booth which a watchman makes.

19 The rich in death.
lies and is not To be honestly buried: for his children shall be killed. ^^ v.
14. Amongst the wild Arabians this continues unto this day: and in our wild
countries. It is an Ebrew phrase, for one dead taken friendly to burial: or of
a stranger into lodging, as Mat. 25. 35. 43.
taken up one opens his eyes, but he is gone.

20 Terrors shall fasten on him as waters: and in the night a tempest shall
steal him away.

21 An (...) Act. 27. 14.
East wind shall take him: and he must go: and and it shall whirle him from his
place.

22. It falls on him, and spares him not: when he would feign flee from that
sway.

23. Every one shall clap hands at him, and hiss him away from his place.

CHAP. XXVIII.
NOw there is an issue for silver: and a place of God is merveilous in works
made known: but unsearchable for man's let.
Golds refining.

2. Iron is taken out of dust: and brass is molten out of stone.

3. HE has Psalm. 119. 96.
set an end to darkness: and searches the use of all things: stone of myrknes
and shadow of death.

4. A stream breaks from his spring: vnkenned of a^y foot: deep for sad-man,
it flows away.

5 A ground out of which grows food: is underneath changed as Erimsto^
fire.

6. Her stones have the place of Saphir: and the dust of gold is in it.

7. A path which the kite has not known: nor the eye of glead looked on it.

8. The savage beasts have not trod it: nor fierce-Lyon passed over it.

9. HE sends his hand into the flint: and changes In mountains he breaks
a way for streams.
mountains at the root:

10 Breaking rivers out of the rocks: And all that is rare his ey sees.

11. HE God dries the springs whence rivers ran: that they fail: and have not
so much as a tear of water.
binds the floods from weeping: And the hid he brings to light.

12 But from whence can wisdom be found: and where is understandings place?

13. Sorowfull-man knows not her esteem: neither can it be found in the Land
of the living.

14 The deep says, it is not in me: and the sea says, it is not with me.

15 No Ebr. Sagor: stored that is gold.
ore can be given for her: nor silver be weighed for her price.

16 It will not be valewed with The name of gold in Ophir.
Cethem from Ophir: with precious Beryll and Saphir.

17* No gold nor diamond will match her: nor cup of Phez-gold of Pess in
Barbaria.
Phez-gold make her exchange.

18 East mountain stones, Sardonyx and Cha^ar in Greek as I guess.
Ramoth and Gabish may not be mentioned: wisdoms price does pass carbuncles.

19 The Topaz of Cush will not match her: she will not be weighed with pure
Cethem.

20 Then from whence does wisdom proceed: and Chapter 8. 10.
where is the place of understanding.

21 For it is hid from the eyes of all living: and kept close from the fowls
of the heaven.

22 Destruction and death say: with our ears we have heard her fame.

23. God perceives her way: and he knows her Elohim, the name of the holy
trinity.
place.

24 For he beholds the ends of the earth: and he sees all that is under
heaven.

25 When he made for the wind a peise, and held the waters in a measure.

26. When he made a bound for the rain: and a way for lightening of thunders.

27 Then he saw her: and showed her: and settled her: and searched her.

28. And he said to Adam, Mark: the fear of The Lord. Adonaj is used first Genesis
15. of Abraham, and is plural, for note of Trinity: My stays.
Adonaj, is the wisdom: and to eschew ill, is understanding.

CHAP. XXIX.
ANd Job continued his Oration and said.

2 O that I were as in former months: as in the days when the Puissant
preserved me.

3. When he caused his brightness to shine over my head: when I walked at his
light in darkness.

4. As I was in my lusty years: with Gods favor over my tent.

5. When yet the almighty was with me: and my children about me:

6. When I washed my steps with butter: and the rock powered me streams of oil.

7. When I went out a door to the city: and settled my seat in the street.

8. The young men saw me, and would not be seen: the aged arising stood up.

9. Princes refrayned from speaking: and laid their hand upon their mouth.

10. The best in voice would not be seen: their tongue cleaved to their palate.

11 When the ear heard, then it held me happy: and the ey saw, and gave me good
report:

12. That I delivered the poor when he cried: and the fatherless and the
succourlesse.

13 The blessing of the perishing came upon me: and I made glad the heart of
the widow.

14. I put on righteousness, and it clothed me: my justice was like a cloak, and
a crown.

15. Eyes was I unto the blind: and I became feet to the lame.

16 A father was I to the poor: and the cause I knew not I searched out.

17. And I brake the tuskes of the unright: and cast the pray out of his teeth.

18. And I said: I shall give out the ghost in presence of my nest, and
multiply days as the sand.

19 My root was spread to the water: and dew lay upon my branches.

20 My honor was aey-new with me, and my bow^ was fresh in mine hand.

21 To me men gave ear and regard: and kept silenc^ at my counsel.

22 After my words they diffred not: and my talk dropped upon them.

23. They regarded me as the rain: and gaped as to the later showers.

24. When I laughed upon them, they would not be bold: nor cast down the light
of my face.

25 I chose their way, and sat a chief: and dwelt as a King with a garrison:
as one that comfort mourners.

CHAP. XXX.
BUt now they make a scorn of me, who are lesser in days then I, whose
fathers I would have disdayned to set with the dogs of my sheep.

2 For what could their hands strength do me: whose aged time came to nothing.

3. In want and in famine heavy, they fled into the vnwatery land, obscure,
wast and wilderness.

4 Which plucked up salt herbs among trees, and Juniper roots were their meat.

5 They were driven from company: men shouted at them as at a theif.

6 That they dwelt in Ground holow: broken by streams.
cliffs at rivers, in holes of dust, and in rocks.

7. Among trees they groned: among the nettles they ^marted.

8 A vile kind, yea a kind without fame: banished from the earth.

9 But now. I am become their talk, and made to them a common speech.

10 They abhor me: keep far from me: and from my face spare not spittle.

11 For HE has loosed (...) Iithro, The string or rain of his government:
that holds base from striving with mighty. Let them that think that hard,
read the margent: (...) Iithri, my string: the string of my bow, Chap. 29. ^0.
his strings and afflicted me: and they cast away the bridle from me.

12 At my right hand springals arise: they thrust my feet: and they cast upon
me the causies of their woe.

13. They have marred my way: they hold my heavines a profit: though they be
never the better.

14 They come as into a broad breach: in the broken place they tumble.

15 All terrors are turned upon me: each, course my Chap. 29.
nobility as a wind: and my salvation is past as a clowd.

16. So my soul in me is powered out: and affliction days have caught me.

17 The night perceth my bones from me: that my sinews do take no rest.

18 Through great force my garment changes: as the edge of my coat it girdes
me.

19. He has Or, compared me to mire.
made me a pattron of mire: that I am like dust and ashes.

20 I cry unto thee, but thou do not hear me: I stand up, but thou do To
bring upon me all kinds of punishments.
mark me.

21. Thou art turned one cruel to me: by thy hand hand thou art my foe.

22. Thou take me up unto a wind: and Layest me me thereupon.
causest me to ride: thou meltest me from all soundnes.

23. For I know, to death thou will turn me: and to the house appointed for
all living.

24. And prayed I not when plague was sent? when hurt came to any, thereupon
cried I not?

25. Did I not weep for the hard of day: did not my soul (...) 2 Cor. 11. 29.
Mercerus cites S. Paulan expounder of this rare word: very learnedly.
burn for the poor?

26. But I looked for good, and evil came: and I waited for light, and myrknes
came.

27. My bowels seethed and rested not: days of affliction came upon me.

28. I walked black out of the sun: I stood up in the Church: I cried*

29. I am a brother to Dragons: and a fellow to Estrich kind:

30 My skin upon me is black, and my bones are brent without hoat-drought.

31 And my harp is made a mourning: and pleasant soundes be weepers voice.

CHAP. XXXI.
I Made a covenant with mine eyes, not to look upon a virgin.

2. For what were the portion of God from above: and lot of the almighty from
on high?

3. Have not the unrighteous woe: and be not ildoers rid away?

4. Will not he see unto my ways: and number all my passages?

5. If I walked in vanity: and* my feet hastened to guyl:

6. Let God weigh me in even balance: and let him mark my integrity.

7. If my step have turned from the way: and my heart followed mine eyes: and any
blame sticked to mine hands:

8 Then let me sow, and another eat: and my offspring be rooted out.

9 If mine heart were drawn by woman: that I waited at my neighbors door:

10. Let my wife grind to an other: and let others bow upon her.

11 For this should be an heinous thing: and a sin To take knowledge of, search
out, and punish. Pro. 6. 29. Lev. 20. 10.
for the Judges.

12. For it is a fire eating to destruction, which would root out all my
revenues.

13. If I despised my servants cause: and my handmaids pleading with me:

14 Then what should I do: when th'Omnipotent stood up: and when he did visit,
what should I answer him?

15 Has not he that made me made him in the belly? and the same framed us both
in the womb?

16 If I stayed the poor from the wished: and consumed the eyes of the widow:

17 If I have eaten my morsel alone: that the fatherles ate not of the same*

18. For from my youth this grew with me as a father: and from my mothers womb
I did tender it.

19 If I saw any perishing for want of clothes: and lack of covering for the
poor:

20. If his loins have not blessed me: when he felt warmth by my sheeps fleece:

21 If I listed mine hand against the orphane: when I saw my strength in the
gate:

22 Let my shoulder fall from the back: and let mine arm break from the cane.

23. For th'Omnipotents feared woe held me: and I could not stand be^^^^ his
highness.

24* If I made gold my confidence, and said to Cethem, o my hope.

25. If I ioyed that my wealth grew: and that my hand found much riches.

26. If I admired the sun how it shined: and The new moon: of which yet fools
say, God save her.
the moon walking precious:

27 That mine heart was closly deceived: No, my hand Stopped all idolatrous
speech: of s^^^-worship: for which Babel bred confusion* So Re^ Peritzol takes
it: Others take that for a gesture of idolatry: The words and matter may
abidethat.
kissed my mouth.

28 So this had been a sin to be judged: for I had denied the omnipotent from
above.

29 If See Chapter 30. 24.
I rejoiced at the hurt of mine enemy, and bestird me when he found loss:

30 No, I let not my palate sin: to wish his soul under a curse.

31 Have not the folk of my house said: A speech of hatred to the enemy, as
Psalm. 124. 3. or for hospitality: that servants dynner was given strangers:
that they tarried to roast more: as the next verse shows.
o that we had his flesh: we would not be satisfied.

32 The stranger lodged not in the street: I opened my doors to Wayfaring.
travelers.

33. Have I covered my trespass as Adam: hiding my ^in of a self-love.

34. For I could oppress a great troup: and those of families to baseness, that
made me shrink: that I was dumme, and went not out of doors.

35. O that I had one to hear me: behold my scope is this: that The Almighty
would answer me: and the book which my adversary would write.

36 I swear, I would bear it on my shoulder: I would tie it for crowns to me:

37. I would tell him the number of my steps: I would come to him as a bold
Prince.

38 If my land cry out against me: and her furrows weep together:

39 If I ate her strength without silver, and have grieved her owners soul:

40 Then let thorns grow in stead of wheat: and darnell in steed of barley.

Here end the words of Job.
CHAP. XXXII.
SO these three men rested from answering Job: because he was just in his own
eyes.

2. And the anger of Elihu, the son of Baracheel the Buzite of the family of
Ram, was in a choler against Job: because he justified himself above God.

3. And against his three fellows his anger was in a choler: because they found
no answer, yet condemned Job.

4. Yet Elihu waited to speak to Job: because they were elder then he, in days.

5. So Elihu saw there was no answer in the mouth of the three men, and his
anger was in a choler.

6. Then spoke Elihu the son of Baraceel the Buzite: and said: I am young,
and ye are old: Therefore I reverenced, and feared to show my mind among you.

7. For I said, days will speak: and many years will teach wisdom.

8. Certes a spirit is in sad-man: and the almighty's breath to wise them.

9 Men of not great time may be wise: as the old understand the right.

10. Therefore I say, Hear thou me now: I also will show my mind.

11. Behold I waited through your speech: I gave ear to your arguments: while
ye searched out what to speak.

12 And unto you I gave attendance: and lo, Job found no confuter: of you that
answered his words.

13 Least ye say, we have found wisdom: th'omnipotent Chap. 19. 5. 6.
does toss him, not man.

14. He has framed no speech against me: I will not answer him by your words.

15. They shrink away, do speak no more: speeches be departed from them.

16. And I expected, til that they would no longer speaks but they stand still,
they answer no more.

17. Now I will answer in my turn: also I will show mine own mind.

18. For I am full of words: and my bellies spirit does press me.

19 Behold my belly is as wine that has no vent: as new barels like to burst.

20. I will speak that I may take breath: I will open my lips and answer.

21. Look not that I regard man's person: that I respect an earthly-man.

22. For I know not how to respect: So my maker would be my taker away.

CHAP. XXXIII.
ANd in sooth hear now Job my talk: and give ear to all my speeches.

2. Behold now I will open my mouth: my tongue speaks in my palate.

3. My words are th'vpright of my heart: and my lips shall utter knowledge
purely.

4. Th'Omnipotents spirit has made me: and the almighties breath has given me
life:

5. If thou can answer, settle thy self before me, stand to it.

6 Lo I am, as thou spakest, for th'Omnipotent: I am also formed out of clay.

7. Lo Chapter 13. 21.
my terror shall not fright thee: nor my (...) acaph, hand: Caph is usual.
hand be heavy upon thee.

8 Now thou have spoken in mine ears, and I heard the voice of the words:

9 I Chap. 9. 30.
am clear, without trespass: I am neat, without iniquity.

10. Lo Thou ioynest unto mine iniquity more matter: Ra^ban so does fitly
apply the reply. *Chap. 14 17. and 16. 9
he piketh quarrels against me: Chap. 13. 24. and 16. 9.
and takes me for his enemy:

11 He Chap. 13. 27. and 14. 16.
puts my feet in the stocks: and watches all my paths.

12 Lo here thou art not in the right. I must tell thee: For the puissant is
greater then sorowful-man.

13 Wherefore do thou strive against him: that he will not speak for all his
dealings?

14 When th'Omnipotent speaks once, or twice: * man will not mark it.

15 In a dream of a vision by night: when heavy sleep falls on weak-man: in
deep-slumbring upon the bed:

16 Then he opens the ears of weak-men: and When he has chastised them, he
seals up the decree of their judgment.
imprinteth why they are chastised.

17 That the earthly-man Leave man's work, and do the work of God.
leave of to work: and He cover pride from the humane-wight.

18 To keep back his soul from the pit: and his life from going on the dart.

19. So he chastises with malady on his bed: yea all his bones with a sore one.

20 So that his life abhors meat: and his soul the delicate food.

21 His flesh wastes away from sight: and his bones stand out, which were not
seen.

22. And his soul draws near to the pit: and his life to killing maladies.

23 If there be for him a messenger, a teacher one of a thousand: to tell the
earthly God his mercy.
HIS rightfulnes:

24 Then he will have mercy upon him: and say: spare him (o killing malady,)
from descending into the pit, I have found a ransom.

25 His flesh shall be moister then in youth: he shall return to his fresh days.

26 He will pray to the puissant, and he will accept him: and he shall see his
face with great ioyance: and HE will restore to man his Justice in Christ.
justice:

27 He will accompany with men and say: I sinned and wrestred the right: but
Romans 6. 21.
it profited me nothing.

28 He saved my soul from going into the pit: that my life does see the light.

29 Lo, th'Omnipotent works all this: twice, thrice with a man.

30 To stay his soul from the pit: to be lightened with the light of the
living.

31 Attend o Job, listen to me: be silent, and then will I speak:

32. If thou have speech to answer me, say on, for I desire to make thee just.

33 If thou have nothing, listen thou to me: be silent, and I will teach thee
wisdom.

CHAP. XXXIV.
FUrthermore Elihu spoke and said:

2 Hear o ye wise my words: and give ear ye men of knowledge.

3 For the Chapter 12. 11.
ear discerns speeches, as the palate tastes to eat.

4. Let us desire judgment for us, know amongst us what is the good.

5. For Job has said: Chapter 13. 18. 23. -- 27 and 27. 2. 6
I am just: but, th'Omnipotent keeps back my right.

6. For my right I must be a liar: my stroke is sore without trespass.

7 What sage-wight is like to Job: that drinks scornfulnes I Looked for good:
but evil is come.
like water.

8. Who goes in company with them that work iniquity: and walks with the
sorrowful wicked men.

9. For he has said, it profits not the humanewight, when he would walk with
God.

10 Therefore sad-men of heart hear me: far be wickedness from th'omnipotent:
and unrighteousness from the Romans 3. 4. 5
almighty.

11 For he will repay the earthly his work: and as the Romans 2. 6.
way of each one is, so will make him find it.

12 Most sure is this. th'Omnipotent will not do wickedly: neither will
the almighty pervert judgment.

13 Who before him looked to the earth: or who settled all the dwelt-land.

14. If he set his heart upon one, gather his spirit and his breath unto him:

15 All flesh would yield up the ghost together: and the earthly should return
to dust. Genesis 3. 19.


16 Now, if thou have understanding, hear this: give ear unto the voice of my
speches.

17. Can a foe to judgment rule well: or will thou co^demnethe most just?

18 May one say to the King, Belial? thou wicked, to Romans 3. 5. 6
the King of nobles?

19 Who respects no person of Princes: nor regards wealthy more then poor: for
all be the work of his hands.

20 People Genesis 19.
die suddenly: and be shaken of Exodus 12.
at midnight: and they pass away: and the mighty are taken away without hand.

21 For his eyes are upon man's ways: and he does Rev. 2. 18. 19.
see all his goings.

22 No darkness, nor shadow of death, can hide in it workers of sin.

23 Therefore Chapter 4. 17. 18. 19.
it is not for man ever to purpose, to enter into judgment before the
Omnipotent.

24 He bruseth mighty without end: and places others in their rowme.

25 So he looks unto their works: and brings night, and they are brought
low.

26 For wicked, he makes plentiful riddance of them: in In open sight: for
example of others.
open place of beholders.

27 Because they turned back from him: and considered not all his ways.

28 Bringing on such the cry of poor: as he hears the cry of the needy.

29. When he makes rest, who can disturb? when he hides When for the poor he
kills the mighty, none can stay him: and when he hides his favor, none can
find it.
favor, who can behold him? either for a nation, or one earthly man alone.

30 That the hypocrite do not reign: that HE take away snares from people.

31. Now unto the Omnipotent, which says, I pardon, I will not destroy: This
should be said:

32 Where I see not: do thou teach me: if I wrought il, I will no more.

33 Shall that come from thee, which he will punish: as thou do loath, as
thou likest, where I would not? Now Lothest life, likest of death, Chapter 7 16.
and 17.
speak what thou think.

34 Sad-men of heart will speak as I: and the wise person that hears me.

35. Job does speak without knowledge: and his speeches are without skill.

36. O my father Elihu in gesture looking to heaven, by o father, mea^t the
rest: as Abraham S. of Peritzol expounds the words at large.
which art in heaven, let Job be tried thoroughly.
unto victory: for answers of sorrowful wicked.

37 For he adds trespass to his sin: he makes a noise amongst us: and against
the omnipotent, he does multiply his talking.

CHAP. XXXV.
ELihu spoke moreover and said:

2. Have thou counted this for judgment? Thou saydst, I am more just then the
Omnipotent.

3 So thou saydst, what good will it do thee: what gain I cleansed from my sin?

4 I will answer thee in speeches: and also thy fellows with thee.

5. Consider and see the heavens, and mark the skies height above thee:

6 If thou have sinned, what can thou work for him: and Chap. 7. 20 Thy sins
punishment profits God, or thee. But it is nothing to God: therefore it is
for thy use, and men's: as also thy justice.
thy trespass be much, what can thou do to him?

7 If thou be just, what give thou him: or what will he take from thy hand?

8 Thy ill may touch one like thy self, and thy justice a son of Adam.

9 For violence the oppressed complain: Afflicted godles cry, and God hears
not: less him who says God is his enemy. Chapter 19.
cry out for the violents arm.

10 But none say, where is the Puissant: The mystery of the Trinity.
my MAKERS (the Eternal Trinity,) who stirs to praise on the night.

11 Who does (...)
teach us more then the beasts of the earth: and wiseth us above the fowls of
the heaven.

12 There they cry, but he answers not: concerning the wrong-doers pride.

13 So, As God hears not the faithles: he will not hear the despiseus.
bad, th'Omnipotent will not hear: and the almighty regards it not.

14 So when thou say, thou will not mark it: Judge thee before him, and wayt
for him.

15 And now for missing, his anger does visit: because Job knows not this
great plenty.

16 But does open his mouth in vayn: without knowledge does use much speech.

Chap. XXXVI.
Again Elihu held on and said:

2. Wait.
Forbear me a little, and I will show the^ that I have yet speeches of God:

3 I will utter my knowledge from the eternal nature of God: etc.
from far: and to him that wrought me give justice.

4 Truly my words shall not be lies: for him that Ramban.
tendreth thee soundly.

5 Mark, the Omnipotent is mighty, no despiser, mighty, the strength of heart:

6 He saves not Ps. 55. 23 and 104. 35.
the wickeds life: but yields Right is defense and mercy; in speech from God
to the humble. as Act. 17.
right unto the The poor in spirit. Mat. 5. 3.
poor.

7 He witholdeth not his eyes from the just, and places them with Kings in
throne: They shall be made fit for light with the living with the angels of God
his servants: in their degree and be placed for ever in honor: and be high in
honor and dignity. So, ye shall sit upon 12. thrones, judging the twelve
tribes of Israel. Mat. 19. 28.
that they are exalted for ever.

8. And if they be bound in chains: and be caught i^ cords of anguish:

9 Then he will tell them of their work: and that their trespasses reigned.

10. He will open their ears to correction: and bid that they return from
naughtnes:

11 And if they hear and do serve him: they shall spend their days in good,
and their years in pleasures:

12 But if they will not hear: they shall pass on the spear: and yield the
ghost without knowledge.

13 But So in the Lxx and in the N. T. And is often used, for profane.
hypocrites in heart store wrath: they cry not ^ when he corrects them.

14. Their soul shall dye in their youth: and their life with fornicatours.

15. He Chalatz, and lachatz, two contraries: save, undo, are sweetly used of
Elihu.
saves poor in their anguish: and opens their ear in oppression.

16. Which God once made thee wealthy and would again.
has turned thee from distress mouth: to largenes where is no straitnes: and
that which was laid upon thy table was full of fatnes.

17 As thou have fulfilled the sentence of wicked, sentence and judgment have
laid hold.

18 Since ire is come, look he turn thee not off by stripes: and great ransom
from being cast of.
help not away.

19. Will he esteem thy Whereof thou spakest chapter 29.
noblenes: no gold nor any other thing If now thou despise repentance: be sure
thou shall be utterly cast off.
should be able to give sound strength.

20. Breath not Desire not death, the common passage of all men: as thou have
done, chapter 6. and 7.
unto that night: for peoples passage to their place.

21 Beware Chapter 7.
thou look not to sorrow, to chose that: for thy affliction.

22. Mark, God can exalt thee: and knows how by thy anguish to teach thee
means to all goodness.
the Omnipotent sets up: by his strength: who can teach as he?

23. Who gave him chargeover his ways: who can say, thou workest evil.

24 Remember to magnify his work: which the sons of Enosh (...) Behold:
Ramban: praise in Psalms and songs. Beholding fully a good thing, and
praising it go together.
behold.

25. All Of Adam and Enosh all men are called so: Adam in the tongue of them that
knew Moses: and Enosh, the faithles east Dan. 2, 10. calls me^: Jiran slate
Adam earthly in respect of God: and Enosh sorrowful: but now to distinguish
from beasts man's knowledge, neither term would serve: but the Ebrew best comes
in.
of Adam see it: they of Enosh behold a far off.

26. Lo, the Omnipotentis great: but we cannot fully know that: nor find the
number of his years.

27. He withdrawes dropping of waters: which makes rain pure through his (...)
Cloud, and vapor, But Ghab and Ghanan be also clouds, therefore I am forced to
use a new schole term.
meteores:

28 Which (...) the welkin, sky, air, 1 These. 4. 17.
the air powers, causes to flow on Mat. 5. 45.
many Adams sons.

29. So if one mark his clouds Diver sities.
spreadinges, the much roaring of his The roaring of winds and clouds in the
air: purging it. Psalm. 18. 12.
cabane.

30 Lo, he spreads Hot sun makes great rain upon the earth: upon which the sea
stands
his light upon it: and covers The earth.
the roots of the sea.

31. When by them he will Help etc.
judge people: and give meat in abundant plenty.

32. By Clouds. He causes cloudy weather.
hands he covers the light: and charge it as man does pray.

33 Declaring his favor toward him, the cattle, and also plants.

CHAP. XXXVII.
ALso at this mine heart quaketh: and skippeth out of his place.

2. Hearken well to the noise of his voice: and to the sound that comes from
his mouth.

3 He directs it under the whole heaven: and his light unto the wings of the
earth.

4 After the light roareth a voice: He thundreth with The lightning comes
first to our sense.
the voice of his Majesty: He will not have it to be behind, when his voice is
to be heard.

5 The Omnipotent thundreth wonderfully by his voice: he does great things
which we cannot know.

6 For, to the snow he says, be upon the earth; or to showers of rayn: then
showers of much great rain come.

7 That seals up the hand of Adams son, to peruse what all his workmen may
According as rain comes in dry countries: the first rain, they apply their
tillage. As in Egypt, as Nilus flows.
do.

8 Then the beasts go into their dens: and keep in their lodgings.

9 A tempest comes from his chamber, and cold from The scatterers of clouds.
the fair-weather winds

10 By the breath of the Omnipotent he gives ice: and the breadth of the
waters are made hard.

So by clearnes he wearieth thick-vapours: he scatters the clouds by his
light.

12 And for varieties, he turns himself in his wise counsels, for their
operation, for whatsoever he commands them, in the face of the world, on the
earth.

13. Whether for a scourge, or for the earth, or for mercy, he does cause it to
come.

14. Give ear unto this o Job, stand still, and consider the wondrous works of
the Omnipotent.

15 Do thou know when the Puissant disposes of them, how the light of his
cloud does shine.

16. Do thou know the peising of his thick-vapours: the miracles of the
perfect in all knowledge.

17. How thy clothes are warm, (when the land is still) Thick clouds with
suns heat in south to Arabia and all more North, without wind, in still air,
give a parching heat.
from the south.

18. Could thou make a firmament with him of the air, settled as glass
molten.

19. Teach us what we should say unto him, we cannot reason for darkness.

20 Shall it be recorded unto him when I speak: would any plead when he should
be undone?

21. And now men cannot look upon the light, when it is bright in the air:
when a wind passes and clears it.

22. Through the North a golden comes: but a terrible glory is in the
Puissant.

23. The almighty, whom we cannot find out, he is huge of strength: but
Judgeme^t in God, for the lowly, is defense against Satan (as in the book of
Judges, and Act. 17. from Psalm. 76. 8, 9. and 89. 14. and 97. 2. and 103. 6.)
and justice is mercy. And such is God to sad Enosh: till he will be a rebel
Nemrod.
of judgment and greatness of justice he would not afflict.

24 Therefore sad-men do fear him. He respects no wise in heart.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
THen answered the Eternal unto Job, out of the whirlewind, and said.

2 What (...).
a man is this, that darkneth Gods providence.
counsel by words void of knowledge.

3. Gird now thy loins like a man, and I will question with thee: and let me
see thy skill.

4. Where wast thou, when I laid the foundation of the Of the Earth.
earth, tell if thou This phrase holy Daniel has chapter 2. 21. in opening the
Image: callnig the hearer to this speech of the Eternal.
know understanding.

5. Who set her measures? for thou will be skillful: or who has stretched the
line upon it?

6. Whereupon are her foundations sunk-fast? or who has cast her corner stone?

7. When the the angels. So Christ is Psa. 22. the morning star: and Rev. 2.
and 22. and so Kimchi expounds Ps. 22. The Angels were made at the first:
Ramban: and Basil: The lesser, Caesariensis, etc.
morning stars rejoiced together: and all the sons of God showted.

8 When he shut up Of the Sea.
the sea with doors, when it gushed out coming from the womb.

9. When I set a cloud his garment: and obscurity his swadling-band.

10. And brake the earth for it by my decree: and set bar and doors.

11 And said, Hitherto thou shall come, but shall go no further: and here
shall be an end for the pride of thy waves.

12 Have thou since thy days given the morning his charge? and have taught the
dawning his place?

13. To hold the wings of the earth, that the wicked might be shaken out of it.

14 That it should be made diverse as clay to the pictured: and Herbs and all
plants.
things stand upon it as a garment:

15. That the wicked should be restrained of their light: and the arm lift up
should be broken.

16. Came thou ever to the springes of the sea, or have thou walked in the
border of the deep?

17. Have the gates of The bottom of the sea which seems left of God, as a
dead place: as Chapter 28.
death been opened unto thee? or have thou seen the gates of the shadow of
death?

18 Have thou perceived the breadth of the earth? tell if thou know it all.

19. Where is the way that light dwells? and where Of light and darkness.
is the place of darkness?

20. That thou may take it into his border, and know the paths of his house.

21. Did If thou know not thy own cause, others of the beginning overreach
thee.
thou know, that then thou wast to be born: and the number of thy days to be
many.

22 Have thou come Of Snow. Hail.
to the storehouse of snow? or have thou seen the storehouse of hail?

23. Which I spare unto the time of distress: against the day of battle and
war?

24. By what way is Lightning Chapter 37. 2.
light parted: and the eastwind scatterreth it self over the earth?

25 Who divided a chanel for the streams, and a way for the lightning of
thunder?

26. To rain upon the earth where no man is: upon the desert, where none of
Adam dwells.

27 To satisfy the wast and vast-ground: and to cause the bud of herb to
spring fourth.

28 Has the rain a father, or who begat the misling Rain. Dew. Ice. Frost.
of dew?

29. From whose womb came the Ice: and who begat the frost of heaven?

30 That the waters hide themselves like a stone: and the face of the deep is
fastened.

31 Can thou bind the delicacies of Pleiades, or loose Stars.
the bands of Orion?

32 Can thou bring forth The far stars in the South.
Mazaroth in due season: can thou lead Arcturus and her children?

33 Do thou know the rules of heaven, or can thou set his force upon earth?

34 Can thou lift up thy voice unto the clouds: that abundance of water
cover thee?

35. Can thou send forth the lightnings, that they go, and say to thee, here
we are.

36. Who has set wisdom in the reins, or who has Of man.
given the heart understanding?

37 Who could make the air Aben Ezra, and Ramban.
Saphir-like by wisdom: Clouds.
or distill the barrels of the heavens?

38. Sprinkling the dust with this sprinkling, that the clods cleave together?

Chap. XXXIX.
Can thou hunt pray for the hardy-Lion: or satisfy The Lion.
the heird of Lions whelps?

2 When they couch in their lodge, and tarry in their covert to lie in wait.

3 Who could prepare for the raven his food: when his Raven. Ps. 147. 9.
young ones cry unto the Omnipotent: The dammes.
they wandering without meat.

4. Can thou know the time when the wild goats bring forth young: can thou
mark when hindes calve? Wild goat. Heart.


5. Can thou number the months that they must fulfill? Can thou know the
time when they bring forth young?

6. They lie down, they calve their young ones, and pass their travel.

7. Their young ones wax strong: they grow in the fields: they go forth, and
return not unto them.

8. Who set the wild-asse at liberty: or who loosed the Wild ass.
bands of that An other name of the strong wild ass.
Arad?

9. Even I, who made the plain wilderness his house: and the barren land his
dwelling.

10. He scorneth the multitude of the city: and will not hear the cry of the
driver.

11 Chosen places in the mountains are his pasture: and he will seek after
every green herb.

12. Will the unicorn do thee service: or will he abide Unicorn.
by thy crib?

13. Can thou bind the unicorn for the furrow, by his cords: will he plough
the valley after thee?

14. May thou trust him, because his strength is great: or leave thy labor
unto him?

15 May thou beleev him, that he will bring home thy corn: or gather it unto
thy barn?

16 Could thou give the proud wing to the peacock: Peacock. Stork. Estrich.
or fether to the stork, and estrich?

17. Which leaves her eggs in the ground, and warmeth them in the dust:

18. And forgets how a foot may dash them: and the beasts of the field may
tread upon them.

19. So hard she is to her own young ones: as though they were not hers: and
had labored in vayn without fear.

20. Because the Puissant has denied her wisdom: and not geven her
understanding.

21. At what time it mounteth on high: she scorns the horse and his rider.

22. Can thou give to the horse courage? can thou Horse.
cloth his neck with thundering?

23. Can thou make him quake as a locust: or his proud snurting with terror?

24. His feet will dig in the plain ground: he reioiceth in his strongnes:
he will go fourth to meet the harness.

25. He mocks terror, and shrinketh not: neither starteth back from the sword:

26. Though the quiver rattle upon him: with bright blade, with spear, with
javeling.

27 With shaking and stirring he beats upon the earth: and will not stand
still at the voice of the trumpet.

28. Of the trumpet he will say, Heah, and from far will smell the battle, the
thunder and shout of princes.

29. Does the Hauk flee from thy wisdom, spreading Hawk. Eagle.
the wings toward the south?

30. Mounts the Eagle on high by thy mouth: or does it make the nest on high?

31. He dwells and lodges on a rock: in the edge of a rock, and a fortress.

32. Thence he searches meat, his eyes will see far off.

33. His young Eb. Ieghaleghu: a word made here to show choking by greedy
sucking.
nere choke swallowing blood: and Math. 24. 28.
where carcasses be, resort they.

CHAP. XL.
MOreover the Eternal spoke to Job, and said:

2. Who is the pleader that will check the Omnipotent? Romans 9. 20.
let the reprover of the puissant speak to any on^ of these things.

3. Then Job answered the Eternal, and said:

4. Lo, I am vile, what shall I answer thee: I will lay my hand on my mouth.

5. Once I spoke, but I will not answer: or twice, but (...) will no more.

6. Then the Eternal answered Job out of the whir^^ wind, and said:

7. Gird now thy loins like a man, and I will question with thee, and let me
see thy skill.

8. Will thou disanull my judgment, condemn m^ that thou may be just?

Or have thou an arm as the Omnipotent? can tho^ thunder with voice as he?

10. Deck thee now with gayness and height: and put o^ glory and honor.

11. Cast abroad wrath of thine anger: and behold ec(...) proud, and humble him.

12. Behold each proud, make him bow down: be(...) wicked to dust as they stand.

13 Hide them in the dust together: bind their faces i^ the hid place.

14 And then I will confess to thee, that thy right hand can save thee.

15 If thou can not deal with stout men: mark the beast Elephant how he is
stronger then thou (...) being without man's reason: and without traynes can not
be taken.
Behold now Behemoth, which I have made wit^ Of the Elephant.
thee: he eats grass as an ox:

16. Behold now his strength is in his loins: and his power in the navel of
his belly.

17. He will make his rail stand like a Ceder: the sinews of his stones are
platted in and out as branches.

18. His bones be as bars of steel: his hard-partes as staves of iron.

19 He is the chief of the Omnipotents ways: HE that ^ade him, dare join his
sword.

20. The mountains do bring him fodder: where all ^he field beasts play
boldly.

21 He rests him in the shadow: in the covert of reed and fennes:

22. Shade-places cover him with their shade: the rivers willowes cover him.

23 Lo, he robs a river, that it have not: he durst think that Jorden would
gush into his mouth.

24. Can men take him before his eyes: to pierce his nose with many snares?

CHAP XLI.
Can thou draw Livjathan with an hook: or deep Of the Whale.
a cord into his tongue?

2 Can thou put a rush into his nose: or bore his ^aw through with a thorn?

3. Will he make much praying to thee: or speak unto thee tenderly?

4. Will he make a covenant with thee: that thou take him a servant for ever?

5. Will thou play with him as with a bird: will thou ^ye him for thy
yonge-girles?

6. Will companies make cheer of him? shall he be parted to merchants?

7. Will thou fill his skin with sharp-hookes: and his head with fishers angles?

8 Lay thine hand upon him: look for war: do it no more.

9. When hope of him proves false: yea at his very sight one would be cast
down.

10. None is so hardy that dare stir him: and then who can stand before me?

11. Who gave me any thing first, that I may pay it to Romans 11. 3^.
him again? whatsoever is under the heaven is mine.

12. I will not keep silence, concerning his members: and speech of strength,
and grace of his frame.

13 Who can uncover the face of his garment? who can The sea is his garment:
who can take that from him, and bring him to la^d?
come with his To draw him to land.
double bridle?

14. Who dare open the His jaws
doors of his face? Terror is about his teeth.

15 The strong Scales. They are as a shield, all sealed together: as one skin.
shieldes have pride: he is closed with a strait seal.

16 One touches an other so nere, that no wind can come betwixt them.

17 Ec^ does cleave unto his fellow, hold one the other* and cannot be sundred.

18. His neising makes a light shine: and his eyes are like the huge great*
eylids of the morning.

19. Out of his mouth do lamps proceed: and sparks of fire leap of themselves.

20. From his nosetrilles issues a smoke: as a pannes or caldrons seething.

21 His breath would set coals on fire: and a flame issues from his mouth.

22. In his neck does strength always lodge: and before him He has no care;
meeting a^y with fish to feed upon: that his taking of thought is a gladness.
Abr. Ben. Peritzol.
daunseth carefullnes.

23 The pieces of his flesh cleave fast, hard in him, that none can be moved.

24. His heart is so hard as a stone: so hard as the nether millstone.

25 At his statelynes the mighty fear: Ab. ben Peritzol.
and of shivering purge themselves.

26. The sword of one that does strike him, spear, dart, and javeling, will
not fasten.

27. He holds iron as straw: and steell as rotten wood.

28. The arrow.
bows child drives him not away: the sling stones turn as chaff to him.

29. The axes are counted as chaff: and he will laugh at shaking pikes.

30. His vnderneath-places be as sharp sheardes: He spreades the pricking in
the mire.

31 He makes the deep boil as a pot: sets the sea as a spicers kettle.

32 After him he makes the way lighten: and thinks the sea to be hoary.

33 His like are not upon the land, which do deal without Though the land by
nature should breed stronger things then the sea: yet God shows that his
power* not nature, rules all, and bred al.
fear.

34 He despises all lofty things: He is King over all the wild kind.

Chap. XLII.
THen Job answered the Eternal, and said:

2. I know thou can do all things, and no wisdom was kept from thee. Thou
have made all things in perfect wisdom: to show thy Eternal power and godhead.


3. What a man has this ben, who hides counsel without knowledge? Therefore I
tell, that I had not understanding: wonders are above me: such I know not.

4 Oh hear me, when I do speak: I will make petition unto thee, and teach thou
me.

5 By ear hearing I heard of thee: but now mine ey has seen thee.

6. Therefore I loath my self: and I will repent in dust and ashes.

7. Now after the Eternal had spoken these words unto Job, the Eternal said
to Eliphaz the Themanite, I am displeased with thee, and thy two friends: for
ye have no^ spoken of me the right, as my servant Job.

8 But now take to you seven oxen and seven rams: and go to my servant Job:
and offer a burnt offering for your selves: and my servant Job shall pray for
you. For certainly I will accept his person, that I punish not your foolishnes:
where ye have not spoken the right of me, as my servant Job.

9. So went they, Eliphaz the Themanite, and Bildad the Shuchite, Sophar the
Naamathite, and did as the Eternal spoke unto them: and the Eternal accepted
the person of Job.

10 And the Eternal restored that which had been taken from Job, when he had
prayed for his friends: and the Eternal increased all that Job had to double.

11 Than came to him all his brethren and all his sisters, and all that had
been of his acquaintance before: and did eat bread with him in his house: and
solaced him, and comforted him, for all the harm which the Eternal had brought
upon him. And they gave him each, one lamb and one earing of gold.

12. So the Eternal blessed the end of Job, more then his beginning: and he had
fourtene thousand sheep, and six thousand camels, and a thousand yoke of oxen,
and a thousand asses.

13. And he had seven sons, and three daughters.

14 And he called the name of the first Iemimah, and the name of the second
Cassia, and the name of the third, Keren-Happue.

15. And no womankind was found so fair as the daughters of Job in all the
land: And their father gave the^ inheritance among their brethren.

16. And Job lived after this, an hundred and forty years: and saw his
children, and his childrens children, four generations.

17. And Job died aged, and full of days.

The Argument of the book of Job.
Job tried of God with many and heavy sorrow(...) loss of all his cattle,
children, health, is further tried of his wife and friends. She greveth him with
mocking and scolding, as though all his religion was but hypocrisy; They from
God his majesti(...) and man's corruption, and Jobs disturbed speac(...) would
prove that either Job was an evil doer; or an hypocrytes otherwise the just God
would never afflict him so grevously. Job defends his speeches, Gods justice
and his own: and shows th(...) commonly the godly are in this life more
afflicted then the wicked: and blames his friends of impiety in handling Gods
cause unjustly, and in false accusing of him. At last, Elihu makes a (...)
dest agreement: and blames both: and teaches Job of Gods highness by his
works, showing his eternal power and godhead: that bas(...) and blind man
should not wish to plead with him. At the last, God confirms the same
doctrine, by examples from al his works* and drives Job first to silence: then
to confession and repentance* and teaches his friends reconciliation: and
restores Job to health: and new children, and double wealth.

THE ARGVMENTS of each Chapter.
Chap. 1.
Job in the land of Uz, Aus in old pronouncing, whence Ausitae, in Ptol. table
4. where Thema, Saba, Buz, and Madian, and Chaldaea, and Minnaej be near;
where Arabie the stony held Tharahs house, Ismaels, Keturaes, ^eare Esawes; Job
being Godly is tried by Satan going about like a roaring Lion and accusing the
godly, by loss of catell and children: and still continues in synceritie.

Chap. II.
Jobs body is afflicted by Satan with all greifs: he is mocked of his wife:
visited of his friends, of Esaw, Ketura, Buz.

Chap. III.
Job wishes he never had been borne, in merveilous vehemence of speeches: and
lastly that still he feared, but now found, extreme vexation.

Chap. IV.
Eliphaz upon Jobs chiding with God, Chapter 3. 19. exhorts him to patience: and
to consider Gods holiness: before whom the angels be not perfect: and men in
this earthly tabernacle of sorrow, (...) of one days life: and perish almost
all by ignorance of the Lord, whom to know they regard not.

Chap. V.
No holy would defend Job: whose punishment arises from his sin: and to God he
should seek: and so find an happyer state then his first.

Chap. VI.
Job defends his speeches, Chapter 3. that they were nothing to his pangs: and as
the wild ass would not bray nor ox low at fodder: so would not he have done:
and shows that he wishes death: and cannot hope to live: and look for
prosperity, by repentance: and has integrity to defend himself, against his
friends; in prosperity, needles; in distress, amazed: and requires
disputation, against his speech, Chap. 3.

Chap. VII.
All men's time is short, and they naturally groan for a passage hence: and flit
like a Chap. 9.
Post, Pinesse, or Egle to prey. One in pangs endless should desire death: as
Job did, Chapter 3. and now desires pardon of trespass, and passage away.

Chap. VIII.
Bildad holds Jobs words of pleading innocence but as a strong blast: that
seemed to make God unrighteous: who, as he said, killed not his children, but for
their sin: and wishes Job repentance, so he should be happier then ever he
was. Ancient stories tell, that as segges can not grow without moisture, so man
cannot without moisture of just life: But his house is made a spiders web: or
a tree over luxurious in branches, to provoke the Lord of the soil to root
him out: as Jobs children in their feasting by course. But seeking to God would
bring prosperity.

Chap. IX.
Job acknowledges Gods justice, and himself a sinner: (...) God is only wise
and mighty. He makes seas where ^ountaines were: he makes earthquakes:
cloudy, fair, and calm weather: the stars order show his wisdom: calling
us to consider how his works are unsearchable: in election and reiection: in
punishing or sparing: when he robbed Job by Sheba and Chaldy, none could stay
him: or plead with him. Job, if he were just, would not plead: but crave mercy:
though for civil carriage, he knows no gross trespass. But this is the sum:
Gods wrath in this world is upon just and unjust. But commonly the wicked rule
countries: who kill them that would do justice: And Jobs life fled away: full
of heavy cares: and now can hope for no quietness: nor dare plead: for God
would find him loath some. But wishes leave out of grief to plead with God:
because he knows not him self worthy of so heavy punishments.

Chap. X.
Job humbly pleads with God of his afflictions; and of wicked men's
prosperity: and acknowledges Gods old mercy: with petition to have an end of
this praesent sorrow.

Chap. XI.
Zophar blames Job for long vehement speech, for lying and for checking
Eliphaz and Bildad: and for justifying of himself: deserving double punishment
by Gods justice. The height the depth the length the breadth, of whose counsel,
none can see. (From this speech, S. Paul wishes Gods mercy in Christ known to
us. Ephe. 3. 18. 19.) But here punishment from justice does Zophar plead: by
which God would wise Adams sonns being naturally dull as beasts. But Job by
repentance may come to joy, otherwise while he continues in wickedness, his
hope can be but panges of soul.

Chap. XII.
Job takes up all his three friends at once, for arrogance in geving counsel:
and chalengeth equal skill: and pleads upon their speech, that the just is a
mock, in affliction, to the welthy: And that the God of this world has from
the true God power, to prosper the wicked. Beasts and fowls, plants and fish,
show God rules all: and so from him wicked rule: and no repentance of godly can
find this worlds prosperity.

Chap. XIII.
Job repeateth the checking of his friends: as not superiors to him in wisdom:
and calls them liers: and foolish physicians, and foolish pleaders for God:
and trusts that if God would give him leave to plead without his pangs, he
would frame a sufficient narration.

Chap. XIV.
Job pleads of man's common frailty: as a flower: (from him Moses Psalm. 90.)
and confesses all unclean: and craveth ease of his pangs, til near death
come. A tree dying from by-rootes yields new: but man not so. As waters pass
and not return: so he, dead arises not: till the heavens and worlds end.
Rocks of mountains break: and tumble into rivers: which being soft, yet
consume them: So would man's hope soft strokes, and consume.

Chap. XV.
Eliphaz in this second reply is vehementer then in the first: wherein he
blamed Job not so, as openly wicked: nor justifying of himself. His long
speeches he counts a wind: and that he says, perfect and wicked God
destroys, so all prayer to God he holds also destroyed: if God regard all
alike. And checketh him as chapter 4. that miserable man would compare with God:
before whom the Angels be not perfect. And by old testemonies he would prove,
that the wicked be aey full of sorrow.

Chap. XVI.
Job blames them for often windy and vehement words: and if they had been in
his case he had otherwise solaced them. And he shows that his sores
exceedingly pass punishment of wicked: from deep counsel of God.

Chap. XVII.
Job continues blame of his friends mockages: how God has hid their heart from
understanding: and wishes wiser pleaders: where God will not give such honor:
and shows himself being just and in misery, an example for martyrs not to
shrink, Apoc. 22. And blames their smooth words how repentance can help him
that is already as death.

Chap. XVIII.
Bildad the second time blames Jobs much speech in defense of himself: and in
sending the disputers to learn of beasts, Chapter 12. And against Jobs speech
there, he gives this rule general, that the wicked man is full of sorrow, and
nippeth Job, as one that knew not God.

Chap. XIX.
After five speeches of Jobs, and so many of his fellows, tedious and teaching
nothing, as he wished, Chap. 6. he wishes better argument then his afflictions
to prove him one that knew not God: and now, seeing they have harped still upon
the same string, he desires them to leave him rest in his error: and shows
his punishments extraordinary, and that he is not godless, but knows Christ
his incarnation and resurrection, the cause of ours to see God in Christ: and
he blames his friends of badnes.

Chap. XX.
Zophar in his second reply chafeth that he was counted bad, v. 3. and could
not chose but reply that the wicked ever since Adam stood upon the earth wicked
were to themselves and children, highly plagued.

Chap XXI.
Job replyeth how he desires not to complain to man's persuasion: but has
occasion of sighing: and therefore must have leave to sigh: and biddes them
merveil at his case: and not speak as of an ordinary, that speech of
repentance might help him. And to confute Zophar, he replyeth, that wicked and
their issue commonly prosper. Or if issue does not: the wicked little cares but
for himself. And in this sort their counsel is in vain.

Chap. XXII.
Eliphaz now the third time comes nere Job: that he should not look for
familiarity with God: to think that he would regard his teaching: or joy that
he pleaded justice: or punish him for being religious. And charge him of open
trespass: that thereupon punishment comes: as generally upon all wicked in
Noes flood: to all the old world: and bids him in the world now, where yet
fire consumes not the wicked remnant, seek unto God: and he shall have a
golden life: and as just Noe save the unjust.

Chap. XXIII.
Job greived that his friends complain of his desire to plead with God; and
blame his carriage: still stands to his defense: and lamenteth that he cannot:
and merveileth that he neither dyed quickly, nor has ease of calamity.

Chap. XXIIII.
God hides his judgments: that even Prophets cannot see them. Wicked often
prosper: often never have good day.

Chap. XXV.
Bildad the third time replyeth that the terror of God is high to his very
Angels: and thereby peace is on high. And Gods light is too bright for man to
abide: whereto stars to him be not clear: less sorrowful man.

Chap. XXVI.
Job mocketh him for telling plain known things: and tells from the sea
bottom and deep earth, the furthest from heaven, Gods works: and from the
earths set in the mids, and mountains quakes, and clouds not broken, and sea
shore not overflowen, and stars beauty, and Livjathans greatness, that all
these pass man's reach: that Bildads arguments should not hinder Job.

Chap. XXVII.
Job still protests his innocence: and that he could not hope of good
pleading before God if he were wicked. For the wicked when God enters into
judgment come to horrible ruin. But that is hid from us: how he measures
judgment times.

Chap. XXVIII.
God teaches men to find mines of silver and gold, and to refine it: and to
make iron and brass of stone: and to find the limit of all hid things: and
precious stones deeply hid: and how of small springs deep rivers flow: and how
the earth above bears meat, Brimston and Saphir underneath: where fowls and
wild beasts could see nothing: so he changes rocks at the root: and makes
rivers: and brings every precious thing to light.

But Gods wisdom for dealing with men cannot be foun(...) out among the living
here: the deep sea expresses it n(...) no mettalls nor precious stones match
it: the living on t(...) earth and fowls express it not: though they show
mu(...) of Gods providence. The earth in the sea bottom, when live things be
not, and which seems as cast off, the(...) have not similitudes of this: but
God only: who in h(...) meteores plainly shows his wisdom unsearchable: and
said to Adam, Mark, the fear of Adonaj is wisdom, and to flee from evil is
understanding.

Chap. XXIX.
Job wishes his former happiness restored: and shows all his duties to God
and men.

Chap. XXX.
But now the vilest violate Job, flowing on him as rive(...) breaking the
stank: and Gods hand has made him miserable.

Chap. XXXI.
To all sorts he showed goodness: maids, wife, man(...) servants, widows,
naked, orphans: worshipped no stars* nor gold, Ephe. 5. 5. loved his enemy,
was hospital, confessed his imperfections, paid for the land he tilled: and
wishes curse if this were not so.

Chap. XXXII.
Elihu seeing Job silent and his three friends: was offended at Jobs comparing
in justice to plead with God; and with his friends for concluding that Job was
wicked, because God afflicted him: shows how Gods spirit bids him speak
without respect of person.

Chap. XXXIII.
He replyeth to particular words of Jobs, wishing to dispute with God as man
does with man. He will speak right: ^ creature that Job may abide. This he
reproves: verse. 9. I am pure without sin: Chapter 9. 21. and 16. 17. and 29. 14.
And ^. 10. He picketh quarrels with me: and boldeth me as his enemy. Chapter 14.
13. and 13. 24. and 19. 11. And v. 11. He lays my feet ^n the stocks: and
watches all my ways, Chapter 13. 27. To this ^e says: God is too great for man
to call to account for all his ways. God does by visions and sickness warn
men: which warning if they take, they are restored. And he as^eth Job what he
can say to this, and Job is silent.

Chap. XXXIV.
Elihu, upon Jobs silence repeateth his speeches: and shows their
absurdities. Job said, I am just, and God has kept away justice from me:
should I lie against mine own cause: ^y plague is deadly without my sin: Chapter
13. 18, and 23. 10. and 27. 2. and 6. 4. Gods just nature which rewards every
man according to his doing, will not abide this: who might as in Noes flood
call all to judgment at once. And ^f God were not just, how could he govern
the world? (Genesis 18. Romans 3.) Now he still destroys the froward, and the
humble penitent he restores: and he prays God to testify that, by his own
judgment.

Chap. XXXV.
Jobs justice or sin cannot reach to help or hurt to God: the height of the
heavens might teach that. Oppressed cry: but faithles in vain: more, proud
contemners, who said, God will not regard: now because neither Gods justice
upon all, nor his patience is regarded, God is angry with Job.

Chap. XXXVI.
Elihu shows Job of Gods power and tendering of his creature, of his
judgments, and mercies: and bids Job apply himself accordingly, considering
Gods judgment, Political and Physical, in the meteores.

Chap. XXXVII.
Thunder, lightening, snow, rain, ice, sayre weather show power and mercy
toward man: that he afflicts not, but provoked: that the world may be
governed i^ order.

Chap. XXXVIII.
God shows Jobs shortness in vvisdome, to plead i^ Gods causes: by the earth,
how it stands, which things the Angels the first with the heavens admired: by
the sea how the shores keep it in: by night and day, how they have limits: by
the bottom of the sea, and parts that see^ cast off: by snow and hail, for
Gods judgments: by lightening and great rain; by lesser, and dew; by ice, and
frost^ by the stars for all seasons, by their operation upon the earth: by
planting wisdom in man's soul: by making the clovvdes saphirlike: by calling
the rain to fall out of them, to clod the earth. That which may be known of
God, his eternal power and Godhead, wisdom may hence see to be unsearchable.

Chap. XXXIX.
The Beasts and fowls on the earth and air, call Job to see weakness of
judgment. As how the Lions in the(...) dens have beasts to come near to be
caught: and how the ravens forgetful and foul kinds breed. The will(...) goat
among beasts in the high rocks keep their young fr^^ being taken: and hindes
hide cunningly their faons. Th(...) wild beast, the wild ass, has also a
strange course: And the Unicorn or Indians ass, a straungier. Again in fowls
the Peacock has a proud feather: the Curlew, a flighty: the Estrich a brave: a
brave has the Estrich, the dull of understanding: which leaves her eggs in
the sand: not thinking whether beasts tread them: Yet by Gods providence they
breed, to pass the horse with legs and wing: Also the horse shows Gods
power by his boldness in snurting: and digging the ground and desire to fight.
Also Gods wisdom passes man's reach, in the hauks change to South and North:
and in the Egles wit to nest on the tooth of a rock, and in sharp sight to
find prey: (a pattern for the godly to search where Christ may be found. And
none but of sharp sight will be chief guides herein.)

Chap. XL.
Job not knowing Gods counsel in these visible things, should not plead with
God for justice. Now for Gods power, as Elihu showed it in taming the proud,
Chapter 34. 24. etc. so God does after long patience: to show his power and justice
upon vessels of wrath bent to destruction: And who is he that will plead with
God: who cannot speak to this.

Of the Elephant.
The Elephant shows Gods power: not a devouring beast: but fed with grass
like the ox: what strength is in his loins? what force in the navel of his
belly? his yard is like the Ceder: the nerves of his stones, like the branches
of a tree: his bones and joints as iron and steel: God can tame him, who made
him a strong one: and quiet to ly among willowes:: and heavy great wight: yet
not by force will pierce his snorte. And thus the power of God passes man's
reach in a quiet dryland beast.

Chap. XLI.
The Whale in the sea shows that they curse their da^ that course him: and
Dionysius the Greek Geographer, borne near Jobs country, at Teredon on the
Persia^ gulf, remembranceth whales hunting there: and poetically, how they
svvallovvship and all. If none dare meddle with a fish in vvatery not hard
earth breed: who dare compare with God: for Jobs afflictions: (or as S. Paul
cites this place: for election, or rejection, Romans 9. and 11.) who first
could give to God: that he should be bound to repay them. Job the godlyest
could not plead: but must stand to Gods mercy. All that is under heaven is
Gods, and Satan's fall and all are from him, and by him, and for him* he
praedestined them not: that is, he furthered not their means: but gave
infinite arguments of better advisement: but set them to anger: leaving them
vnsearchably to rebellion.

Of the Whale.
A description of the Whales nature, for a waterie creature, to teach all of
Gods power: (yea and of the God of this world, Satan, by Gods just judgment: as
the LXX here allude:) 1. An huck will not dravv him: 2. a cord cannot be put in
his tongue, 3. no rush in his nose, 4. no thorn shall perse his chekes. He
will not be taken with sharp pickes in skin or head: They are deceived who
think to take him: and will not twice fight: but curse their day. Who can
bring him out of the sea: and take away the waters, the garment that covers
him. Who dare meddle with the jaws of his face with a snaffuld: his teeth be
terrible: his skales one continued matter: His snurting makes a light: his
eyes be great, as the mornings: his eyes sends forth, torches, with sparkles
of leaping fire: and all terribles of a creature is in him. Man's weapons hurt
him not: and he despises all, all of the earth: which should be stronger by
man's esteem then the sea: as all other fish be weake^ then beasts. But God
would have his will to rule and overruled his means: that his will might be
known the ground of all: who will suffer no pleading for his dealings full of
power, and justice, and mercy in Christ: as Job told, Chap. 19.

Chap. XLII.
Job repents, and his fellows: and sacrifice in Christ pleases God: and Job
is double happy.

JOB. BROVGHT ON TO FAMILIAR DIALOGUE AND PARAPHRASE FOR EASIER ENTENDEMENT.

TO WHICH IF ANY REQVIRE FVRTHER RESOLUTION, QVAESTIONS UPON THEIR DOVBTS
SHALL BE ADDED.

By HVGH BROVGHTON.

Of Job brought into dialogue: for our familiar speech.
THe case of Job, that he the godliest in the world should be most afflicted,
would not be understood of the children of this world: But that was to teach
that the world of souls was the world of reward: as Abraham Isaac and Jacob
lived here in a peregrinatio^: looking for the heave^ly city, which God
praepared for them in that part of Haides, Luc. 16. which was the kingdom of
heaven, as Chrysostom speaks upon 2 Cor. Hom. 6. Although the outward
doctrine of the law had not perfection, God providing somewhat better for us,
that they should not have perfection in this world without us: yet for perfect
comprehending of Christ, by spirit of prophecy and plenty of grace, they far
passed us. In Job God would revive Abraham's case: before the law was geven:
which taught dull Israel, by outward blessings closly after spech of all such,
how he would have his tabernacle amongst them, Levit. 26. 10. That when the
earthly house of tabernacle should be dissolved, they should have a building
from God, not made with hands, everlasting in the heavens. But worldlings, who
all as the serpent go upon the belly, would not understand this. Therefore Job
is a rare example: who in most high calamityes, wished to be with God. Profane
would scoph this pleading. Therefore God penned the book in such a style as
Sadducees and Epicures should not care to understand it. And of my self I will
say, that the tongue, in propriety and trop^^ and sequeles of arguments, has been hard^ to me, then all the rest of the Bible. That he may be softer to
others, I have made a translation with great pains and the be^ circumspection
that I could. Moreover I have brought the disputers spech, in terms hard and
short, unto a softer and larger vein: bringing the best examples at large to
enlarge sentences. As Targum Ierusalemy cited to general sentences particular
examples, and sometime later then Jobs time, as a Paraphra^^ might do: So when
I make them Prophets, to speak of latt^ times then their own: I speak it as my
own Paraphrase. The settling of arguments: to what verse of the formers
speech, replyers do speak: that I studied to express clearly: and all har^
Phrases. My desire was to have had the Ebrew text joined to the English, with
Rabbine commentary for their tongue: saving Job. 10. where the incarnation and
resurrection passes Iew^ modern faith: for the bare tongue, my desire was to
force our enemies the Thalmudiques to speak for us: But I could fin^ no cunning
and ready hebrew printers unless I had gone to Basil. To print the whole Bible
in the original and my English, I would have done it: upon allowance and
expected recompense. But I might not be at so great charges for one little
book. Besides this dialogue: I have before added sundry helps: Short not^^ in
the Chapters, large Abridgementes and arguments of every chapter, and here a
description of the disputers story, how they belong to Abraham's kindred. To a
plain book I would not have done so: But for this of unspeakable difficulty it
will not be tedious: as the disputers themselves infinitely roll one stone:
The rest, all save Elihu: That Job is wicked: yet by repentance may be sure of
Gods grace: and, that still the wicked be punished: and the strangely punished,
be so far in wikednes. Job as often defends his integrity: and that he cannot
be ever better then he was: and therefore would gladly know the reason of his
affliction. As they often repeat their discourse, so the co^menter might. When
this is abroad, if my readers think it not plain enough: questions upon
difficulties remaining shall come forth, if God will. So I have made two
commentaries upon ^poc. one curt, that the hearer may soon see the tenor of
the ^ork: the other larger, showing by what mispolicy and mistudy, the City of
Quirinus came to be so great. When those books be printed: I would bring in
Dialogue some demanding of matters which breed hardness. Dialogues have
brevity: and therefore Plato the learned contrived his matters into Dialogues.
But now let the reader turn his mind from me, unto Job.

THE SPEECHES IN JOB BROVGHT TO a short sum, showing at which the replyers
aim.
Chap. 3.
Job. Lost be the day wherein I was borne: Job.
I had forty tounges, I could not sufficienth curse it. For before my meat my
sighing^ come: and my roaring gush like waters. ^ had small ease in heart, when
Sheba took m^ Oxen and asses: no quietness, when Cald^^ ans took my Camels: and
both killed my men. So when fire from heaven brent my sheep: and wind feld the
house upon my children. In this I had grief enough. Y^^ all this while I
blessed God: that gave and took away: But now that I am stricken with boyles
from the sole of my foo^ to the top of my head, I cannot sufficiently curse my
days* Now I have in my siknes an intolerable vexation.

Chap: 4. and 5.
Eliphaz. May I speak my mind? Thou have comforted many others in sorrow: Thy
religion knows the right Eliphaz.
way of hope in Gods mercy: and thou know how to make thy ways right, by
seeking unto God. v. 6. But no^ thou art thy self touched, thou art most
impatient. Rem^ber that no innocent perishes: But they that reap m^sery, have
plowed sorrow: and by the blast of Gods anger they consume: Mighty tyrants like
lions, as Emi^^ and Zamzu^mim are come to nothing: and Ismael hat^ had twelve
dukedomes in Cush or Abyssinj, (as The ma is one, our neighbor:) and droven
out mighty L^ons. And Esaw my ancester has broken lyo^ teeth in Seyr: And ye
of Ketura the children of the east have drouen Cush further South: and have
dukedomes: as Madian thy ancester: and Medan: and Shuach, or Sychaeus, of whom
Bildad comes: and Sheba that took Jobs oxen and asses: forgetting the kindred
of Abraham: and when we plow sorrow, we reap misery: yea the richest of
Abraham's sons: when we play the tyrants: As at this time Israel in Egypt, see
Pharoh kill their children, because none forsake Pharaohs Idols. I will spare
to blame Job of Tyranny as a lion: though he be Lord chief Justice in Aus Land:
yet I would desire him to consider man's common corruption, and how the very
Angels have not perfection before God: Much less our souls that dwell in this
earthly tabernacle: of one days life: (...) of Greeks: beaten to powder as
mothes: and all their excellency of learning and eloquence comes to nothing,
and their thoughts perish, when they die: and they perish for ever, unless God
be their guide: as the most part of Edom my father leave God: though he pitied
some of my fathers house. Madia^ thy ancester gave goodly names to his sonns to
teach them godliness, (...) darkness: (...) dust: (...) Enoch dedicate Genesis 25. 4.
thy self to God: be a new Enoch: and walk with God: (...) know the father
which is in heaven: (...) know God: (I think he is thy father, o Job.) The
first of these tell we are in darkness, and be but dust: and I had a dream from
God, v. 12. etc. which taught me the same that Madians childrens names warn
them: though many now worship Baal Peor. These matters should humble thee from
such invectives against God. Chap. V.


No holy will like of thy dealing: such chasing kills the evil fool. I have
seen the evil fool prosper: and ^^ children come to nothing: and wild Arabians
rob him ^^ all. Misery does not spring from the earth: but from man wickedness,
which as sparkles, breaks out. Therefore ^^ would wish thee not to invey
against God: who is unspeakable in mercy: as his works, specially the rain,
in o^ dry Arabia shows. Subtle contemners, as hypocrites and inventers of
false religion, he will defeat: that in the^ high day prosperity they shall
come to nothing, to darkness of night. But the poor he will save from the sword
of the strong wild Arabian: from their conspiracy: such as the Caldaeans and
Sabeans made to spoil in one day Yea the poor in spirit shall find confidence
And it is great token of Gods favor to be chastised: for him tha^ can seek to
God. For as he strikes, he can heal. After six afflictions he can succor
thee; after loss of Children of Sheep, of Camels, of Oxen, of asses, of
family: after all this he can so deal that harm shall not fasten upon thee.
Though thou have lost thy oxen for tillage, in hunger he can save thee from
death: as thy money is not take away: and in war from Sabeanes and Chaldeans:
that they make amends for thy Oxen, Camels, and ass. From all conspiring to
spoil thou shall be safe. For stony hearted shall be at peace with thee: and the
vvild savage Arabians. Thou shall be wealthy, and have many children: and live
long, notwithstanding this great sickne^ I have seen the like: and from things
past can judge vvh^ will be to come.

Chap. 6. and 7.
Job. Am I evil that so complayn (through Chapter 3.) w^^^ Job.
such streams of grievous speeches? Oh that my calamiti^ ^vere weighed: and my
complaint: so my words should be seen to come short. For when the arrows
of the almighty are in me, and there venom drinks up my spirit, and the
terrors of the puissant camp against me; should I not vvish the day of my
birth never to have been: or that darkness and shadovv of death should stayn it:
and cloudiness dwell upon it: and svvartnes of day make it terrible? Do you
think that I would thus complain without just occasion. A beast wild or tame
would not do so. Does the wild ass bray at the grass: or the ox lovv at his
fodder: when they want nothing? Your speech is unsavory, without salt of
reason: and has no more taste then the white of the yolk: and complaining in
grief, is as salt to the unsavory white of an egg.

Strangulat inclusus dolor, atque cor aestuat intus: Cogitur and vires
multiplicare suas. I would have lothed to touch in an other, such sores as
now are in my flesh. Therefore I cursed the day and night of my birth and
conception. And now again, I say: o that God would make an end of me: Though
I parch in pain, I should find comfort: if I knevv I should soon die. I am sure
I shall go to Eternal joy: for I kept not close the words of the most holy:
but as my father Abraham, I showed my hope of the world to come. Now where
Eliphaz says, I shall come in lusty old age to the grave: what hope can I have
that way: or of what sort can my end be: that I should prolong my life? Am I of
stone or of steel, to abide long in this parching: But where ye would persuade
me, that for Lyonlike tyranny I am punished, or for sowing sorrows to reap
misery, and to have sorrows for coals of sin, whose sparkles flee out up: I
have my defense against such: whose mercy is molten toward the neighbor:
and he leaves the fear of the ALMIGHTY. My brethren are like the rivers of
our Arabia, which i^ winter are black by Ice, and deep, when men want not
water: but when heat comes, be dried up and come to nothing. The passingers
of Thema, the Ismaelites our neighbors, and of Sheba, that robbed me of my
oxen, (wh^^^ I name to teach posterity of what Uz land I am, not o^ Edoms, but
of Nachors, as the Chaldeans are on the ea^^ neat:) these men come for water,
and find none: and art ashamed of their hope: So ye are become like that, come
to nothing: ye see parching affliction and ye are at your wits end. You need
not to fear: I request no money help, to ransom me from some wild Arabians,
or any strong hand: but touching my complaint, Chapter 3. let me understand wherein
I have erred: Nay right will never be reproved: and what can ye soundly blame?
You think to reprove words, that I curse my night of conception and day of
birth. And whereas I am past hope for this world, and would joy for the grave,
ye think my words to be but a^ wind: ye lay a snare to overthrow me: while ye
would persuade me not to stick to my former integrity. Be of an other mind:
object no wickedness: Be thou my soul of an other mind still. Is there any
wickedness in my tongue: for my vehement complaint, Chapter 3. Cannot my palate
declare all kind of sorrows: more then the boiles which you see?

All men by natures course have an end of life's toil: as Chap. VII.
a serva^t of his days work: But I have most joyles months and nights, of
sorrow: that when I lay me down, I would feign see the morning. My flesh is
loathsome: that I am past hope of long life: my days are spent: my life is but
a blast: I can hope for no more pleasures: I slit away as in the twinkling of
an ey: I go to the grave as a fading cloud: Therefore as Chapter 3. I will not spare
my mouth: but I will sigh unto God in the bitterness of my soul: That I am kept
in prison with boyles: and I would not live: Pity me from this visitation,
every moment: leave me for a breathing while: I have sinned, as the heart of man
is only wicked all the day: and what can I do unto thee, o thou watcher of
men, that every sin receives recompense: that thou have made me thy mark:
that I am a burden unto my self. O that thou would so pardon my sin, as I ly
now in the dust to be pitied of the keeper of men: that thou would make a
short end of my sorrows: and lay me in my grave.

Chap. VIII.
Bildad. How long will thou talk in this sort: that we Bildad.
may as thou speak, Chapter 6. 26. hold the terms of the forlorn a wind? Is
God unjust who shows anger? Far be that: So how could God rule the world?
Romans 3. Genesis 18. Take an example by thine own children: As thy children have
sinned against him, in their continual feasting: so he has sent them into the
hand of their trespass. By their example look to thy self. If thou would crave
for pity at the almighty, and become upright: thou should be happier and
ritcher then ever thou wast. Enquire of the former age: and the age of their
fathers: For we are but of yesterday, and have no experience: as our days are
but a shadow: Ancient examples since God scattered Noes sonns, and how for
wickedness one is overrun of an other, such remembrance of ancient days, such
marking the years of all ages, will teach sound judgment. As segges can not
grow without water, but soon withers and is cut off: so they who have not
the dew of grace to remembe(...) God: soon perish. Ne^rod was a lusty hunter:
and set up kingdoms: but soon Sems house in Ela^ was Emperor: and (...) med
the Chananeans brother, who when their sins (...) ripe, shall be wholy
given to our Isreal's house. Of Nacho(...) Elihu his father, for Abraha^s sake
twelve nations settle (...) the heart of Cush: of Ismael, as many: of Esavv,
more Duke doms: who drive Cush further off. And because Abraham(...) after
marriage with Ketura our grandmother, left religion i(...) our families, we have
prospered: That Tyrus King take(...) the name Sychaeus from our father: as glad
to honor o(...) houses. Now they whom our fathers drove away: wanting
moisture of grace, dried up as rushes without mire: The favor of God in
Christ, is as dew upon grass: and the wicked, as rushes without water.
Chanaan now builds cities full strong, to defeat the promise to Abraham:
B(...) his building shall be a spiders house: he shall lean upon(...) it, but it
shall not stand. Pharaohs daughter took up lately an infant of Israel cast into
the waters, and meanet(...) to make him King: and calls him, taken out of
the water: when he shall be 80. years old: then shall be 400 years to our
brother Isaaks affliction. Then God will revenge Chams land: and Chanaan:
juicefull now before sunn(...) parching: and his suckers sprout over his
orchyard. B(...) when the sun shall root him out of his place: then he
wi(...) flee to Lybia: and thence to the Island Ierne: and in Chanaan he shall be
seen no more. But from the ground others will grow: our brethren of Israel.
Lo, the Omnipotent will not loath the perfect, nor mainteyne the hand of the
mischeivous Chaldeans and Sabeans that robbed thee: For the tent of the wicked
shall come to naught.

Chap. 9. and 10.
Job. I know that I must seek to God for mercy: as I Job.
confessed, Chap. 7. verse. 20. and 21. every mouth must be stopped: and no
flesh can be justified before God. If he will plead with a man: he cannot
answer him to one thing of a thousand: as he is wise in heart, and mighty in
strength: ^o defeat the subtle in their purposes, that their hands bring
nothing soundly to pass. And all that which may be known of him, appears in
his creation. His might appears in removing mountains to be seas, and making
Islands of a continent: as in Cittim land: the Island flaming with brimstone,
called three mountained Trinacria, was joined to the near continent. And
Rhegium bears ^ame The next land of Italy to Sicania or Sicily.
of breaking the ground. He makes the earth to quake: that the mountains, the
pillars of it tremble: he cloudeth the sun, to be no more seen then if it were
not risen, and seals up the stars: that they cannot be seen of certain
days, when he will make a tempest (as Act. 27.) Again he spreads the
heavens, which in tempest, were rolled up as a book, not to be looked upon: and
he walks upon the high waves of the sea: and when God shall be Math. 27. and
Chapter 14.
manifested in the flesh, and prove himself to be God by the miracles of the
spirit, he will darken the sun at noon day, and walk upon the waves of the sea.
His eternal power and goodlynes appears in the clustered stars: for all
seasons: in the bands of Orion, for wintery weather, and for delicacies in
Pleiades: He does great things (as Eliphaz spoke) unsearchable: and wonderful
without number: specially in election, and rejection. Now Keturaes sonns, and
some of Esaw, and Elihu, and others of Ara^, as Bosor his house, hold truth in
part: and none of Israel forsake the idols of Egypt. We shall soon fall: and
Israel shall in Chanaan tie Satan for a thousand years. And then shall Israel
be cast off: and lapheth dwell in the ten(...) of Sem. So unsearchable are his
ways. Now when h(...) passed in his judgment over me, I cannot perceive
hi(...) counsel: when he takes all away, who can make him (...) store: or
enter an action against him: and say unto hi(...) what do thou? Dan. 4. when
the Puissant will not sta(...) his hand, proud helpers can do the afflicted no
good. A(...) all my confederates could not help me against the Sab(...)ans,
and Chaldaeans: but all lost heart, and durst not sti(...) If I were just, I
would crave pity: If I cry, I can hardly b(...) lee^^ that he will answer me.
He will bruise me with tempest, so that none can blame him. As for judgment who
can be my pleader? If I will be perfect, mine own mouth shall condemn me: if I
be upright, I know not mi(...) own soul: but that great impiety lurketh hid:
But this know, I am weary of my life: This is uniform: The perfe(...) in man's
judgment, and the wicked does he consume: (...) mocketh at the scourge of the
innocent. The earth is give(...) to the hand of the wicked: which overruled
them that d(...) right. And yet none can have any authority, unless (...) be
given him from God. So my days are fled: and I a(...) full of sorrow: and if I
would forget my sighing, Chapter 3. (...) know God will not clear me: I shall be
holden as wicked Now then, why should I labor in vain, by repentan(...) to
hope for any goodness. Bildad exhorts me to b(...) blameless and upright. Chapter
8. verse. 6. If I wash my self i(...) snow, in snow water, dye must I quickly:
and thou will dee(...) me in the grave naked: as though my clothes loathed
m(...) If the high God would take from my baseness his rod: that his terror
fright me no more: I would then speak and not fear him: for I am not such with
my self as my calamities make you think.

Ye find great fault with my complaint, Chapter 3. still I tell Chapter 10.
you, my soul is weary of my life: when I leave my sighing for my self:
Therefore I will say unto the Puissant: condemn me not: let me know wherefore
thou pleadest with me. I am the work of thine hands, why should thou loath
me: and shine upon the counsel of these troublesome pleaders. Thou art not as
a man that need years, as Chapter 8. 8. 9. 10. or trial: where thou know
the heart. Thou know that I am not wicked: and yet I am plagued, past all
man's help. Consider thy goodness in my frame of body: and joining of soul: and
looking to me: to plague me, upon sin. Which now is come to the highest, that
I vvish I never had been: Ease my pain, seeing I shall shortly die.

Chap. XI.
Zophar. Thou have used much speech, Chap. 3. Eliphaz Zophar.
blamed that: Chapter 5. thou do answer, Chapter 6. that thy complaint is less then
the sorrows undeserved. And thou do mock, Chapter 6. that thy friends are like
the rivers in our dry Arabia: full, when men need not rivers, in vvinter: in
summer. dried up. etc. all Chapter 6. And thou will say to the Puissant, condemn
me not: does it please thee to oppress? Chapter 10. 3. And, thou know that I
am not wicked: v. 7. and thou art not such with thy self; as Gods scourges
argue, and the advice from Eliphaz and Bildad.

Thou would feign plead with God: as a man does with man. Chapter 9. 3 3. and
would take his rod from the(...) that thou should not be frighted: So now
truly I vv(...) that the Puissant would speak, and open his lips with thee:
that thou should have double by justice: and know that the Puissant vvil
call thee to account, for thine iniquity. Can thou find out the depth of the
Puissant? (...) depth of riches of the knowledge and vvisdome of Go(...) How
unsearchable are his judgments and his vvayes p(...) finding out!

The Translaters commentary. Before the flood, wh(...) they despised the
fathers, he did let them run to the destruction of the deluge: He gave over the
builders of Babel for worship to stars, that even Sems house in Ioc(...)tan
has perished more by millions of parts then Cha(...) despising despising Noe,
Se^, Arphaxad, Sala, Eber, all ali(...) still warning them. The east Indians
come of them: as Io(...)tans sons names show: famous in Greeks, by names
remaining in cities, rivers, mountains. And the west co(...) of them: as the
passage betwixt is very narrow. And me(...) from the West could not so pass
over the broad Ocean* Abraham is called to revive the world: the sons of
Abraham will fall away: and yet be zealous in the law: to give warrant to the
Apostles for all that they speak, plain warrant: but for the mystery hid of
long time: that God i^ Christ will reconcile the world unto himself. And here
comes a new mystery: That the city which crucified Christ, shall be extolled
by Satan's slight, to overthrow the Gospel: because men love not the truth:
and when reformation comes, yet wicked archbishops overruling common laws:
and other creatures of the King of Locusts, will still plague in the ends of
the earth: where Christ has his chief possession. Now Gods vvayes be
unsearchable in these dealings. When the Gospel was confirmed: if Princes and
all sorts had daily read it: all had held the truth: but as they disdayned that
pains, God gave them over to embrace deceit: That many are called: and fevv be
saved. The height, the depth, the length, the breadth, of Gods counsel is
unsearchable. This should be our work, to bow our knees unto the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ: that* we may comprehend the breadth and length, the depth
and height: and know the love of Christ which passes knowledge. Job will flee
to this. Chapter 19. Return to Zophar.

If God pass through the world, to give over men to Satan in blindness, or
conqueror to be servant; or keep them in assemblies, to continue religion, or
policy: who can stay him? In punishment most we feel him. Because he knows
men aey dying to be nothing vvorth: and seeing sin, should not he mark it: That
vayn man should have an understanding heart. For as God told Abraham of our
Ismael, that he should be a wild ass: so we are all: and thou, I guess, by
many mothers art of Ismael, as Israel of Chanaan: we wild asses must be tamed,
by Gods hand: seeing men cannot tame us. Now I will tell thee, as Eliphaz did,
Chap. 4. that the just perish not: neither come the upright to ruin: (Chaldy
Paraphrast, Chapter 4. 7.) The just, as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, perish not: But
the wicked nation of the deluge perished. So Ismael and his children, as Lions
and Lionceaux, given to spoiling, have their teeth pulled out. As each was borne
the foale of a wild ass: I as Eliphaz, Chapter 5. 8. would vvish that thou seek
unto God: so sinning no more, thou should have great prosper^^^ This rule is
general: that the eyes of the wicked sha^^ fail: and their refuge all be
forlorn: and their hope naught but pangs of soul.

Chap. 12.
Job. Out of doubt wisdom must dye with you. B^^ Job.
I am not inferior to you. And who cannot speak suc^ things as these: That God
is high, and invisible, and God only wise: ^ Tim* ^* and men cannot search
out, his ways* Take this Proposition: A mockage to his neighbor sh^^^ the
perfect just be: who prays unto God, and he (...) hear him: a base lamp to
the thoughts of the vvealthy Aben Ezra and Kimchi upon the brave Ebrew.
and for calamity a contempt to the shining state of the prosperous is he that
is near* to tottering of feet. The just perishes in his justice: and the
wicked prospers (...) his wickedness: To show that this world is the world
(...) trial: and the world of souls is the world of revvard Eliphaz said:
The roaring of the renting Lion, and the Chapter 4. 10.
voice of the feirce Shachal shall come to nothing. And Bildad said: As segges
cannot grow without mire: such Chapter 8. 11.
is the gladness of the wicked, that has not moisture of grace. And Zophar
said this as a general rule: tha^ Chapter 11. 20.
the ey of the wicked shall fail: and their refuge all be forlorn. I
ansvvered Bildad, that the earth is given commonly all to the hands of the
wicked: The wicked be the Pakidim: who condemn all that would do good to
their state: and cover their faces: as unworthy to see light: So will they do
to the son of God: when in the flesh he comes to give light to the world.
Among beasts, fowls, trees, fish, the strongest oppresses the inferior. And
who can deny, but God rules in all varieties. Ye speak at randone. But cannot
mine ear discern speeches, as the palate tastes it meat. Elihu will confess
thus much: Chap. 34. Ye bid me look to former ages: when they lived long: Chapter
8. 9. Is the vvisdome in the aged? The foolish builders of Babylon were of
long life: but short in vvisdome. God has wisdom and mightynes, counsel
and understanding are his. If he pull down the tovver, Genesis 11. it will not
be built: If he shut one up in prison, as Pharaohs baker: he cannot be set
free: if he with hold the waters, for mercy to Noe. Genesis 8. they dry up.
When he sent them forth, Genesis 7. they overvvhelmed the earth. For him and by
him and from him are deceivers and deceived. Because they knovving God by his
works, do not honor him as God: he shuttes them up to a bad mind: and
although he puts not wickedness in their heart: yet that which they have, he
rules to his counsel: Pharaoh would destroy Israel: God turned him from the
right way to that: which had been to kill the fathers: that he set to kill
some children: Esavv would kill Jacob: God suffered him not to think of present
murder: but when his father should be dead: And when with 400 men he came
against him, he bridled him. All states he rules up and down: and the rulers
which prosper are wicked: and one wicked plagueth an other. He brings
counselors to badnes: and judges unto stark madness. Such they were in Enos
age: when corruption sprang, in stead of calling upon the name of God. The
rulers or judges of families being profane, hating God that looked unto all
things, and required to be regarded in all things: they hated him, as curious
and full of business: and worshipped stars: and the creature, not the
creator. For the wickedness of their heart: he shut up the rulers of many
families, called counselors and judges into madness.

The band of Kings he makes loose: when the Kings (...) Chanaan Genesis 14. did
cast of the yoke of Cedarlaomer: (...) brings Dukes to be a spoil: and
overturneth the mighty. As to Kedarlaomer the Raphaim, and Zuzim, and A^^mim,
and the Aemorites. So he powers baseness upon nobles, Psalm. 107. and weakeneth
the sway of veheme^^* He bereaveth eloquent speakers of lip: and takes reason
from Bishops: as from Pharaoh and his counselors, to ma^^ Israel a bush
burning but not consumed: and pricks (...) Egypt in the end. Exodus 1. Act. 7.
He reveals d(...) things out of darkness: and brings to light the shado^ of
death: as to Joseph in expounding Pharaohs dream: (...) to Iaacob in the Lot of
his Children. He augments nations: as before the flood: he spreads nations,
after the flood and sets their limits. He takes heart from the head of the
people of the earth: as when Cush fled to the furthest south and west: and so
Ioctanes 13. sonns: They grope in darkness without light, and wander as one
drunk. Es. 19* 14. and 24. 20.

By this ye may see that I am not inferior to you i^ Chapter XIII.
knowledge how God does govern the world. Therefore I would speak with God:
you are all bad Physicians* Will you plead for Gods justice more then due? God
will not be mocked. Gods highness, and your glory dust and ashes should keep you
in order. Genesis 19. be silent and I will speak. Wherefore should I take my flesh
in my teeth as one desperate: whose words fleing through the hedge of my teeth:
should rent my flesh, and cause me destruction. Behold Lord I have ordered my
pleading: and i^ is death to me not to defend my good conscience of walking
uprightly. I know I should be found just. God^ hand and terror I wish
withdrawn: then would I plead. How many are my sins, that I am thus
strangely afflicted?

Earthly man is of himself but as a flour, and should Chap. 14.
such be thus afflicted? I confess, all are unclean: Seeing his days be
short, let him end them with some rest. A tree cut down may yet sprout: But
Adams sonns starves, and where is he? As rivers are spent and dry up: so man
^yeth down, arises not till the end of the world. I could wish to be dead: to
plead in the world of souls: where my soul should joy till the resurrection.
Now thou do count my goings: but kepest them not from sinning. But my
trespass is sealed in a bag: That thou joynest to present iniquity: to punish
the old and new together. Rocks of mountains falling unto the water do wast:
the hard grouth of the earth: So thou sendest man away. He knows not what
shall become of his children: unless he be a prophet, as Abraham: for special
revelations: to know Moses and the Prophets: and as Jacob, know principal
heads of his sons affairs. Only a man will mourn for him self: and for
his sick body. For this cause we never pray to Enoch, Sem, or any but unto God:
because he only knows our hearts: And also because the souls and the Angels
are in a fear before the infinite majesty: and leave man to learn how to pray
for himself. And God is the only that hears prayer.

Chap. 15.
Eliphaz. Wind and blast: Thou disannullest prayer: Eliphaz: The second time.
Thy own mouth shall argue thee to be wicked. I Chap. 4. spoke not so expressly:
but of ordinary infirmities. But now I tell thee plainly, thou speak
wickedly. Thou say, art not inferior to us: and that we are forgers of
li(...) and bad Physicians: and should be wisest in silence. The have no
extraordinary, as Adam had, or the Angel ^^ated the first day. Therefore by
years wisdom comme(...)* And there be here elder then thy father. Thy
chasti(...)meant wisely expounded, and our spech upon it, be co^forts: But thou
chafest against God, and with subtle hypocrisy deceivest thy self. I told
Chap. 4. that all me^ are miserable before God: and I repeat that: for the
wo^thynes of the matter. And for open wicked, open punis^ment comes: as sage
wise men taught: such as the people obeyed quietly: and never sought others to
che(...) them. Thus they teach: that the wicked ^exeth him se(...) and has no
hope, as thou have none: from v. 20. to (...)* Be not deceived: punishments
argue a man wicked.

Chap. XVI. and XVII.
Job. I have already heard many words as these: wi^dy Job.
words, as you reckon mine to be* Chap. 15. 2. I would if you were in my case,
strengthen and not weaken yo^* Ye blame my vehement complaynt: when I complayn^
not, I find no ease: And my punishment is more grievous then they have which
are openly sinful.

And there is no hope for a body as mine to be restored Chapter XVII
to long life: as you would persuade me, Chapter 5. T^ the pit I cry, o father: o
mother and sister, to the worms* Ye mock and vex me: o that God would judge:
for Go^ has hid your heart from judgment: and will not give you that honor:
God will consume your eyes, for your vai^ goodly speech: which makes me to be
a byword to the people: that I am openly a taber. Wherefore mark wha^ I tell
you: Mine ey is dymme with anguish: and all my members be like a shadow. This
counsel God has: that the just should have me for an example: not to shrink
for ^fflictions: Iam. 5. But that the just should be just still: Apo. ^2.
Therefore change your mind, and cause not me to be ^l-spoken-off. My days are
past: for any comfort in this world: and the night they change into day: that I
fleepe not: but wake, as men do on the day. And light of day, short by my
darkness of afflictions: little light, that is little rest, do I find on the day
time.

Chah. XVIII.
Bildad. Why are we counted as beasts, when thou do Bildad: the second tym^
bid us ask the beasts of the field, Chapter 12. 7. and unclean, as fools, Chapter
17. 10. Apo. 22. Oh thou that rentest thy soul in thy anger: Chapter 3. and 6. and
10. and 14. and 16. thou think to remove rocks: and alter the most constant
course of Gods judgment. Yea the light of the wickeds prosperity is soon
quenched: His tyranny will come to distress: and his own counsel, as
Pharohs, will make him fall. Pharaoh now kills Isreal's children, But Pharaohs
daughter has taken one up, that shall pay his successor, and God will judge
him as he told Abraham, Genesis 15. Pharaoh shall be sent into the net by his own
feet: And the present Pharaoh, if he do envy Moses, when he shall be forty
years old, and will visit his brethren: he shall not long live, but his candle
shall soon be put out. Job, thou may hope to see the day, some forty years
hence, that Moses will come to thy nation of Madian, nere Aus to Raguels
house: who has a little Boy called Iethro: Who can tell but we may have
affinity with him. And Pharaoh that shall be in time, when God will judge:
400. years since vvild Ismael aged 18. vexed Isaak, entering into six: doubt
not Job but that thou shall see the day about 80. y. hence to see judgments.
Pharaoh will be sent ^^ his own feet into the net: when he pursues Israel, w^^^
God in the fourth age brings them out. And so other wicked of families amongst
us: shall soon have their na^^ put out. Consider Job: these are the
habitations of the unrighteous, as thou art: I must tell the plainly: a^^ this
plainly is thy case, that know not the Omnipotent

Chap. XIX.
Job. How long will ye fret me with words? Now t^^ Job.
times ye have reproched me. Five times I spoke: and five times you, crossing
my speeches; Eliphaz twice: and Bildad twice: and Zophar once. Suppose I have
erred: (...) my error continue with me. Eliphaz has made me (...) be counted
wicked over Theman: because I am so greatly plagued: and says that my children
were punished f^^ their sins. And because God has geven me over in^^ the
hand of the wicked, Chaldeans in my Camels, and wicked Sabeans, who have
forgoten our kindred in Abraham, Eliphaz will have me counted wicked, bringing
my wretched case an argument against me. Bild^^ will make all the Land
Sacchaea, make me a parable: and Zophar over all Minnaea. The Agarey of Hagar,
and Ch^tramis Land of Cheturam, Abraham's wife: (In Arab(...) we term gladly
names in the letter M) these will have as ill a conceit of me. Thema of wild
Ismael is most quiet my next neighbor to our Aus or Uz land: where mountains
of Chaldaea ly East: Saba that took my Oxen and Asses, West: and Dry Thema,
South. When my story shall be written, men will think then I am of Vz in Edom. It
is much that Eliphaz comes to grace: of profane Esavv, that sold his
Birthright, for a mess of Pottage. I^ him God in wrath remembers mercy: But
one svvalovv makes not a summer. Of profane Nachor, Elihu is one, best of all
us. But of Chetura, our best and most good be. Amongst all these families, ye
would have me counted one that forgets God. Ye deal too proudly against
me. Know then that God has dealt more strangely with me, then ever with
wicked men for wickedness. Know then that the Puissant has overthrovvne me:
and compassed his net about me: As never to any man for wickedness. If I
complain, I cannot be heard: The common rule is: call upon me in the day of
trouble, and I will hear thee. But I call, as one that God should hear: but
no sentence is geven. Therefore my case is strange: and not as of one punished
for wickedness. He has hedged me in on every side, that I cannot pass: He
has not done so with wicked Nemrod: nor with any wicked. He has bestript
me of all my honor: whereas I was Lord chief Justice in all our
confoederated provinces: and the richest of all Abraham's sonns by Ketura. He
has pulled me down on every side: as never any for sin. For Gods patience
leads them in many degrees still to repentance: and I go away, incapable of
any benefit in this world. His anger is kindled against me: and he houldeth me
as one of his enemies. Elihu will reply upon this, Chap. 33. 10. as that I
complain upon vvrong, and cannot be heard, Chapter 34. 3. etc. As he holds me as
one of his enimyes, so he comes with an host against me: His host of
affliction in wealth body and frinds come together against me: and cast up
their trench against me: and camp about my tent: my brethren, all honorers, my
kinefolke, my promoted, my hirelinges, my maidens, my wife: prinkockes, sage
counselers, my tendered: And my body, is so lean, that it cleaves to my
bones: so full of sores, that only the flesh of my teeth within my lips
has escaped. Therefore do ye persecute me, as the Omnipotent holds me as one
of his enemies: and why are ye not satisfied with my flesh so eaten up: but ye
will as savage beasts, eat my bones. And where ye say, that I am one that
forget God: I have a ready answer for my hope: as Abraham taught us in our
fathers: how Adam lost life, and brought death upon all. But the S. of God will
dwell in our tabernacle: and perform justice for us: That as all being in Adam
lost life: so they who will receive the abundance of the grace of the gift of
justice shall reign by one. The abundance of grace is in this: That one
disobedience brought death: but the grace washes all soul sore, from the sole
of the foot to the top of the head. Now of Abraham the God of Bethel will take
flesh: in Isaac, his death and resurrection were taught: with Jacob he
wrestled, and showed how his delight is to play with the sons of Adam: Of Judah
he comes, and that tribe shall not be scattered till his Son comes. Jacob
in Mestra land, where the great river Egypt is, told all this in his last
speech: and thence we learned all. But as now we of Ketura in Ismaels land,
stick to God: and none of Israel forsake the Idols of Egypt, so in time we
shall have equal glory: though when they have the land of Canaan, and all must
come thither, to worship, our children will not: but be enemies. Troops of
Camels shall cover the land: Dromedaries of Madian and Ghepha our house, and
all of Saba: the Saba that robbed me, now godless: they shall bring gold and
incense: and preach the praise of the Eternal. Yea and wild Ismael will be
ashamed of Hagar, and name them of Sara: and Cedar and Nabaioth called commonly
Nabathaea, shall serve the God of Bethel: the Angel that wrestled with Jacob:
in memory of which story, Jacob was called Israel: and the place, Phanuel.
This I know, that seeing in Abraham all families shall be blessed, Abraham's
natural specially. Now then I will bring the sum of my faith: and o that my
words were written, and drawn in a book; graven with a pen of iron, with lead
were in stone for ever: How I know that my redeemer is the everliving: and at
the last shall arise upon the dust: dying for our sins, and arising for our
justification. And after worms spend this my skin and flesh, I mean, after my
resurrection, (and I use a doubtful term, to conteyne both, (...)) from my
flesh shall I see the Puissant. When God has been manifest in the flesh, and
seen of Angels, and taken up in glory. The very same body shall come to this
soul, not a new body: God has all the dust of the earth in measure: and all
dust of bodies eaten with fish, water or fire, dogs or worms, shall return to
their old bodies. So I shall see the Puissant, in his most glorious body: and
my eyes shall view him, and not an other Job: when my reins and bosom, all is
once spent. God will do this by the power wherewith he is able to subdue all
things to himself. Thus ye should say, why doye call him wicked, when the
things root is in me: that my mind goes up to heaven, and brings the God of
Bethel, the angel of the covenant down: to be made a man of a woman: and to
be made under the law: and my mind descends to the grave to bring him from
death. And this matter is the mayn point: whereby God is pleased. Consider
how wickedly you deal in your bitterness against me: and be afraid your
selves of the svvord. For ire upon sin has the svvord. Therefore know there
^^ judgment.

Chap. XX.
Zophar. Where thou do charge us with sin: for Zophar: the second time.
this my thoughts make me reply: and I have to do that. A reproof to my shame
I hear: and the spirit of my conscience will, that I answer: now my second
time: as Eliphaz and Bildad have done. I will speak in a word: Since Adam
was set on the earth, the joyance of the wicked is short. etc. from 6. to 28.

Chap. XXI.
Job. I will speak, and after I have spoken, mock. Is Job.
my sighing unto man: as though I thought you could help me. But I have much
cause of sighing and sobbing speches: and then why should you complain of my
discouraged speches? Mark my case: and marvel. When I my self bethink me, a
quaking takes my flesh: seeing the contrary prosperity of So Moses desired to
know this: Ex. 33. Asaph Ps. 73. Ier. 12.
the wicked. You see the wicked are lively: continue long, and be mighty in
riches. Why said you then: their joyance is short: their height has a quick
fall: and they pass like a drcame. Their seed is settled before them: and their
houses have peace: and how say you then, He oppresses and leaves poor:
robbed of houses, which he shall not build up: and the fruits for his house
shall pass away: and flow away in the day of anger. They bear with the
tabret and harp: and rejoice at the sound of the pleasant instrument. And why
say ye then: he shall feel no rest in his belly. They spend their days in
vvealthines: and in a moment go down to the grave. The house of Lamech was
like them: and thence we have a pattron: for wicked Iabal had sheep: Iubal
Music: and Tubal-cain smithrye, that man made him a God of smythes, Vulcain.
And men said as before the flood: what is the almighty, that we should serve
him. They thought that the stars had spirits in them, and gave them wealth:
and thereupon sprang corruption in steed of calling upon the name of God, in
the age of sorrowful Enosh. But far be from me the judgment of the wicked. God
gives all that all have: But they never thank God. Eliphaz said, Chapter 18. the
wicked his candle is put out with him. How often is his candle put out? not so
often: that God does lay up his injuries for his children, Chapter 5. 4. and 20.
10. Can a man teach the Omnipotent knowledge, how he shall judge the lofty?
One dies in perfection: an other with a bitter soul: and never ate of good.
As for the wealthy wicked, Chapter 5. 10. and 20. 19. God does not always, lay up
his injuries for his children: pay him that he does feel it. Behold, I know
your injurious imaginations against me: when ye say, where is the pavilion of
the wicked, Chapter 5. 3. I saw the wicked fasten root, but presently did I curse
his dwelling: the hungry shall eat up his harvest, as the Caldeans: and the
thirsty Sabeans shall swill up, their wealth. And Chapter 20. 19. He oppresses and
leaves poor: robbed of house, which he shall not build up. I know your
imaginations when ye say, where is the house of the noble tyrant? Can ye not
mark them which go by the way? how came Ismael by 12. princehoods: and Esavv
by so many dukedoms? They would tell you: What stately houses see you not
built of tyrants? The bad is spared unto a day of heavines, a day when all
wrath is brought: that men may know that this world is the world of work,
and an other world is the world of revvard: And God in this world often
plagueth all sorts, that men may know him judge. But the just are not still
in best case. And what do ye comfort me with vanity: when great offense
remains in your disputations.

Chap. XXII.
Eliphaz. Thou would be pleading with God. If Eliphaz: the third time.
thou would teach, would he regard it? is it a pleasure to the almighty that
thou pleadest justice? What shall we say of our father Abraham: that he
attained of his natural power? If Abraham were justified by works, he has
wherein to rejoice: but he has no such matter before God. Before men he was a
Prince of God: And rare in readiness he was to have sacrificed Isaak: But Isaak
was no less rare, that would be sacrificed. Now mark Abraham, how far he was
from justification by works: The Jew Bechaia reasons, as Eliphas might, upon
Genesis 15. Fol. 22. Col. 3.
Behold this was a great sin, that Abraham sinned, saying to Sara, I pray thee
say, thou art my sister. This sin which Abraham sinned, was the cause of the
slavery in Egypt. And doubtless it was a great sin, that he brought his just
woman, into a trap to sin: for his own fear, least men should kill him. It
was his part to have trusted in God, that he would save both him and his wife.
Moreover he sinned in going out of the land concerning which he had the charge:
It was his part to have trust Thus much Bechaia brings from Ramban, which
Eliphaz might have told.
in the blessed God, that he would save him in hunger, from death. And for this
was decreed against his seed, the captivity of Egypt: for in the place where
he sinned, there was the punishment. Job, all that Eliphaz tells, thou
might have known not to plead justice before God. Would God reprove thee
for thy religion: and call thee into judgment for being holy? Nay, thy evil is
great: Unjust pledge; bestripping the naked; denying water to weary, bread to
hungry; violent holding of Land; oppression of widow and fatherles: These be
thy sin: that snares come, and darkness, in Gods providence: that he cannot see
through the clouds. Have thou marked the old world: when mockers following
their own desires said, said unto Noe, as doting in the work of the Ark:
where is the appearance of Gods coming: as Enoch said, that God would come
with thousands of his Angels, to be revenged upon all wicked men. They were
willingly ignorant of this, that the heavens were of old: and the earth, set
out of water and by water, by the word of God, and by them, by the windows of
heaven opened, by the springs arising and sea swelling, the world then deluged
by water perished: But the heavens now and the earth, stored by his word are
kept for fire to the destruction of godless men. In memory of this story
Greek fables grew that Noe, (...) is Deucalion: and his wife in warning of
destruction by fire is called Pyrrha. So the Poet Metamorph. ^. tells with the
flood, of fire, in this sort.

Esse quoque in fatis reminiscitur, affore tempus,
quo mare quo tellus immensaque regia Caeli
ardeat, and mundi moles operosa laboret.
That is,

Iuppiter bethought him, how time should come,
when sea and land and great heavens palace
should burn, and the worlds workmanship decay.
The Greeks of old had learned the same: And their verses be worthy marking:
and now we are in the mids of Job: and at a mayn matter, for the old world,
and end of the present. Sophocles says in this sort, in Iustine Martyr, fol.
167. and in Clem. strom. 5. fol. 258. Commel. and Eusebius. Pr^par. 13. fol. 400.
from Aristobu^^^* learned Iew^ so rare the matter is:

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
That is,

Such a time of ages is for to come:
when the welkin of golden hew sends
a store of fire, and then the hungry flame
shall burn all that is below or on high:
And when all is wasted and consumed,
all the depth of waters shall come unto nothing:
And the Land shall have no dwelling, nor fowls
that can flee when fire has eaten all up.
For in haides we settle two dwellings,
one of the just, and the other of godless.
Thus the old families taught of the world to be consumed with fire: that not
only Abraham in Israel should hold it, and in Edom, and Keturah: but heathen
estranged from Israel. Now the two last verses are in Diphilus, And Philemo^
and Diphilus have moo verses the same, then lightly any brase of writers, for
Haides. So when S. Luke wrote to Theophilus in the gospel, Chapter 16. he places
Abraham of the city which God prepared for him, to be no less in Haides,
being in joy: then was the co^temner of God, the tormented inflames. This
digression the Author makes: Now Eliphaz shall speak to Job. Have thou marked
the way of the old world: which say, depart from us: as thou spakest, Chap. 21.
14. we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: when the spirit of our Savior
went and preached in the days of Noe: when the patience of God waited while
the ark was in making: their bodies wrinkled by waters, but the spirits which
disobeyed are in prison, for not giving ear to Noe. And what should God do to
them. They had sheep, and music, and smithry for all tillage and husbandry,
and to lock their house filled with all store: and feasted and married: till Noe
went into the ark: and the flood came and took them all away: Because they bred
profaneness and called not upon God with a clear understanding: but said, what
can the Omnipotent do unto us: our Bell is he that storeth: as Cham taught
Nemrod. I will say with thee, Job: that I am far from those wicked minds: I
know God is the giver of all wealth. The just Noe and Sem and Iapheth did see
Gods judgment, and rejoiced: Noe the eight, the preacher of righteousness, with
his two sons and their wives, did mock them: And they were saved by waters:
and we should be saved with waters of knowledge to call upon God aright. So
Job reconcile thee unto God, and thy afflictions shall be unto thee as the waters
of Noe: that as God swear, he would drowned the earth no more, so if thou turn
to the Almighty, thou shall be built: So thou shall set by gold as dust: and
Ophir, as the stones of rivers. And the almighty will be thy gold, and silver of
strength to thee. He will spare the vninnocent, as Cham was to Noe, and he
shall be spared for thy pure hands.

Chapter XXIII.
Job. Yet this day my sighing, is holden a rebellion: Job.
as though I would teach the Omnipotent: to hold it a gain, that I make my
ways perfect. Oh that I knew how to find him, that I might come unto his
throne: would he by great power plead against me? No, but he would help me.
There the upright do plead against him. So should I be quit for ever by my
judge: if I might plead, why the ill have good, and the good ill. Of this I can
learn nothing by your speech. But neither in East, West, South, or North, can
I find him. He knows what way is with me: tried he me, I should come forth as
gold: More then my daily bread have I laid up all the words of his mouth. Yet
when he is against me, who can stay him? But because he furnished me with my
daily bread, and many graces: whereby I do know, that he tendreth me, as I
told, Chapter 10. 8. and 9. I consider and am afraid of him* Because thick darkness
and affliction has not made an end of me: nor I see an end of my burning
sickness.

Who can deny but that God has hid his counsel Chapter 24.
for men's affairs: seeing the coil our wild Arabians keep. They daily fight
for their borders: rob one an other: as the Chaldaeans and Sabaeans have done
to me: yea the fatherles and widow: and the poor of their garment: that they
cannot pass the ways for freebutters: the grapes and corn of others they
eat. They drive the poor to dwell naked in high rocks: in many great showers:
and live Tr^glodytae in dens. And if they have a garden of hemp to have a
shirt, or of corn to have a sheaf: they rob them of that. So the wild live
abroad. In the city they are as bad. Poor make oil, and tread winepresses,
and without pay: by hard Landlords: they groan by oppression, and by unjust
death: and yet God suffers all this. He suffers rebellers against the light
of conscience: which keep not in his paths: Murderers on day: thieves on
night: adulterers, house-breakers. This sort is of less weight in trade of
life, then the face of waters which winds beat: their portion in the earth is
cursed: tillage they regard not: nor planting of vines. Miserably they live:
and miserably they die: taken to the grave as heat takes snow: his mother and
wife will soon forget him: only his sweetness shall be for worms: and he is no
more pitied then a tree cut down: which has no feeling. God sends after
him, a barren wife: that he should have no help by children: and shows no
pity to his widow. God draws the stout after him by his might: and while
they stood, they were not sure longer then God would. God gave them a while
security to stay upon: but his eyes were upon their ways. A while they were
exalted: but soon come to nothing: they are cut off as an ear of corn. Thus
the course of the world is: God long suffers: and leaves some to
ungraciousness: and pays the mighty, mightily. And who can deny this?

Chap. XXV.
Bildad. Although the state of men be on earth confused, Bildad: the third time.
God on high is terrible to all about him: who see his angry face upon them
that despised his covenant of grace: but rebelled against him: whose worm
shall not die: and whose fire shall not be quenched. On high is terror: and
so peace: his armies of light be innumerable: and his light overshineth all:
where sorowfull-man could not abide an angels light. And what should he plead
justice with the Omnipotent? In the moon he teaches us: that it has not
clearnes of it self: neither be stars bright, when he will shine in the
redemption, And what should one of Adam plead with God? We are but worms.

Chap. XXVI.
Job. Thou helpest nothing, nor show wisdom. Who Job.
would admire so vveak a speech: to tell a little of Gods terror on high? Who
knovveth not that? or who would plead justice with God? I told you, Chapter 9.
none can be just before God: but as in mercy he held me his servant: and I have
run for the goal of the heavenly calling, I would plead why I am thus
punished: and touching honor to God for his works, ye shall see what I can
say. Thou speak of his power on high* it reaches to the furthest off. The
sea bottom has things without life formed, as ambre and pearl and topaz and
such. The lovv earth seeming lost and cast off, is shevved to have stones
precious, and for building, and coals. He turns the heavens about upon no
stay: and hangs the earth in the mids. The heavy meteores he binds: and
beautifieth the air, as a palace for him self. The unconstant sea he keeps in
bounds: and makes mountains as Atlas the Pillars of heaven to shake. The
divisions of all seas, and great rivers through mountains show his power. By
his spirit he trimmed the heavens by a most pleasant situation of stars: to
be remembered by forms of creatures. This on high: and below his hand has
made the great terrible Whales. And these are but part of his vvayes: and what
a small thing can we hear of him: as when you teach me slenderly how to
seek to him by repentance. Now the thunder of his power who can understand:
as how the wicked armies in millions fall to Eternal death: and the old
world: and the builders of Babel are cast off: and how God has set unto
wrath all them whom he has not chosen of Eternity to seek him in this life:
and here to honor him. These be his hid works.

Chapter XXVII. and XXVIII.
Now as the Almighty, which has brought my soul to bitterness, does live, my
lips shall not speak the unright: I will not justify you: nor remove my
integrity from me. My enemy shall be as the wicked: and my adversary as the
unrighteous. This I speak unto you: Eliphaz, Zophar, and Bildad. If I had been
an hypocrite, what hope could I have: when God should shake off my soul? Would
the Omnipotent hear my cry? I will teach you of Gods hand: and ye have seen
it. Wicked tyrants shall come to nothing: either in their life, or soon after:
This is the ordinary course of Gods judgment. But God in patience often
suffers much: knowing his heavy punishment.

God opens exceeding secrets of his works in the earth: Chapter 28.
but none of them have any resemblance of his dealing in his counsel for men,
cast off, or spared. But each one should fear him: and labor to eschew evil.

Chap. XXIX. and XXX. and XXXI.
I Job was in high prosperity: a Prince in our confederate states: for sage
counsel all gave place: and I aey defended the poor in right: I brake the
tuskes of the unright: and I was loved accordingly: And this was long:
according to Gods ordinary favor to the rulers in justice. I washed my
steps in butter, of sheep milk and Camels milk: and I had woods in stony
ground of olives: which I bought, Chapter 31. 39. Young and aged, princes and
orators, gave me place: when I went to judgment court: They regarded me as
the rain: and gaped as to the latter showers.

But now, for grave aged and nobles, young vile-mens Chapter 30.
sons, the basest that can be, a vile kind, banished from the earth, arise
against me: thrust my feet: and hold my heavines a profit. They rejoice as
though they had been the better by my sad case. As waters in part of a wear
broken all tumble: so they upon my misery. And they vex my former noble case:
become now as a wind. And by Gods hand my sickness is unspeakable: and he is
turned to me as one cruel: and I know to death will he turn me. When others
were in hard case: I parched in sorrow: and should but for some hid judgment of
God feel the like. Not for Chap. 31.
my sin: as come punishment. For my eyes durst not look upon a maid: I held
that adultery, and sure of heavy punishment. I used my servant, as knowing
that I had a Lord in heaven. I let the poor have what they could wish:
specially the sad widow, and the fatherles ate with me: The naked I clothed:
the orphane I protected: covetousnes I hated: and starr worship I detested: I
rejoiced not in my foes hurt: passengers by, had my servants portion: that they
tarried for a new dynner to be dressed: that they said, o that we had the flesh
prepared for us: we would soon eat it up: we come so hungry from work. The
stranger lodged not in the streets: I opened my doors to travelers. Abraham
and Lot taught me such hospitality. If my folk did any wrong, and they
complained: I covered not my trespass like Adam: hiding my sin of self-love:
Though I could oppress a great troup. But such families come to baseness. That
made me shrink: and that made me dum, that I never went out of doors to plead
in injury: but at home made content. That all this is true: I wish the
almighty would plead. And lastly this: if ever I ran into my neighbors ground
to plow or grase without pay: then let thorns grow in steed of wheat: and
darnell in stead of barley.

Chapter XXXII. and XXXIII.
Elihu the Buzite, of Buz Abraham's brothers son, of the family of Ram,
famous then for knowledge: Auz was the eldest brother: and to the eldest, to
avoid envy, would Abraham send the sons of Ketura. Auz and Buz, Ier. 25. are
together in Arabia. Rebecca and Jacob seem to have left religion in Nachors
house: That Elihu should be rare of knowledge. He ends the disputation.
Nowlet speak Elihu. Elihu.


Elihu. I am young, and ye old: therefore I reverenced and feared to show my
mind among you. For I thought, many years will teach wisdom. Certes a spirit
is in sadman: and the almighties breath to wise them. Men of not great time may
be wise: as the old understand the right. Therefore I say, o Job hear thou me
now: I also will show my mind. Behold I vvayted while ye searched what to
speak. And unto you I gave attendance: and lo, I found no confuter of you, that
ansvvered his words. Ye thought this enough: His punishment shows he is
wicked. He has not framed speeches against me: and I vvil not reply upon him,
as ye do. Now I will speak: and I will not regard Person: which doing Job
blamed in you: and spoke of punishment for mocking with God: as thou spakest,
Chapter 13. He will surely reprove you, for secret regard of Person. Will not his
highness make you fear: and will not his dread fall upon you? I will not
plead for God, that he never punishes but of hatred? So my maker would be my
taker away.

And in sooth hear now o Job my talk: if thou can Chapter 33.
answer, settle thy self before me, stand to it. Lo I am, as thou spakest, for
th'Omnipotent: I am also formed out of clay. Thou did say of God: Draw away
thy hand far from me: and let not dread of thee fright me. Chapter 13. 21. Lo my
terror shall not fright thee: nor my hand be heavy upon thee. Now thou have
spoken in mine ears, and I have heard the voice of the words: I am clear
without trespass: I know I shall be found just. Chapter 9. 21. Lo he piketh quarrels
against me: when my trespass is sealed in a bag, that thou joy nest to present
iniquity. Chapter 14. 17. Also thou have said to Bildad: He takes me as one of his
enemies. Chapter 19. 11. And to Zophar: He puts my fect in the slocks: and
watches all my paths. Chapter 13. 27. Lo, here thou art not in the right: I must
tell thee. For the Puissant is greater then sorowful-man. Wherefore do thou
strive against him, that he will not speak for all his dealings. First I will
tell thee of Gods general dealings: manifest, and felt: then I will touch thine
more particularly: and his unsearchable in the frame of natural philosophy in
the meteores. Mark Job, when the omnipotent speaks once or twice in visions,
or sickness to the grave, to stay man from his own work, man will not mark it
Job now thinks himself past hope of recovery, Chapter 7. through out. But when a
man's soul draws near to the pit, and his life to killing maladies: if there
be for him a messenger, a teacher one of a thousand, to teach the earthly, Gods
rightfulnes: then God will have mercy upon him: and say: spare him, o killing
malady, from descending into the pit: I have found a ransom. His soul shall be
moister then in youth: He shall return to his fresh days. Attend o Job: and
then I will speak. If thou have speech to answer me, say on: for I desire to
make thee just.

Chapter XXXIV.
Hear me o ye wise, and give ear ye men of knowledge: for Job said truly,
Chapter 12. 11. The ear discerns speeches, as the palate tastes to eat. And
when words be spoken as before God: a man's soul is an angel betwixt God and
him to judge of them. Let us desire judgment: know amongst us what is good.
Job said, I am just, Chapter 9. 21. and 10. 7. and 13. 18. 23. 27. and 27. 2. ^.
But Job drinks scornfulnes like water. Also he has said, it profits not a
man when he would walk with God. For he said, perfect and wicked he consumes,
Chapter 9. 22. Far be unrighteousness from God. For he will repay every man
according to his work. His justice is so great: that if he minded feveritie,
all flesh would yield up the ghost together: and all of Adam should return to
dust: as Genesis 7. Can a foe to justice rule well? But God rules well. Will thou
then condemn the just. He respects no person, as all are the work of his
hands. We see great judgments: and we see his justice. Whole troops die
suddenly: as the consumed with fire from heaven: Genesis 19. and the mighty are
taken away without hand, as in the deluge. He bruseth mighty, without end in
open place of beholders: Because they (...)ed back from him: and oppressed the
weaker. So he brings on such the cry of the poor: when he rooteth out all
their families: as in time he will root out the Chanaanites, when their sins
be ripe. When he makes rest, who can disturb? When the Sychemites were killed:
who durst meddle with Jacobs family to whom God had promised favor? When he
hides favor, who can behold his mercy? whole nations and several men find
this: Where Abraham's posterity, though faithles, drove out other nations:
Nemrod was mighty: But Sinear served Elam of Sem in Abraham's days, Genesis 14.
though Elamites left God: and made Gods of the fire that brent the sacrifice,
yet for Sem they had superiority: that the wicked house of Nemrod should
smart: As they smarted by Abraham. Now touching thy case, o Job: Unto the
Omnipotent, which says to thee repenting, I pardon, I will not destroy: this
should thou say: Where I see not the causes of my affliction, teach thou me:
I know, I am wicked: If I have wrought evil, I will do it no more. Shall that
proceed from thee, which he will punish: as thou do loath life: and likest
of death? where I durst not do so. Speak what th^^ think. Wise men will say
as I: but Jobs speeches are without skill. O my father which art in heaven, let
Job be tried unto victory. For against the omnipotent does he multiply his
talking.

Chapter XXXV.
Now Job I will come near thee: Thou say in effecti(...) thy great
complaint: I am iuster then God. Chapter 6. And wh^^ gain I cleansed from my sin,
seeing perfect and wicked he destroys. Chapter 9. Consider as thou can not reach
unto the heavens: so thy dealing, in justice or sin, cannot help or hurt God:
But for thy, self thy punishment comes to amend thee. Thou complaynest, that
God does not hear thee* Chapter 30. ^0. For violence the oppressed complayn: as
thou of the Chaldeans and Sabeans, the godles. When thou w(...) wealthy: but
art undone: Ch: 16. 11. Thou did cry out, for violent arms. So the oppressed
do. But none say: where is the Puissant my makers: the Eternal trinity: who
stirs to praise on the night. There they cry, but he answers not,
concerning the vvrong-doers pride. So God hears not sinners. (Ioh. 9.) So
when thou say: Thou will not mark it: Chapter 30. 20. Judge thee before him, and
vvayt for him. Now for missing, his anger does pay thee: because Job regards
not the great plenty of Gods vvayes, which should teach him wisdom? But
does open his mouth in vain: without knowledge does use much speech.

Chapter XXXVI. and XXXVII.
Forbear me a little: I will utter my knowledge from far, from the nature of
God. Mark, the Omnipotent is mighty: no despiser: mighty; and that the wicked
feel: the strength of heart; and that the poor in spirit feel. He saves not
the wickeds life: but makes him feel his might: but he yields right unto the
poor: as he is no despiser. He places the just with Kings in throne, as he
did thee when thou did well: and if they be bound in chains of sorrow, he
will open their ears to correction. If they will not hear, they shall die
without knowledge. But hypocrites in heart store up wrath and their soul dies
in youth. He saves the poor in their anguish: and opens their ea^e in
oppression. As he made thee great of a small man: one of the richest of
Keturaes sons. But as thou have fulfilled the sentence of wicked (some close
error) sentence and judgment have laid hold. Since ire is come: look he cast
thee not off: will he esteem thy noblenes and great hospitality? such ransom
which thou spakest off, Chapter 29. will not help away. This may be thy very great
sin: that thou do breath unto death: in thy continual speeches: as
mistrusting Gods will or power to restore thee: And this also: that thou
would be reasoning with God. Beware thou look not to sorrow: to choose death
for thy affliction. Mistrust not Gods power, for thy restoring: Mark, the
Omnipotent sets up, by his strength: and who art thou that disputest with
God? who can teach as he: who can say, Thou vvorkest evil. Remember to
magnify his works: which all men see: even the meteores in the air: which
all men behold: but none can tell how they be ruled: for mercy, and plage: In
rain, for men, cattle, and plants: In thundering and lightening: Chapter 37.
in snow and vvintery vveather: sealing men's hands from work: to cast their
accounts with better leisure, for husbandry: Ice, cloudy vveather, clearnes,
heat, and such. Through the North a golden light comes: but a terrible glory
is in the Puissant. The almighty, he is huge of strength: able to pay all that
will be contending: and him we cannot find out, to be pleading with him: But
of judgment in tendering his creatures and justice of ^^^cy he deliteth not to
afflict. Therefore sad-men fear him. He respects no wise in conceit: such
as will be pleading with him.

Of Chapter 38. 39. 40. 41. and 42.
The speeches of God, plead not of Jobs faults, but The Lord: And Job.
of vvishing to plead with God. Whom he teaches from his visible works, yet
unsearchable, that Gods counsel for men is deeper. And who should plead with
God: who punishes not but the proud: and the deserving: and why God
rejects men: none should plead: seeing to the visible creatures our wit
reaches not to see the reason of them. I leave the whole text to be sought
for them. Now Chap. 42. has no hardness.

(...)
Faults escaped.
Chap. 30. verse. 11. for, strings, read, string, and etc. Chap. 31. v. 34. for,
and those of families to baseness, that made me shrink etc. read, but such
families come to baseness: That made me shrink: etc. Chap. 36. v. 13. put out,
^, in the end of the line.


