A TRVE DISCOVRSE, UPON THE MATTER OF MARTHA BROSSIER of ROMORANTIN, pretended
to be possessed by a Devil. Translated out of French into English, by ABRAHAM
HARTVVEL.

Ecclesiastic. 19. He that is hasty to give credit, is light minded: and
shall be held as one that sins against his own Soul.

LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf. 1599.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, RICHARD BY THE PROVIDENCE of God, Lord
Bishop of London, my very good Lord.
RIght Reverend. The late notable Accident, that happened at Nottingham,
wherein your Lordship among others has taken great pains to examine, search,
and sift out the truth, has bred sundry rumors, not only in the North, but
also in the South parts of this Realm, according to the several humors of
sundry persons: some of them holding opinion, that all that Action was true,
and acted in deed by the Devil in the body of the Boy: and some others of the
wiser and more stayed sort, remaining in a suspense what they should think of
it: in so much that diverse of the latter sort, being persons of good Note and
Quality, (knowing that I was well acquainted with the matter, as having been
an (...) or Reader of the proofs collected together, and openly read in a very
Honorable and Solemn assembly) did deal earnestly with me; that I would
declare unto them, even in fide boni viri, in the faith of an honest man, what
I thought thereof. And although I did truly and according to their charming
request, relate unto them, how plainly, evidently, and manifestly it was
proved, that the matter was a mere Imposture and Cousenage, yet could I by no
means settle a resolute persuasion in some of them, that I had dealt sincerely
with them therein: neither would they be removed from the doubtful humor
which had usurped a predomination in them, but would remain still in the same,
until they might understand more certainty, of this my asseueration delivered
unto them. Which strong conceit (it seems) they have nourished and fostered
in their minds, partly upon the extrauagant and extraordinary Motions and
Gestures of the Counterfeit Cranke that acted them, and partly upon the
Stoicall conversation and Holy life of the Chief Choragus, that brought all
those Actors upon the Stage. To deliver these good minded people out of their
error, it is greatly desired by many, and by some expected, as a thing very
convenient, that the said collected proofs should be published to the world;
so as every man thereby may see, what notable practices have been undertaken:
but to what end, I will not judge. In the mean while, I am bold to present
unto your view and censure, this little pamphlet, containing a true Discourse
of a matter of the like Nature, written and printed in the French tongue, and
directed to the French King: which alighting into my hands tam oportune, in so
fit a time, I thought good to translate and publish to the world, to the end it
may be seen, that even by the judgment of the best Physicians in France,
nothing was acted by the Boy of Notingham, or this Maid of Romorantin, but
might very well be performed by the course of Nature, and without the help,
presence or assistance of a Devil. I was once determined to have prefixed an
Advertisement to the Reader, wherein I might have made an Apology for my
self, by alleging some special reasons why I translated this discourse: to
answer some curious Carpers, that may peradventure tax me for setting forth
the Ceremonies and Toys, that are commonly used and practiced by the Popish
Exorcists in their Coniurations: in which respect some have already taxed me
for the Book of Congo. But I stand or fall to my God, assuring my self, that
I have neither here nor there done any thing, which is not auouchable by the
Sacred Scriptures; let them feed their own humor as they list. I meant also to
have enterlaced some other histories and examples of former times, touching
such cunning and counterfeit Possessions. But when I had gathered them
together, I found that if I should have followed that course, accordingly as
that cause had required, I should have made the head bigger then the body, and
the shortness of the time would not have permitted me to finish it in fit
opportunity. And therefore I have reserved those Parralleles for a longer
Treatise, which as my leisure will afford me, I mean by Gods good leave and
favor hereafter to publish. In the mean time I beseech your Lordship to
accept this little in good part, and so in all humble duty take my leave. From
Lambehith, the 17. of October, 1599.

Your Lordships assuredly at commandment, ABRAHAM HARTVVEL.
To the King.
SIR,
BY the commandment of your Majesty, we have set down in writing, briefly
and truly, that which we have found in our visiting of Martha Brossier,
pretended to be a Daemoniake, together with the advice, which we have given
therein and thereupon, in our consciences. We present the same unto your
Majesty, without any Art, without any painted show, without any flourish, but
with a naked simplicity, the faithful companion of truth, which you have
desired from us in this matter, and which in every other thing you have always
loved and curiously sought. This desire, Sir, is a most certain proof of the
vprightnes, which you carry both in your mouth and in your soul, as a
witness of your just and holy intentions: whereby you have gained, and for
ever confirmed the hearts of your Subjects withdrawn from your obedience: and
the amity of foreign Nations, as much as you have done by the terror of your
Arms: both the one and the other being as greatly assured in the certainty of
your word, as they have feared and stood in awe of your invincible courage.
Receive therefore, Sir, if it may please you, the truth contained in this
little Treatise, as a testimony of our most humble obedience: and vouchsafe to
honor the same with the benignity of your surueigh, in favor of the singular
affection that you bear unto the truth, which indeed does make you so much
the more conformable to the Divinity, whereof you are a lively Image, and
which is the very Truth it self. Whom we do humbly beseech to redouble upon
you his holy graces and blessings, and to give unto you as much prosperity,
good fortune, and health as do wish unto your Majesty,

SIR, Your most humble, most affectionate and most faithful Subjects, the
Physicians of Paris.

A TRVE DISCOVRSE, UPON THE MATTER OF Martha Brossier of Romorantin, pretended
to be possessed by a Devil.
AS faith is the gift of God, and a virtue inspired by Divinity, whereby we do
steadfastly believe such things as do not appear unto us, neither by sense nor
by natural reason: so is too great credulity a vice, that proceeds from an
infirmity or weakness of a man's mind, and that oftentimes by suggestion of the
wicked Spirit. And therefore old authors have said, Epicharmus.
That not to believe lightly is the sinew of true wisdom: 1. Ioh. 4.
and the Apostle forbids us to believe every Spirit. The faith of Christians
is greatly commended: but the credulity of Magicians is much reprehended, as
being so great, that it takes away belief from all things; and is the cause,
that by believing every thing (though never so absurd) in the end, men will no
more believe any thing at all. Credulous Antiquity has bin deceived by the
delusions of Devils, and drawn to superstition and idolatry: but Christian
Religion has been always contrary to such deceits, to the end that the honor
of the true God and sincerity of faith might be preserved. And this was the
cause, that by the craft and subtlety of the Devil, Christians had an evil
report, and were by these Sorcerers and Deceivers expelled, when they went
about to work any of their delusions; for then would they cause to be
proclaimed (...), that is to say, Forth Christians. Faith is a sure and
certain way to come to verity, salvation and wisdom: but too great
credulity is the path that leads headlong to falsehood, fraud, folly and
superstition. This difference of faith and credulity may be showed by many
examples of ancient times: but there is none of them more worthy to be
written and known in these days, then the History of Martha Brossier of
Romorantin, pretended to be possessed with a Spirit. Many Prelates, Divines,
and Physicians, all of them acknowledging, according to the Christian Faith,
that wicked Spirits do enter into the bodies of men, and that by the
commandment and word of God they are cast out, have by a diligent observation
of all her signs and actions, discovered the cousonage and counterfeiting of
this woman, and have made their report thereof to the Parliament, the true
Protector and Defender of Piety and Justice. Other Divines, Religious persons,
and Physicians there were, which either through credulity, or to follow the
opinion of the people, or for some other reason, have said and assured, that
there was a wicked Spirit in the body of this woman, challenging al others for
Infidels and Atheists, which should think, or say, that this woman was not a
Daemoniake. The Parliament, by a solemn Decree of the Court, has confirmed
the judgment of the better and wiser sort, and set down an order, that this
credulity and superstition should proceed no further, to the detriment and
hinderance of the Catholic Religion. But to the end, that there may rest no
scruple or doubt in weaker minds, and that such a cousinage may be known to
all the world: we have briefly and truly written the whole History, we have
proved the said Martha not to have been a Daemoniake, we have faithfully
described the opinion and reasons of those which thought the contrary,
following therein the Original-writing of their own hands, word for word: and
have withal confuted their arguments, as being grounded upon too light
conjectures. We do hope, that those which shall read this discourse will
receive pleasure and profit thereby, and con them thanks, that (without
fearing the slander of evil speakers, and looking to none other mark, but
only to the truth it self) have resisted and made war against the Author
of lies: and that they will likewise give thanks to God, who has discovered
this cousonage, whereupon there might otherwise have followed, not only false
miracles, but also great division and partstaking among the people: as by the
discourse ensewing all men of understanding may know.

On Tuesday the xxx. of March 1599. at the commandment of the right Reverend,
the Bishop of Paris, there met together, Marescot, Ellain, Hautin, Riolan, and
Duret, within the Abbie of Saint Geneuesua, in the hall of my Lord Abbat, where
was brought before them one Martha Brossier, who (they said) was possessed of a
wicked Spirit: and this was in the presence also of the said Lords the Bishop
and the Abbat, and many other persons of Note. By the commandment of the said
Lord Bishop, Marescot (as the ancientest of the rest) questioned with her in
Latin: (for the rumor went, that she spoke all manner of languages) but she
answered not a word. Then said the Abbat, She will not answer, unless my Lord
Bishop command her. Then the Bishop commanded the Devil to speak, saying,
Adiuro te per Deum viuum, vt respondeas Dommo Marescoto. I adjure thee by the
living God, that thou answer Master Marescot. But both the woman and the
Devil were mute. She was again questioned withal in Latin by Marescot the
Physician, and in Greek by Master Marius Doctor of Divinity, and the Kings
Reader of Greek Philosophy: but she answered not a word. Then the Bishop
being very desirous and curious to discover the truth: (because the said
Martha had said, that this was no place to answer in) commanded that she
should be carried into a Chapel. Wherein, a number of Tapers being lighted,
one Priest accompanied with two others, all apparelled in decent and Priestly
garments, in the presence of the said Lord Bishop and the Abbat, and many other
persons of quality, all being together in great devotion and at their prayers,
began to exorcise her. She, being upon her knees praying to God, and making the
sign of the Cross, presently tumbled her self backward, first upon her
buttocks, then upon her back and upon her shoulders, and then softly upon her
head. Whilst she lay upon her back, fetching her breath very deep, and
quaking in her flanks, (like a horse after he has run) she turned her eyes
in her head, blared out her tongue, and told the Bishop that he had not his
Miter, and bid him that he should go and fetch it. Then they caused certain
Relics of the very true Cross to be brought unto her, which she endured to
be put in her mouth. They presented also unto her a Doctors whood, which she
stoutly rejected, as though the whood of a Divine, or the Miter of a Bishop had
more virtue and more Divinity in them, then the Relics of the very Cross.
These things being done, and many other, which would be to no purpose to
rehearse, the Lord Bishop commanded, that the Physicians would tell him what
they thought of it. Who after that they had maturely deliberated together, and
considered all that they thought fit to be considered, reported to the Bishop
with the consent of them all, and by the mouth of the said Marescot, the
ancientest of them all, what their opinion was, and that in few words, Nihil a
Daemone: Multa ficta: Amorbo pauca. Nothing of the Devil: Many things
counterfeited: and a few things of sickness. And indeed all these actions were
counterfeit, as hereafter shall be showed. But in truth her tongue was red,
and they perceived some little rumbling under her short ribs on the left side,
proper to those that are subject to the Spleen.

The day following, which was Wednesday the last day of March, Ellain and Duret
met together: and when the Exorcismes or Coniurations were again repeated, the
said Martha fell down at the rehearsal of certain words, raised her self up
again very lustily, made mowes upon the Exorcists even to their faces, and
nothing else was then done, saving that Duret pricked her with a pin, between
the thumb and the forefinger. After these actions diverse times reiterated
until Noone, the Bishop demanded of Ellain and Duret, what they deemed of it.
But they entreated the Bishop, it might stand with his good pleasure, that the
other Physicians, which had seen her the day before, might be called, and
others also with them, to the end they might more maturely deliberate of the
matter: especially considering, that the said Martha Brossier, being commanded
to give some tokens of her possession by the Devil, had made answer, To
morrow: which request the Bishop found to be very reasonable.

Upon Thursday the first day of April, all mysteries were employed and used:
none of the remedies were forgotten, that are proper to the driving out of
Devils. They settled themselves to prayers: She blared out her tongue, turned
her eyes, and at the pronouncing of certain words, (Et homo factus est: Verbum
caro factum est: Tantum ergo Sacramentum: that is, And he was made man: The
word was made flesh: Therefore so great a Sacrament) she fell as before, and
used such motions, as they do that are troubled with a Conuulsion. Yet all
these actions seemed to the Physicians to be merely counterfeit: and therefore
they would have been gone. But my Lord the Bishop entreated them, that they
would bestow yet a little more time for the public benefit. The Exorcismes or
Coniurations were begun again: and then the woman hearing the words, ( Et homo
factus est, And he was made man) she labored with all her strength and forces
to make her gambals, and being upon her back, in four or five skips removed
her self from the Altar to the Chappell-dore: which indeed did astonish all
the company. A Capuchin Friar.
Father Seraphin waxed somewhat angry, and said: If there be any here that is
incredulous, and will trouble her, the Devil will carry him away in the air.
Then Marescot growing impatient at that cousinage, said, I will take that
hazard and peril upon me: let him carry me away, if he can. And so set his
knee upon her knee, took her by the gorge, and commanded her to be quiet. She
being not able to stir her self, and seeing her cousinage to be discovered,
said, He is gone: he has left me. The good Seraphin approaching near unto her,
said, Indeed this is nothing but Martha: the Devil is departed. Then have I
made him run away, quoth Marescot. The Bishop being very desirous to know the
truth, and doubting some counterfeiting, said: Let us begin again, and pray
to God, that he would learn us the truth: let us see if the Devil will
torment her again. Then they sung Veni Creator, and the Apostles Creed. At
this word, Et thomo factus est, And he was made man, she did not fall, nor was
tormented any more: yea, when they showed her the holy Sacrament, she neither
was troubled, nor tumbled any more: but seeing Marescot, Hautin, and Riolan
behind her, she said, Meddle thou with thy Physic. Marescot answered her: If
thou do stir, and play the fool again, I will handle thee well enough. In
the mean while they perseuered in their prayers to God. She thinking that
Marescot was departed, fell again upon her back, played her old tricks, and
used her ordinary motions. Then Marescot, Hautin, and Riolan held her, and
stayed her very easily. The Bishop began to say to Father Seraphin the
Exorcist, Good Father, command her to rise. The good Father cried unto her with
a loud voice, Raise thy self upon thy feet, raise thy self upon thy feet.
Marescot said, The Devil rises not in our presence: and withal, because few
people should take offense, he spoke alowd in Greek, (...). Nothing against
nature, nothing against nature. And it is not to be marueiled at, that the
said Marescot, Hautin, and Riolan were not afraid, because they knew her
dissembling, and believed in Jesus Christ, who is the terror of all Devils.

Riolan, at the commandment of the Bishop, spoke unto her in Latin, as
follows: Misera, quous* perges nobis illudere? Nunquamne cessabis plebeculam
ludificare? Agnosce culpam, and veniam deprecare. Patent enim tuae frauds: and
nisi hoc feceris, breui traderis in manus Iudicis, qui quaestione veritatem
extorquebit: Thou wretched woman, how long will thou proceed to delude us?
Will thou never cease to deceive the simple people? Acknowledge thy fault, and
crave pardon. For thy guiles are discovered: and unless thou do so, thou
shall shortly be delivered into the hands of the Judge, who by torture will
wrest out the truth. She being demanded, whether she understood this or no,
answered in good sooth, She did not. It was thought, that now all this
business was done: and the Bishop withdrew himself, and went out of the
Chapel, with diverse men of good Note, and commanded the Physicians, then
being present, freely to tell him their opinion and advise. One of them assured
him for certain, that she had the Devil in her body, because she had blared
out her tongue very far, and had endured the pricking of a pin. Another
amongst them said, that undoubtedly he had seen very many signs of
counterfeiting: but yet his advise was, that they should stay three months
longer, to the end they might be assured, whether she had the Devil in her
body or no. For Master Fernelius, as he writes in his Second book De abditis
rerum causis, Of the secret causes of Nature, could not certainly know a
certain sick gentleman to be possessed with a Spirit, till the end of three
months. Six others there were, that very confidently and constantly said for
certain, all these actions of Martha were fained and dissembled, as it was
reported on the Tuesday before. And therefore it was thought that they were now
at the end of this business.

But upon the Friday and Saturday following, being the fourth and fifth days
of April, they called other Physicians, (omitting the greatest part of those
which had seen her before) and then they began a new combat with this
Fantastical Devil. One spoke certain Greek words unto her: and she
answered in French. Another spoke in English: she answered in French, but yet
(as some say) somewhat to the purpose. They observed her most violent and
sudden motions to be without any change, either in pulse, or in breath, or in
color. The Physicians then present, made report in many words and magnificall
terms, that Martha was possessed with a Devil, and signed it with their
hands. Which report we will write out hereafter, word for word, as it is in
the Original.

While all this was in doing, the Parliament fearing, that this concourse of
people, which came to see this new Devil, might breed some new Mo^ster of
Sedition, (whereunto were are all too much inclined) made a Decree, That Martha
Brossier should be committed into the hands of Monsieur Lugoly, the Lieutenant
Criminal. Hereat, the Ecclesiastical persons repined, and said, that this
cause, of a woman pretended to be possessed, belonged unto the^. The Preachers
cried out alowd at the matter. And the King, being then at Founteyne-Bell'-eau,
and fearing also, that of this spark there might be kindled a great flame,
commanded the like. And for the performance thereof, Martha was carried into the
Chastelet, where she continued and lived almost for the space of two months,
not as a prisoner, but being entertained very mildly, and well lodged: viewed
and visited by Bishops, Abbats, and other Ecclesiastical persons, Counselors
of the Court, Advocates, Gentlemen, and many Ladies and Gentlewomen, as many
times and as often as any was desirous to see her. Besides, she was viewed by
many Physicians, that is to say, by my Masters De la Riuiere, the chief
Physician, Laurence the Kings ordinary Physician, Laffile the ancient Deane
of the Faculty in Paris, Le Feure, Marescot, Ellain, Hautin, Lusson, Pietre,
Renard, Herouard, Cousinot, D' Amboise, Palmier, and Marces: all which did say,
and signed it with their hands, that they had not seen nor observed any thing,
that was above the common laws of Nature. And yet many there were, who being
still infected with the old Leaven, had scattered it abroad throughout the
City, that in the Chastelet she had played many of her Deuillish tricks:
which was afterward found to be false.

The said Martha, being shriuen on the morrow after Easter Day, and absolved by
the Curate of Saint Germans, or the Vicar there, received the Holy Sacrament,
without making any stir, or sign, or appearance of a person possessed by a
wicked Spirit. In the end, when al sorts of informations were most diligently
searched, and all things well considered, the Great Parliament of Paris set
down a Decree, with great prudence and clemency, which we will deliver you
in the end of this discourse. We have declared unto you the whole History as
in truth it was: and now we must show, by what reasons we were induced,
firmly to believe, that Martha Brossier neither was, nor is possessed of a
wicked Spirit: and afterward we will signify unto you, how slight their
reasons are, which held the contrary opinion, to the end we may clear a matter
of so great weight and of such consequence. But first we would have every man
to understand, that we were not any way assistant in this action, but only
being called and commanded thereunto, by the right Reverend, the Bishop of
Paris: and that we had none other scope therein, save only God and our
Conscience, not regarding what many might say thereof, nor the harm that might
redound to us thereby. And touching the Thesis and General Proposition, there
was never any doubt of it. For we do believe, according to the Christian
Faith, that there are Devils: that they enter into men's bodies: and that they
torment them in sundry sorts: and all, whatsoever the Catholic Church has
determined of their creation, Nature, Power, effects and Exorcismes, we hold
to be true, firm and stable, as the Pole of Heaven. But touching the
Hypothesis, that is to say, that Martha Brossier is, or has been possessed of
a Devil, we say, it is absurd, false, and without any likelihood. And to prove
it, we will conclude by this general Syllogism.

Mayor. Nothing ought to be attributed to the Devil, that has not something
extraordinary above the laws of Nature: Minor. The actions of Martha Brossier
are such, as have nothing extraordinary above the laws of Nature. Conclusio.
And therefore the Actions of Martha Brossier ought not to be attributed to the
Devil.
Those that are exercised in the knowledge of the signification and
equipollence of propositions, and in the Art of Syllogismes, will confess,
that it is concluded very well in secundo Modo prima Figurae, that is, Celarent.
in the second Mood of the first Figure. The Mayor or the Proposition is very
evident, and Plato in his Apology is of opinion, that there are Devils,
because there be many things where of a man can give none other reason, but
that it is the Devil, as being extraordinary effects, and surpassing the
forces of Nature. The Minor or the Assumption may be known by an Induction of
all the Actions of the said Martha Brossier. For what has she done? Mary, she
has blared forth her tongue, she has roled her eyes in her head, she has
showed diverse motions like to Conuulsions, and being laid upon her back, she
has shaken her flanks. There is never a one, I do not speak of these
tumblers, but even of the very Lackies of the Court, that cannot do so much.
And by this reason, that excellent Dancer upon the rope was rather to be
counted a Daemoniake, and possessed with a Devil, then she is. Martha
therefore has done no Action, that we ought to attribute to the Devil, as
hereafter shall be more at large declared. Moreover, is it likely, that after
fifteen months being so often vexed and tormented, she should remain fat and
in good liking? considering that even in the Gospel it is noted, that such as
were possessed with Devils, waxed dry and very slender? We are yet at this day
all of us of one mind and opinion, that the motions like to Conuulsions in
Martha, proceeded not of any sickness or disease, because while she was in
them, keeping her eyes half shut and half open, she perceived and saw
whatsoever was done, and did of her own free will and power move her eye, and
by consequence all her body. Again, such as have a true Conuulsion indeed,
use to bite those which come unto them, and put their fingers into their
mouths: yea, if a man put a cudgel between their teeth, they will crack it:
and withal have their limbs so stark and stiff, that they cannot be bended.
Martha seeing her self stayed and holden by any, or hearing certain words of
the Priest, wherewith she was before instructed, lifted her self up lustily, as
though she had had not fit at al. These motions then proceeded not of any
disease, and therefore they were counterfeit, as we have always maintained:
or else they proceeded from the Devil, as some held opinion grounded upon
very slight reasons: which we will thoroughly examine, after we have set
down the Original report thereof word for word, and inserted the same in this
place, as follows.

THE REPORT OF CERTAIN Physicians of Paris, touching the matter of Martha
Brossier.
WE the vnder-named Doctors, Regents in the Faculty of Physic, in the
University of Paris, touching the matter of Martha Brossier, a maid of the
age of two and twenty years, or there abouts, borne at Romorantin in Berry,
who diverse times to some of us, but specially upon Friday and Saturday, the
second and third of April to all of us in common, (saving and excepted one of
us, who was not there but only on the Saturday) was brought unto us in the
Chapel of my Lord of Saint Genenefue, hearing Mass there celebrated by my
Lord the right Reverend Bishop of Paris, and enduring the Exorcisme, performed
on the Friday by Father Benet a Capuchine, assisted therein by Father Seraphin,
a Religious person of the same Order, who had exercised her upon the days
aforesaid: and on the Saturday by Master Clerk a Lay Priest, assisted by Father
of the Order of the Feuillans. And there, during the said time, we saw her
sometimes in constitution, countenance and speech, as a person sound of body
and mind: and sometimes dissigured with diverse foul, unseemly and deformed
looks: and now and then vexed and troubled with many different and furious
motions of all the visible parts of her body: All the said evil favored
looks being either full of a kind of scoffing, deceitful, and consining
laughter: or very fierce, horrible, and silent, and oftentimes accompanied for
the most part with a roaring. In the midst of all this, sometimes obeying and
answering the Priest, as well in gesture as in words, upon commandments and
demands that were conceived in Greek, Latin and English: but as far as we
did mark, more often and more readily to Father Benet, then to any other: we
do say in our consciences and certify that which follows:

That is to say, as it may be that all this, which is before set down,
remaining to be specified hereafter, must necessarily be referred to one of
these three causes, which are Sickness, Counterfeiting, or Diabolical
possession. And for the opinion that it proceeded of Sickness, we are clearly
excluded from that, for that the agitations and motions which we observed
therein, do retain nothing of the nature of Sicknesses, no not of those
Diseases, whereunto at the first sight they might have been resembled: it being
neither an Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness, which always supposes the loss
of sense and judgment: nor the Passion, which we call Hysterica or Suffocation
of the Matrix, which never is either without utter privation, or at least
without restraint of breath: (of which accidents never did there any appear
unto us.) But to the end we be not too long, and by excluding generalities, to
exclude lik^wise all specialties, to him that shall look near into the
matter, these motions aforesaid being found not to appertain to any of the
four motions proceeding of Diseases, that is to say, Shiuering, Trembling,
Panting, and Conuulsion: Or indeed, if there do appear any Conuulsions, and
that a man will so call, the turning up of her eyes, the gnashing of her teeth,
the writhing of her chaps, (which are almost ordinary with this maid while she
is in her fits:) the confidence which the Priest has when he opens her
mouth, and holds it open with his finger within it: testifying sufficiently
that they do not proceed nor are caused by any disease, (considering that in
Diseases, he that has a Conuulsion is not master of that part or member
wherein it is, having neither any power of Election or commandment over it:
and particularly in the Conuulsion of the Jaws, which is the most violent of
all the rest, the finger of the Priest should be no more respected nor spared,
then the finger of another man, but should be as quickly bitten off.) Adding
hereunto moreover, that the accidents of Diseases, as well as the Diseases
themselves, being found to have their times of beginning, increasing, full
force, and declination, these torments here as they first took their
beginning, and mounted to their uttermost extremity all at once, so did they
likewise cease all in a moment. Diseases and the motions also of Diseases,
(especially those that are violent) as they leave the body feeble, the visage
pale, the breath panting: this maid on the contrary, at the end of her fittes
was found to be as little moved and changed in pulse, color, countenance and
breath, as ever she was before: yea (which is the more to be noted) as little
at the end of her Exorcisme as at the beginning, at evening as in the morning,
at the last day as at the first. Notwithstanding touching the point of
Counterfeiting, the insensibilitie of her body, during her ecstasies and
furies, tried by the deep prickings of long pinnes, which were thrust into
diverse parts of her hands and of her neck, and afterward plucked out again,
without any show, that ever she made, of feeling the same, either in the
putting in of them, or in the taking out of them: and also without any mark of
blood, (a grief, which without Magike and without speech could not in our
opinion be endured, without any countenance or show thereof, neither by the
constancy of the most courageous, nor by the stoutnesse of the most wicked,
nor by the strong conceit of the most criminal Malefactors) took from us
almost the suspicion of it: but much more persuaded us from that opinion, the
thin and slender foam, that in her Mad-fits we saw issue out of her mouth:
which she had no means to be able to counterfeit. And yet more then all this,
the very consideration before mentioned, of the little or no change at all,
that was seen in her person after all these most sharp and very long pangs,
(a thing which no body in the world did ever try in their most moderate
exercises) we are driven, even till this hour, by all the laws of discourse
and knowledge, yea and almost forced to believe, that this maid is a
Daemoniake, and the Devil dwelling in her, who is the author of all these
effects: for that next after the corporal and material causes, which we do
not find to have had any place in this matter, come the spiritual and
supernatural causes, in the highest degree whereof, acknowledging God to be
the Father of grace and mercy, and the Angels to be ordained for the tuition
and consolation of Mankind, as Christian Philosophers we have learned and
know, that there is none but the Devil that delights in doing evil.

Now if we had seen that, which my Lord of Saint Geneuefue and many others
do report, that this maid was lifted up into the air, more then four foot,
above five or six strong persons that held her: it would have been an argument
unto us of an extraordinary power, over and beyond the common nature and
condition of man. But not being present at that wonder, we do give a
testimony of our knowledge, which is as much or rather more admirable then
that force and power was, viz. that being demanded, and in her exorcising
commanded, (my Lord of Paris furnishing the Priest with questions and
Interrogatories) this maid diverse and sundry times, by many persons of
quality and worthy of credit was seen and heard to obey and answer to
purpose, not only in the Latin tongue, (wherein it had not been impertinent
peradventure to have suspected some collusion) but also in Greek and in
English, and that upon the sudden. She did (we say once again) understand the
Greek and English languages, wherein we believe, as it is very likely, that
she was never studied: so that there was no collusion used with her, neither
could she invent or imagine the interpretations thereof. It rests therefore
even in the judgment of Aristotle in the like case, that they were inspired
into her.

By reason whereof, and considering also (under correction) that S. Luke, who
was both a Physician and an Evangelist, describing the persons, out of whose
bodies our Lord and his Apostles did drive the Devils, left unto us none other,
nor any greater signs, then those which we think we have seen in this case:
we are the more induced, and almost confirmed to believe and to conclude as
before, taking God for a witness of our consciences in the matter. Made at
Paris, this third of April. 1599.

Now let us briefly examine this long discourse: The actions of Martha (say
they) which we have observed, are either counterfeited, or proceed of some
Disease, or are caused by the Devil. Of any Disease they proceed not, neither
are they counterfeit: then are they caused by the Devil. The Proposition is
true: the Assumption is false: and we do deny it. How prove you it? Mary first
you prove, that they proceeded not of any Disease; because every motion that
proceeds of any Disease, is either a Trembling, or a Stifnes, or a Panting,
or a Crampe. This division seems to be imperfect: because there be diverse
motions proceeding from Diseases, which are mixed: as for example those that are
called (...), Mingled of a Crampe and a trembling: and (...), a Trembling with
a Shiuering, which Hippocrates calls (...). And these mixed kinds are
sometimes so mingled one with another, that it is a very difficult thing, to
refer them to any one of your simple kinds. But let us not rest upon this,
seeing we are all agreed, that the motions of this woman proceeded not from any
disease: and let us examine the reasons which you allege for the Devil.

The first reason is, for that she being pricked very deep with a pin, she
never made any semblant, that she felt it. Out of all question, when she was
but slightly pricked on the side of her neck, she turned her self, and felt
it indeed: and then Father Seraphin used his wonted excuse, and said, Here is
nothing else but Martha. Well, a little after, being pricked somewhat deeper,
she dissembled her pain: and therefore had she the Devil in her body? The
Lackies of the Court, which diverse times will of themselves thrust a pin very
deep into some fleshie part, as in the thigh, or in the arm, are they
therefore possessed with a Spirit? The wise Stoike, being enclosed in the bull
of Phalaris, said that it was but a gentle torment. Thieves that rob by the
high way do easily endure the torture: we have seen many that were burned
alive, and never showed any token of pain. Plutarch in the life of Lycurgus,
says, that the children of the Lacedaemonians did use themselves to stealing,
with so great fear to be discovered in their theft, as one of them having
stolen a young Fox, hid it under his clothes, and suffered all his belly to
be rent out with the nails and teeth of the beast, and yet never cried for
it, for fear he should have been discovered, insomuch as he dyed in the place
where he was. Which thing (says Plutarch) is nothing incredible, when we see
what young children do even at this day endure. For we have seen many that
without either crying, or speaking a word, have endured to be whipped even to
the death, upon the Altar of Diana. Behold the very words of Plutarch.

But ye will say, that Martha was pricked, without any blood following.
Assuredly we did see a show and a mark of red. And ye must understand, that
when a pin is pricked directly and uprightly into a fleshie part, wherein
there is not notable vein, it will make a very small and narrow hole, out of
which blood does not issue, especially if the blood be earthie and
melancholic. Upon such a like argument as yours is, we have seen poor
souls condemned to be burned for Witches, and afterward absolved and let go
by the Judges of the Court. A dangerous argument for such Witches, and yet in
this question now in hand much less pricking then a pin. But let us argue by
Philosophy a little more subtly. Galen shows against Aristotle, that Sense
is not the alteration or change that is made in the Organon or Instrument of
Sense, but the knowledge of that alteration. As for example, (says he) if I
be very attentive to any thing, and in the mean while one passes before me:
although his image be received into the Chrystalline humor of mine eye, as it
were in a glass, yet for all that I shall not see him, because the Visuall
Spirit with the power thereof is kept back in the spring and original
fountain of the sight: or the soul does not send forth the Common Sense into
the eye, because it is occupied elsewhere; and without it there can be no
Sense, and by consequence either little or no pain at all. If I be very
greatly busied or occupied attentively about any thing, although one cry out
or speak alowd that is near unto me, yet shall not I discern what was said,
because the Common Sense is hindered elsewhere. Some have received many shots
of gunnes in the wars, that felt nothing thereof. Archimedes, being busied
about his Geometrical lines, did not think that Syracusa had been taken. If
therefore constancy and resolution, as also a strong imagination do detain
the Spirit Animal in her fountain: if the Soul do not send forth into the
part her Common Sense, without which there is either little or no feeling at
all, and by consequence either little or no pain: do we think it strange,
that the patient, being very resolute, does endure little or no grief, and so
dissemble it? This reason induced the Stoikes to defend this Paradoxe, That
grief or pain consists in opinion: because Imagination is the mother of
Opinion: and if Imagination do not work withal, there is no pain at all.
Cease therefore to conclude that Martha was possessed with a Devil, because she
was not moved with the pricking of a pin: conclude rather that she was not
possessed, because she felt not the pricking. For there is no likelihood in it,
and it is a thing incompatible, (not agreeing with it self) that the Devil
should quite take away the feeling of pain, from those whom he means to
torment: nay, he would rather augment and increase the same, to make them feel
the greater pain. Cease ye also to marvel, that there followed no blood out
of the prick: for the only apprehension or strong conceit of being let blood,
is ordinarily a cause, why there follows no blood out of the issue that is
made, although the vein be very well opened. The common people do usually
say, I was so angered, as if a man had stroke me with a dagger, I should not
have bled. And thus have we philosophically disputed about a pin somewhat
too much.

The second reason to prove, that Martha was possessed with a Devil, is, That
there appeared in her mouth a certain kind of thin foame. Who did ever hear
any speech of the Devils foame? If it be so, there should have been added, that
it was also black. For all that comes from him being of hell, must needs be
black. Yea, our good old women use to say, That the Devil has no white at
all in his eye. Who can forbear laughter, to hear, that a woman is known to
be possessed with a Spirit, by her foame and spittle?

The third reason to prove that Martha was possessed with a Spirit, is, Because
she had certain marvelous violent motions, without any alteration either in
her pulse, or in her breathing, or in her color. But truly, her motions were
not so violent, but that certain Physicians, which could not patiently abide
this cousinage, could very easily stay her: and so would have done upon the
last days also, when she played her part so cunningly, if they had been
called. But, Non patebant fores, ne pateret veritas. The doors were not open,
for fear least the truth should have been opened. Moreover, though the
motions of Martha had been violent, yet were they very brief and short: for
presently she raised her self, and then the Exorcist said, Here is nothing
else but Martha. But let us confess and auow, that these her motions were so
violent and sudden, as they say, without any change or alteration in her
pulse: yet this signifies, that her blood was very thick and earthie, and so
could not easily be kindled: and therefore we say with Galen, that the pulse of
such people is very rare. We have oftentimes seen, sundry Melancholic
persons, not only many days and months, but also many years, to have run
up and down crying very strangely, and howling like dogs, without any change,
either in pulse, or in breathing, or in color. Again, use and custom serves
greatly to this purpose. There were fifteen months spent in carrying of her
too and fro, like an Ape or a Bear, to Angers, Saulmur, Clery, Orleans, and
Paris: in which time they taught her to practice all these gambalds, Et quae
consueta sunt, minus afficere solent. The things that are of use and custom
do not breed any great alteration. How many things are there, which we do
daily see in Nature to be far more strange, admirable, and incredible, which
notwithstanding are not attributed to Devils, but to the hidden secrets of
Nature? We see those that are bitten with a mad dog to bark like dogs, Men
that are Warewolfes to howl and eat man's flesh like Wolves, because they have
their Imagination hurt, and think themselves to be Wolves. They that are
desirous to know more hereof, may read the two books of Leuinus Lemnius De
occultis Naturae miraculis, Of the secret miracles of Nature. Mizaldus and
Fracastorius in the books of Sympathy and Antipathie: and Baptista Porta in
his Magike Natural: and also that which a learned man of this age has written
touching Miracles.

To be short, there are an infinite number of things, that are done by the
secret power of Nature: which if because they are secret, we should attribute
to the Devil: then, to unfold the Questions of Natural Philosophy and
Physic, from the beginning to the end of these two Sciences, we should
always have recourse to Devils. But this reason is of so slender force, as by
the same I may conclude the quite contrary, that is to say, that Martha
Brossier neither is, nor was possessed with a Spirit.

Those that are possessed with a Devil, after their vehement and sudden
motions, do remain astonished, and have their members (as it were) cracked, as
it appears in the ninth chapter of S. Mark, and by the Histories reported by
Master Fernelius in his second book De abditis rerum causis, Of the hidden
causes of Nature.

Martha Brossier, after her motions, was not in that case, but to the
contrary, remained lively and lusty.

Therefore Martha Brossier was not possessed with a Devil.

Now then, build your belief upon such slender reasons as you make, to
conclude a matter of so great weight.

The fourth reason, if it were true, would necessarily conclude, that is to
say, if she had spoken Greek and English, having never before learned either
of those languages, it would be a certain and sure argument of her possession
with a Devil. But that is altogether false. For she never spoke any other
language, then the French tongue, and the proper speech of Romorantin, although
false rumors have been spread abroad thereof to the contrary. But (say they)
indeed she never spoke either Greek or English: but she answered to the
purpose, when a question was demanded of her in Greek. One asked her, (...):
How came thou into the body? She answered in French, For the glory of God.
Now the very self same question in Gr^eke had bin made unto her before at
Clery, as Master Lieutenant Criminal has seen in his informations. It is
manifest therefore that there was a collusion in it. Besides that, she answered
not to the purpose: for she was asked the means how he had entered into the
body, and the answer was made of the end, that is to say, wherefore it entered
into ye body. Father Benet questioned with her a long time in English: and the
good old Father asked her, What was his name, and the woman answered, I was not
at your Christning. O goodly Miracle: Martha had heard the Bishop, that
furnished the good Father with Interrogatories (as even the Physicians
themselves, which though the woman was possessed, have written in their
Report) and the Bishop willing him, to ask it in English, What was his Name,
it was an easy matter for this cunning wench, being very crafty and well
instructed in such subtilties, to answer, I was not at your Christning. But if
in this woman there had been a Devil in deed, how comes it to pass, that
having been so long a time conversant in the Western Church, where Latin is so
common, it had not in all that time learned that language? Now she did
confess, that she did not understand us, when we spoke Latin: What was the
reason then that she did understand rather the words of the Priests, but only
because she was already instructed and used thereunto, and so understood
them, as an Ape or a Dog understands his Master? And for as much as whiles
she was in the Chastelet, she had usually in her hands the book of the Devil
of Laon, which she brought with her from Romarantin, and which Monsieur Lugoly
caused to be taken from her: I leave it to consideration, whether it were not
of purpose to instruct her more and more in such Apish toys.

Besides all these former reasons specified, they bring us the testimony of
Saint Luke the Evangelist and Phisician, to the end that this authority should
be the greater against the Phisicians: who, when he recites the Histories of
such as were possessed, and healed by Jesus Christ, does allege no more
plain and evident signs of possession, then those that were seen in this
woman of Romarantin. Now let us see whether this be true, and well concluded.
In the first place, Saint Luke in his eleventh Chapter makes mention of a
Devil that was dombe, and driven forth by Christ, and does not describe or set
down any signs, whereby this Devil might be known. The Evangelists had no
intent to describe any such signs. For they which were brought to Jesus Christ
to be healed, were evidently found to be such persons, even by the confession
of the Jews, and on the behalf of Jesus Christ, he knew them well enough
without any signs. If therefore we want none other signs of the Devils
possession, but those that are set down by the Evangelists, then every person
that is Epileptike, or troubled with the Falling Sickness, every Melancholic
and every Frantike person shall have the Devil in their bodies, and there will
be more Demoniakes in the world, then there are Fools. But let us see, whether
Saint Luke do not set down more apparent and evident tokens of such as are
possessed with Devils, then those which Martha had. This Evangelist and
Phisician in the eight Chapter of his Gospel, describing the man possessed
with a Devil called Legion, (because many Devils were entered into him) says,
that this man Ware no clothes, neither aboade in house, but in graves. Martha
did wear garments of a slight colored cloth, after the fashion of a
Romarantin Maid. She was, when occasion required, at the table of Bishops,
Abbats, and Monks. She did eat and drink as other folks do. This
Demoniake possessed with the Legion, acknowledged Jesus Christ to be the Son
of God, whom he never had seen nor heard of, and therefore he knew things,
that were otherwise secret. But Martha did never any such thing. This
Demoniake, although he were bound with chains of Iron, yet he broke them, and
was carried away by the Devil into the Deserts. But Martha was easily held
and stayed with a very weak hand. Then is this authority of Saint Luke not
well alleged.

Now that we have confuted these slender and slight reasons of some of the
Phisicians, let us come to the reasons of some others: and begin with the
testimony of diverse men of quality, which say, that they saw her lifted up
into the air for a space, without any stay to uphold her. Go too then: Let us
dispute by Philosophy. Whatsoever is moved in recta linea, in a right line, it
must have a rest, before it take any contrary Motion: as for example, a Ball
being thrown against a Wall, before it reboundeth back again, rests it
self upon the Wall, as Aristotle shows in his eight book of Phisicks: and
an Artery, after the Dilatation thereof, before it make Contraction, rests
it self. And now you may see, why this woman of Romarantin, leaping up into
the air, rested her self before she came down again. But this is somewhat
too subtle a reason: let us yield you one that is more plain and clear. They
told us, upon the Thurseday morning, that they always thought this matter of
Martha to be mere cousinage: but in the afternoon, they saw her aloft in the
air: peradventure because some vapors arising up into their brains, did
breed certain accidents like to Suffusions, or Clouds, in such sort as a man
shall see things (as it were) out of their place. Which may very well be
showed by the Art Optike. Yea it way possibly be, that they saw Duplicem
Martham, vnam humi, alteram in sublimi (Two Marthaes, one upon the ground, and
another a loft.)

Others there be, which have alleged another reason, in that Martha did lift
her flanks, all the rest of her body remaining unmoved. And so Horses, after
they have run, when they pant in their flanks, (which Horace terms
Iliaducere,) may as well have the Devil in their bodies. I am ashamed to hear
such reasons.

And in sooth, this which follows is not much better. They heard a rumbling
under her left ribs, but it was very little, and that only when it was
touched. By this reason, those that are troubled with a Wind about the short
ribs, and poor Maidens that have the Green Sickness, and pale colors,
shall have the Devil in their bodies. For oftentimes the sound in their
bellies is so great, that it may be heard above from beneath, and from one
chamber to another. And by this reason also, they should not have one Devil
alone, but many. And in deed, if we believe those Good-Fathers, Martha had, and
yet still has three Devils in her: one that is an old and a cruel one,
called Beelsebuh: another that is a merry one, which they call Ascalon, The
lester of Hell: and a third which they call, The Skullion of Hell. And thus
these reasons march all after one tune.

Some there be, which add hereunto, that Martha discovered and told certain
Secrets of Men, in such sort, as many of the assistants were in great fear
thereof. Father Seraphin, (who always walked with a good simple conscience in
this business) demanded of her, What have I done this night? Martha answered,
Thou have prayed to God. Behold, what a goodly great Secret this was, to tell a
Capuchine Friar, Thou have prayed to God. Whereby a man may know that the
Romarantine Wench mocked the simplicity of these Good-Fathers.

Some bring a reason that is more urgent, that is to say, That Martha did
speak in her belly, when her mouth and her lips were shut and closed. Truly
Martha spoke as another body did. And yet if she had done so, should she
therefore have a Devil, that spoke within her belly? Hippocrates in his fifth
book of the Epidemies, the 58. sentence, makes mention of the wife of one
Polemarchus, which spoke in her belly. John Gorraeus in his Definitions
Medicinal, says, that in Hippocrates, they are called (...), which talk in
their belly, when their Mouths and their Lips are shut and closed. Look
upon Scaliger against Cardan in the 258. Exercise, and the third part. Foetius
in his Oeconomia Hippocratica writes, that the Great Adrian Turnebus did say
in his Reading-Chayre, S. Augustine also reports a strange dexterity (though
it be somewhat filthy) of a man, that with the wind of his hinder parts,
could make what sound he listed, and that with so good measure, as you would
have thought he had sung. Piedro Mexia de Serilla, lib. variarum lectionum.
cap. 26.
that he had seen a Rogue, who without opening his Mouth or stirring his
lips, did with his belly, make such a sound, and uttered such a voice as
pleased him, and gained great store of money by practicing that feate. And in
truth it might very well be done: because in closing or shutting the breast
and stomach, there may enter some air into the Artery, which may make a
kind of sound or voice, not very distinct or plain to be discerned at first,
and yet by long exercise may be in a sort perceived: and such persons are
called (...), that is, Talking in their Bellies. Or (...), Talking in their
Breasts. Or (...), Prophesying out of their Breasts. Calius Rhodigynus
refers this to the Devil, that speaks within the Belly. But he is but a
Reporter of Fables, and therefore let us leave these popular and common reasons.

Those, that have thought themselves to be somewhat more wise then the rest,
as being skillful in the Law, and making Profession thereof, have oftentimes
objected against us: If Martha were not possessed of a wicked Spirit, Cui Bono?
Whose benefit was it? To what end did she all these things? To this question,
it belongs not to our Art to answer. Yet notwithstanding let us entreat
this favor, that we may make some guess of the matter. To what end do many
run up and down the streets, and say, that They are Emperors, and Kings,
and Kings Sons, and Bishops? You will then say again, That Martha thought
herself to be a Demoniake. It may be so: and to the end that she might imprint
that opinion in the minds of Men, she counterfeited and dissembled all the
rest of her Actions. And it is not to be thought a strange matter, that the
self same person should commit an error in one point, and in all the rest
should be very cunning, subtle, and wary. Melancholic persons are crafty
and malicious.

Let us tell you a thing that is more likely then this. The Father of Martha,
was always factious; by common report. He saw that his daughter, who (as also
the rest of his other Children did) was ever reading of books touching
Deuilerie, and especially and principally that Book of the Devil of Laon was
a very proper and fit Book for these Deuilish feats and counterfeitings:
adding thereunto, that many Priests, and namely the Theologal of Orleance, by
that which she told unto us, confirmed her in this opinion, that she had the
Devil in her body. And therefore he carried her to Our Lady of Ardiliers, to
Saulmur, to Angers, to Clery, to Orleance, and now at the last to Paris:
Whether this were done upon a folly, thinking in deed that his daughter had
the Devil in her body, or thereby to make some stir and alteration, or for
covetousness, God knows: for that belongs to the Parliament to look unto.
But the very truth is, that many bestowed Money on her Father: as namely
Monsieur de S. M. Twenty Crowns, others Thirty: some more, some less. Yea
her Father being at Paris, went up and down a begging Money of the Churchmen,
even of simple Religious persons, to bring this holy enterprise to good
perfection. And it is not to be doubted, but if the matter had fallen out
accordingly, there would have been good store of money gained by it, and she
should have been carried from house to house to gather a benevolence, as was the
Mother of Friar Clement, that wicked and cursed Apostata and Runnagate, The
Friar that murdered K. Henry the third of France.
the remembrance of whom breeds a horror in my soul. And thus much for those
that ask, Cuibono? Who had benefit by it?

We have now showed, that Martha neither was nor is possessed with a Spirit:
We have confuted the reasons of those that held the contrary opinion: We
have seen the testimonies of the wisest and most prudent persons among them.
Martha was carried to Angers to be Exorcised or coniured. The right Reverend
Bishop Miron, (a man of good wisdom and well advised) would not Exercise her,
until he had first tried her, and knew of a certainty that she were
possessed. He caused her to be stayed, he bourded her, and for certain days
he made her drink nothing but Holy Water, wherewith she was neither altered
nor moved. After certain days he caused common ordinary water, (not
hallowed) to be brought unto her in a Holy Water stock: and then Martha seeing
the Holy-water-stocke, laid her self down, fell to her brabling, and made
her wonted Apes-faces. Afterward, the Lord Bishop told her that he had a piece
of the True Cross. He took a key of Iron, wrapped it worshipfully in Taffata
like a Relike, and offered it Martha to kiss: and presently she began to play
her Deuilish tricks. A little while after, when he said, Let one bring me my
great book of Coniurations, they caused a Virgil to be brought unto him: and
he began to read, Arma virumque cano. By and by, she thinking them to be words
of Coniuration, fell down upon the ground, and tormented her self in the best
manner she could. At the last, her counterfeiting being discovered, the Lord
Bishop sent her away, and would not profane those holy Mysteries of Exorcisme,
to drive away a Counterfeit Devil. Others may imitate and follow the wisdom
of this Prelate.

And what was done at Clery and at Orleans? The Official there, being well
assisted with the wisest of the Clergy, did forbid all Priests of the Diocese
of Orleans, to Exorcise Martha, upon pain of Suspension from Divine Service.
It would be a long matter, if we should go about to rehearse all that was done
at Orleans, for the discovering of this cousinage of the said Brossier: we
will only tell you two of the pretiest of them. First, there was brought unto
her a great thick Grammar of Despanterius, bound after the old fashion with
boords, and with claspes of Copper: it was opened and given her to read. She
lighted upon this place, Nexo, xui, xum vult: Texo, xuit, indeque Textum. Which
words Martha thinking to be Diabolical, began to fall backward, (but softly
enough, as we told you before) and to fetch her ordinary friskes and
gambaldes. Another pretty trick was, that my Masters of the Clergy in
Orleans, would needs make experiment of the graund Remedy to drive away the
Devil, and that is called the Parfume. They did set fire to this Parfume, and
offered those villainous and stinking vapors to her Nose, she in the mean
while being bound to a chair, but her feet at liberty to play withal: and
then began she to cry out, Pardon me, I am choked, He is gone away.

THE DESCRIPTION OF THE DIABOLICAL PERFVME, TAKEN OVT OF THE book entitled,
Flagellum Daemonum, The whip of Devils: and is this.
TAke Brimstone, Assafoetida, Galbanum, S. Iohns-VVorte, and Rue; all these
things being hallowed according to their own proper and peculiar benediction,
must be cast upon the fire, and the smoke thereof applied to the Nosthrils of
the possessed.

This is an excellent Remedy ad fugandos and fumigandos Daemones, to drive and
smoke away Devils.

Of the virtue of this Remedy, I will say nothing; but I am greatly amazed,
that they mean to drive out Devils with such stinking Odours and Smells,
considering that Porphyrie and Psellus, who are Philosophers of Platoes Sect,
do say that such Parfumes are the Devils Dainties. If it were lawful for me
to amend or reform this Antidote or Preservative, I would add thereunto, some
Atriplex foetida or stinking Orage, which the Greeks call (...): Some of the
leaves of Coriander, and Wilde-Rocket. For they are all Cordial herbs for
Devils.

All these things that have thus passed, are for the most part absurd and
ridiculous, and yet have they found defendors of them, not only among the
ignorant people; but almost in every estate: and therefore the Parliament
having a long time and diligently considered of the whole matter, to appease
all divisions and Parte-takings, that might arise thereby, did make this Decree
as follows.

A Draught out of the Registers of the Parliament.
THere was viewed by the Court, (the Great Chamber, and the Tournelle being
assembled together) the Decree of the Second Day of April last past, whereby
it was ordered, that Martha Brossier, pretended to be possessed with a wicked
Spirit, should be committed and delivered to the Lieutenant Criminel of this
Town.

The reports also of the Physicians, of the vij. viij. xiij. xiiij. xvij. xix.
xx. and xxj. days of April last: of the viij. and xviij. of this present
Month. And likewise other Acts and Testimonies, whereby it appears, that
the said Martha Brossier is not possessed with any wicked Spirit.

The Capitular Acts also of the Chapters of Orleans and of Clery, of the xvij.
of March, the xviij. and xix. of September, 1599. Whereby Inhibitions were
adwarded to all Priests of the said Diocese, that they should not exorcise the
said Martha Brossier, upon pain of Suspension from Divine Service. There were
heard also Master Peter Lugoly the Lieutenant Criminel in the Prouost-ship of
Paris, and Francis de Villemontee, Deputy to the Kings General Attorney in
the said Prouost-ship, touching the behavior of the said Brossier: together
with the Conclusions of the Kings Attorney General himself. And all this
being considered.

The said Court has ordered, and now does order, that the said Martha
Brossier, Syluina and Marie Brossiers, her Sisters, and James Brossier their
Father being now in this Town, shall be carried and conveyed to the Town of
Romarantin, (the place of their aboade) by Master Nicholas Rapin, Lieutenant of
the Short-Robe in the said Prouost-ship: and the said Martha Brossier shall be
by him left in the keeping and guard of the said James Brossier her Father,
whom the Court does inhibite and forbid, upon pain of Corporal Punishment,
that he shall not suffer her to wander or go out of the said Town, without
the order and leave of M. Paul Gallus the Judge or Steward of Romarantin: who
was enjoined to mark and observe the Actions and doings of the said Martha
Brossier: to make verbal Processes thereof, and to send the same to this said
Court, from fourtnight to fourtnight, and so to advertise and certify, what he
shall see fit to be done: and further in case of disobedience herein committed
by the said James Brossier, to proceed against him and others (if any such
thing fall out) by the ordinary courses of Justice. And this present Arrest or
Decree, shall be executed by virtue of the Copy thereof. Made in Parliament,
the xxiiij. of May. 1599.

Signed VOYSIN.

It cannot be expressed, with how much prudence and consideration this Arrest
or Decree was made: and yet these poor souls (being blinded) are disposed to
confirm their error thereby: and say, If Martha had the Devil in her body,
they should have sent her back into the hands of Ecclesiastical Persons to be
Exorcised: But if she had none, then should they have punished this Cousinage
publicly, and made an example of it. But yet we ought to believe that the
Bishop of Angers knew the cousinage: that the Clergy of Orleans knew it, when
they forbad to Exorcise her: that the Physicians of Paris, (some few excepted)
manifestly knew it and declared it: that my Masters of the Chastelet did wholly
discover it: that the Parliament has seen it plainly and clearly, and so
sent the miserable wench back to her Father, according to her own desire, and
promise, that they should never hear any more speech of her: Wherein the said
Court used great mercy toward her. Why it did not grievously punish this
Cousenage, it is not for us to deal or enquire any further, but to contain
our selves within our own office and vocation, viz. to fear God, to honor
the King, and to obey the Maiestrates. He that resists them, resists the
Ordinance of God. In the mean while let us praise God, and sing an hymn unto
him. For his mercy is multiplied upon us, and his truth endures forever.
Amen.

The Rule to conjure or Exorcise Demoniakes, approved by the holy See
Apostolic, drawn out of the National Synod, held at Rheines. 1583.
ANtequam ad Exorcismum Sacerdos se accing at, de Obsessi hominis vita,
condition, fama, valetudine, atque alijs circumstantijs diligenter inquirat,
and cum prudentibus quibusdam communicet. Falluntur enim aliquando nimium
creduli, and fallunt Exorcistam non raro Melancholici, Lunatici, and Magicis
artibus impediti, cum dicunt se a Daemone possideri atque ter queri, qui tamen
Medicorum Remedio potius, quam Exorcistarum Ministerio indigent.

That is to say,

Before the Priest enterprise to Exorcise, let him diligently inquire of the
life of the Possessed, of his condition, of his fame, of his health, and of
other circumstances; and let him communicate the same with some wise, prudent,
and well advised persons. For oftentimes such as are too light of belief, are
deceived: and oftentimes those that are Melancholic, Lunatike, and Bewitched
by Magical Arts, do beguile the Exorcist, when they say, that they are
possessed and vexed by the Devil, whereas for all that, they have more need
of the Physicians Remedy, then of the Exorcists Ministry. These are the
words of that Synod.

FINIS.
An extract of the Privilege.
BY the Kings Privilege, yeouen at Paris the xiij. of July, 1599. Signed by
the Counsel, Le Cointe, and sealed with yealow wax, upon a single string, it
is permitted to Mamert Patisson, Printer of our said Lord, in the University
of the said Town of Paris, to imprint, sell, and distribute, a book
entitled, A true Discourse upon the matter of Martha Brossier of Romorantin,
pretended to be possessed with a Devil: With inhibition to all other Printers
and Booksellers to imprint, or cause the same to be imprinted, without the
good liking and consent of the said Pattison, until the time and term of six
years, to begin at the date of these presents: upon pain of Confiscation of
the said Books, and an arbitrarie amercement.


