A Censure of the late translation for our Churches: sent unto a Right
Worshipful knight, Attendant upon the King.
THE late Bible, Right Worshipful, was sent me to ce^sure: which bred in me a
sadness that will greeve me while I breath. It is so ill done. Tell his May.
that I had rather be rent in pieces with wild horses, then any such
translation by my consent should be urged upon poor Churches. I will article.

I.
My advertisement they regarded not, but still make SETH a fool to name his
son sorrowful Enosh: when, as they translate, men began to call upon the
Name of God. All the ten Fathers names bear sadness that the seed of the
serpent would bring the flood. Thus Moses meant. SETH called his son
sorrowful Enosh: (because) Then sprange corruption in steed of calling upon
God with good understanding, as 1. Pet. 3. handles the cause. And the Babel
Thalmud: and Iarchj 600. years old: and 900. Arabiq Sadaias: and the late
Jews Pagnin, and Tremelius. This stubburne error deserved all punishment:
dashing all the vein of the old world.

II.
Where JESUS is called the son of God, Luke cap. 3. and Luke should show by
whom, and had nothing to do with Joseph, they in fiftene verses bring fiftene
score idle words for accomptes in the day of judgment: and bring Joseph to
be the son of all the men there: where thus Saint Luke meant: JESUS was
called of the Father My Son, being son of Joseph (as men thought) Filius
not Filij, Eli filius, to each up, filius Adam, filius Dei: so seaventie five
men are by Saint Luke above the Angels (as Jews say commonly) the Just is
above the Angels. And here we have a clear record how Christ came of David:
and Heathen for Saint Luke, and Theophilus kept no less then Jews this most
royal Genealogy. Now when ours say, seaventie five times which was the son
seaventie five times, they trifle. The relation of each is to Christ: and
seaventie five times they obscure the comfort of mankind. A Jew of Amsterdam
objected the Bishops error to deny the New Testament: that omitted how Christ
should come of David. Thereupon I cleared our Lords Family. Bancroft raved. I
gave the Anathema. Christ judged his own cause. The New edition crosses me, I
require it be burnt.

III.
It denies David ever to have been in the world, and so by a consequent
Christ him self, Act. chap. 13. verse. 20. where they say: God gave them Judges
about the space of four hundred and fifty years. It is but four hundred and
four score years from the Lamb to the Temple. Now David was not borne before
Elies death, but ten years after. About 30. of the forty years in the
Wilderness, with about four hundred and fifty years, will make four hundred
and four score years. So by our Bishops all the holy story should be a lie.
My warning was large herein. And two and twenty years ago admired by French
in London, and by them to Zurick, how by Jews I cleared the text: and by my
enemies in London, as my friends wrote upon the advertisement, to
super-admirable report: that none before me did, nor would after match my heed.
And what a prank is this: That translaters sold so mock with the King. This
means S. Luk: God gave them Judges after a forte (of Law accomptes in
troubled states) four hundredth and fifty years. King Edw. the IV. and K.
Henry the sixth did breed such years. I humbly desire the King to bid the BB.
answer to this.

IV.
I warned how Baasa K. of Israel was a warrier against Asa, being ten years
dead: and Ochozias was made two years elder then his Father, and twenty
years elder then him self. The Bb. will not take the warning. The K can judge.

V.
Jews deny the New Test for these lies, Act. 7

1.
Jacob died and our Fathers, and were carried over into Sichem. The Jews
object: If the N. Testament so speak, God never wrote it. Jacob was carried to
Hebron not to Sychem. S. Stephen and S. Luke have truth. The BB. have not.

2.
And they were put in the grave which Abraham bought. S. Stephen and S. Luke
never meant that all thirteen were put in one grave. They meant that Jacob was
buried in Hebron: and the Patriarks in Sichem: and who would think that
scholars should be ignorant of this? and that after open advertiseme^t in two
impressions? what use shall be of opening truth, if men may despise it?

3.
Abraham bought no sepulcher in Sichem. And the sepulcher there was bought for
sheep. Thrice the term Keshita is used, and still in the Chaldie and Greek
for sheep. The margent note for sheep burns the heart of the Translatours:
who bade them put the error in the text, and right in the margent?

VI.
The Angel Gabriels message to Daniel the goodliest of men, is the Lamp to
both Testamentes: But the translation now, as the former, makes it bitter: and
foolish. By it Christ was to end Moses after seauentie weeks: that is four
hundred and ninety days. The Angel spoke of years. And why should the Church
be vexed with a doubtful term? And what can this mean? He shall confirm
the covenant with many for one week. The Covenant is perpetual: not a
covenant for week. Besides, Prince there twice is Messiah: and his People were
the Jews: so the Jews should destroy their own City. and many more
unlearned speeches darken the Angel speaking of the Angel of the Covenant: who
will not bear with our sins, Exodus 23.

VII.
In Chap. 11. 38. They leave atheism in the text: blaming worship of the God
almighty: and put my translation in the margent, and would make the Angels
speech uncertain, about the name of God.

VIII.
The precious twelve stones, Exodus 28. be every one translated by the Ho.
Ghost, Apoc. 21. So that the dumb stones speak of the Bibles story. This made
a learned Rabbi affect the gospel. And I have handled all often, to approbation
of the best learned. They who can cite Rabbines variety to disturb the New
Test. and to cross opened truth, must be told they halt before a cripple. I
will suffer no scholar in the world to cross me in Ebrew and Greek, when I am
sure I have the truth. Men that meant quietness, would never have dealt thus.

IX.
The H. Ghost should not be contemned in Greek spelling of Ebrew, as in Ragau,
Luc. 3. after the 70 Genesis 11. It is barbarously perverted into Reu.

X.
Sadik and Ain in Chaldea had one form and souud, as in Daniels Chaldie: the
Ebrew S. is expressed by ain. and so Saint Peter calling Balaam the son of
Bosor, shows that he was then in Chaldea: where ain was expressed by an S. as
Thalmud Ierusalemy in Megilah and R. Azarias in a learned treatise notes. This
was a little before Saint Peter's martyrdom: and as from Babylon he wrote his
first Epistle, showing that God had his Church there, as was told Psalm. 87. So
from Babylon he wrote his second. And being a Prophet he would not go to Rome
to Saint Paul's Bishopric to be killed, where he had not taught. The Bishops had
fell the bridgemaker of Rome, by one letter Ain pronounced S in Chaldea and
Arabia only: if they had followed the Holy Ghost to call Baalam the son not
of Beor or Boor, but of Bosor: so it had appeared that he was never near Rome.
And Origin in Eusebius. the first auctor of his being there: yet tells that be
kept in Asia til a little before his death. And if Peter ever had been near
Rome, he being a Prophet, and seeing what stirs would arise, had written some
note of his being there: and of the occasions of his carriage ^ that hated City
that killed Christ, as S. Luke and Paul show Paul's occasion. but not one
syllable has he bent that way. And Balaam the son of Bosor had beaten Italy,
no less then when he says: and that people shall afflict Heber (whereof
Christ was more then all the rest together) and shall hold on to destruction.
As John most grammatically translated the Ebrew.

EPILOGE.
I blame not this that they keep the usual style of former translations in the
Church: that the people should not be emazed. For the learned the Geneva might
be made exact: for which pains whole 30. years I have been called upon, and
spent much time to my great loss by wicked hinderance. When you find the K. at
leisure show his M. this short advertisement. And if his Highness bid me again
as once by the Earl of Pembroke, show faulty places. I will in a few sheets
translate what I blame most: that they may be sent to all Churches, that have
bought Bibles. So all may be well pacified. The K. meant Royally: but froward
would be froward: who have felt it: as I was sure they should. Of late by Mr.
Pat. Balfour I heard of most Royal bent: and many of Germany write me the
same. Tell his H. it shall not be lost, by Gods help.

Your Worships in hearty reverence, H. BROVGHTON.


