WITS Theater of the little World.

Breue iter ad bonum per exempla, longum per praecepta. Printed by I. R. for N.
L. and are to be sold at the VVestdoore of Paul's. 1599.

To my most esteemed and approved loving friend, Master John Bodenham, R. A.
wishes all happiness.
SIR, for many causes best known unto your self, and ever of me to be
acknowledged, it might be thought I were no longer worthy of your love, if I
should not in some sort show my self thankeful. Besides, this history or
Theater of the little World, SVOIVRE, first challenges your friendly
patronage, by whose motion I undertook it, and for whose love I am willing to
undergo the heavy burden of censure. I must confess that it might have been
written with more maturitie, and deliberation, but in respect of my promise I
have made this have, how happy I know not, yet good enough I hope, if you
vouchsafe your kind approbation: which with your judgment I hold ominous,
and as under which, Politeuphuia was so gracious. Very fitly is man compared to
a tree, whose roots are his thoughts, whose branches and leaves his words
(which are sufficiently set forth in choicest Sentences and Similitudes) the
fruit whereof are his works, now showed in Examples. In these, as in a
glass, is to be seen the twofold course of man's life, and such presidents,
as either may be followed for virtuous, or eschevved as vicious. In many of
them, I have been brief, the better to assure and consume memory, in others,
somewhat prolixe, because I would avoid obscurity. These all, how soe^er they
want the high charactered style and smooth phrase (which is the body of
eloquence) together with my best endeavors, I offer to your love, that has
begot in me this labor, whose after studies shall be employed to nourish it,
and continue my ever thankful mind for the same, resting always

Yours most assured to command. Robert Allott.

To the Reader.
THE ancient Philosophers (courteous Reader) have written of two worlds, the
great and the lesser, the first is either universal, which Pliny and others
have described, or particular, which is divided into Heaven, called Mundus
Architypus, and Earth, which Strabo, Pomponius Mela, and Solinus, have set
forth. The little world is man, (so called of Aristotle) for whom the greater
world was made. I have therefore called these lucubrations or rather
collections, The Theater of the little world, for that in it thou may behold
the inward and outward parts of man, lively figured in his actions and
behavior. And albeit the persons I allege have given place to nature, yet the
same or the like accidents happen daily. This work gathered out of diverse
learned Authors, I may not call mine, least it be said; Tu quidem a Neuio,
vel sumplis^i multa si fateris, vel sinegas surripuisti. But howesoeuer this my
labor shall be thought perfunctory and idle; because it is but a collection o^
the flowers of antiquities and histories; ye^ does it comprehend those seven
persons which have ever been thought most worth^ subjects to be written of, as
Kings, Knights Bishops, Judges, Magistrates, Husbands i^ their houses, and
Religious men in the churches. The profit that arises by reading these
epitomized histories is, to aemulate tha^ which thou likest in others, and to
mak^ right use of their examples. If I have no^ observed the true method (which
Plato calls a fire sent from heaven) nor honoure^ neuer-dying memory as it
deserves, pardon my default, and show thy gentle acceptance (which is Genius
Librorum, the veri^ life of books) prove al, and approve the best, which done,
Tanquam Hercules in biuio, (...) sequere aut vita.

A Table of all the Authors Names contained in this Book.
A.
Augustinus Aurelius. Albumazar Agathias Appian Aelianus. Aristotle Ambrose
Apoll. Thya. Au. Gellius.
B.
Biblia. Sacra. Bernard. Bruzo Hisp. Berosus Beza Budeus Brusoninus Balaeus.
C.
Chrysostom. Cor. Tacitus Cor. Agrippa. Cicero. Cassianus Cassiodorus, Caelius
Rhod. Carrion.
D.
D. Areopagita Dion, Diodorus, Dodoneus Damascenus D. Laertius Dioschorides
E.
Eusebius Eutropius Euripides Erasmus Egesippus.
F.
Fulgosius Fulgentius Fenestella Florus Freizard.
G.
Gregory. Guido Gueuara Guichardine Grymaldus
H.
Hieronimus Hesiodus Hermes Homer Herodotus Horace Herodianus.
I.
Josephus Isocrates Justinius Iraeneus. Iambylicus Isodorus
L.
Lactantius Liuius Lipsius. Lampridius Lucianus Lucanus Luther. Leo.
M.
Macrobius. Marcianus Marsilius Massaeus Marullus Marcellius. Mirandula
Munster.
N.
Nicephorus Niphus.
O.
Orosius. Osorius Olaus Mag. Ovid. O^pheus.
P.
P. Diaconus P. Martyr. Plato. Pliny. Plutarch Phil. Lonc. Procopius
Porphyrius Polybius Polydorus Plautus. Philo Iudaeus. Patricius Pulio Pontanus
Phil. Com. Polychron. Petrarch Pacunius Pausanias
Q.
Quintilian Q. Curtius.
R.
Rauisius.
S.
(...) Sabellicus Sui^as. Soli^^s. Suetonius Seneca. Stobaeus Statius Salustius
Strabo. Sparthianus
T.
Theophrast. Thucidides Trebell. Pol. Tertullianus
V.
Vigetius Varro. Vitruuius Virgillius. Vincentius Vopiscus. Volateranus. Val.
Max. Vrbanus.
X.
Xenophon
Z.
Zosimus. Zonarus.
THE THEATER OF the little World.
Of God. GOD is called in the holy Scriptures by these names; Elohim, Elohah,
El, Eli, Elion, Jehovah, Iah, Adonai, Shaddai, Zebaoth, which signify his
name, essence, power, and omnipotency.
GOD is called Jehovah, not only because he is, has been, and shall be, but
for that in him we live, move, and have our being. August.

Jesus in the Greek tongue is called Sother, in Latin Sanator or Saluator,
and every name of these signifies in our language a Savior, likewise
Emanuell, which is to say, God with us; Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
ending.

Jesus is the proper name of Christ, and Christ his surname, Jesus the name of
his godhead and divinity, Christ the name of his office and dignity, from
which we are denominated Christians, how vainly then do the Jesuits call
themselves from his proper name?

God has created man 4. several ways; the first, without man and woman, as
Adam out of the earth; the second, of man without woman, as Euah of Adams rib,
the third, of man and woman, as we are now borne, the fourth and last, of a
virgin without man, as Christ of the virgin Mary. Bernard.

GOD within the Arc, made quiet the Lion with the Leopard, the Wolf with the
Lamb, the Bear with the Cow, the Tygar with the Crocodile, the Horse with
the Mare, the Dog with the Catte, the Fox with Hens, the Hounds with Hares,
and so of all other beasts. Aurelius.

Socrates, the schoolemaister of Plato, confessed one only God, and was
condemned to drink poison, for teaching that the heathen Gods which they
worshipped in his time, were but vanity. Aul. Gel.

When Plato wrote of any serious matter, he began his Letters in the name of
one only God, and when otherwise, in the name of many gods. Ep. ad Dyonis.

Orpheus who did write of the plurality of gods in his time to Musaeus, made
recantation, saying, There is but one God. Athenag.

Cicero alleges one sovereign god, Hermes Euripides, Sophocles, Epictetus,
Hesiodus, and Ovid, attribute the creation of the world, and all things therein
to one God.

Antisthenes was of opinion, that there were many popular gods, and but one
true and natural God, which is the Creator of al.

The Sabians worshipped God in 3. persons, naming the first Holy, the second
Fidius, the third Semi-pater, and in their oaths they did commonly put Fidius
in the midst, as under that name comprehending all the 3. persons, whereof came
their great oath, Medius Fidius.

The ancient Romans called their Jupiter Optimus maximus, to show that his
divinity is before his omnipotency.

The Persians had two gods, the one good, Creator and author of al goodness,
whom they called by the name of Truth, the other wicked, author of all evil,
resembling him to Darkness and Ignorance. Agathius.

The Tuscane wits are sharp and waspish, God keeps them under a Prince, the
Switzers be a people of a contrary disposition, peaceable and quiet, he
therefore gives them liberty, the Venetians to be of a mean betwixt both,
therefore he permits to them a mixed or mean kind of government. Lipsius.

Euclides being demanded many things touching God, answered: Other things I
know not, but of this I am assured, that he hates curious persons.

The Athenians banished Protagoras their city and Country, because in one of
his books he called in question the dietie; and caused his books to be
burned. Cicero.

Upon the image of Senacharib in Egypt was written, Learn by me to fear God.

Pherecides an Assyrian, for contemning God, and godliness, was so consumed
with lyce, that he fled for shame from the society of men, and died miserably.

Lucian, having professed Christianity under the Emperor Traian, fell away
afterward, and became so profane and impious, that he mocked at Religion
and divinity, whereupon he was surnamed Atheist, in the end he was torn in
pieces with dogs. Suidas.

The Emperor Justinian, continuing obstinate in the heresy of Pelagius, the
wrath of God fell upon him, and suddenly without any grudge or token of
sickness, he was deprived of his senses, and became a fool, he was so
strooken, that his life and folly ended in one day. P. Diaconus.

Julian the Apostate, at his death cast up his blood into the air, crying
Vicisti Galilaee.

Augustus erected an Altar in the Capitol, with this inscription, The altar of
the first begotten son of God. Niceph.

The Emperor Tiberius, upon a Letter written to him from Pontius Pilate,
reporting the miracles of Jesus and his innocent death, with his glorious
resurrection, preferred a bill to the Senate with his assent unto it, to have
them proclaim Jesus to be God, which they refused, but Tiberius abode still
in his opinion. Egesippus.

Alexander the son of Mammea, did in his chapel worship Jesus, surnamed
Christ, of whom he took his Poesy, ( Do not to another, that which thou
would not have done unto thy self.) And therefore the Antiochians called
him the Arch priest of Syria. Dion.

Certain Pagans used outrage and offered great injury to a religious man, and
in disdain asked him what profit he had by his Christ? Is not this, answered
he, a singular profit, not to be moved with your bitter words, and to pardon
the heavy wrongs you have done me? Cassianus.

The Apostles forsook all, and followed Christ, that the mother Church might
receive them naked, whom their mother flesh had brought naked into the world.
Cyprian.

The Christian soldiers under Julian the Apostate burning incense, had almost
forsaken Christ, but after, being better advised, they restored their gifts to
him which he gave them to commit idolatry, and earnestly desired, that for
their right hand which had made that fault, their whole body might suffer for
Christ. Ph. Lonicerus.

Marcellius Bishop of Rome, for ^eare of Dioclesian offered sacrifice to idols,
and Heathen gods, but afterward lamented it. Idem.

Origin constrained and drawn to the Altar by the cruel instruments of
satan, sacrificed to the gods of Alexandria, but after being desired to teach
at Jerusalem, reading the 16. verse of the 50. psalm, Unto the wicked said
God, what have thou to do, to declare mine ordinances, that thou should
take my commandment in thy mouth? he sat down and mourned.

The Valentinians did hold, that there were thirty couple of Gods, the Heathen
worshipped thirty thousand. August.

Euphemera Tegeian, wrote the true History and genealogy of the Heathen Gods,
showing that they were Kings, Princes, and great personages, and therefore he
was called Atheist. Lactan.

Varro, the best learned of all the Romans, made a bedrole of all the gods, for
fear (as he says) least they should stray away, wherein he concludes, that
those do worship the true God, which adorn the only one, and acknowledge him
to be the Governor of all the world.

The Pyrrhonists, a kind of Philosophers called Sceptikes (that is to say,
doubters) did rather suspend their judgment touching the Godhead, then call it
in question.

Of Heaven. Heaven is called of Aristotle, the most excelent book of nature,
whose longitude is between both the Poles, latitude from East to the West, and
altitude from the South to the North.
THere are in Heaven three Hierarchies, Epiphania, Epiphonomia, Euphumia.
Epiphania, contains three orders, Seraphins, Cherubins, Thrones, the first of
these excels in zealous love, the second in knowledge, the third in justice.

Epiphonomia, contains likewise three orders, Principalities, Powers,
Dominations, the first teaches men of lower estate to reverence their far
betters; the next, chase away evil spirits, comforting the^ that fight in
ghostly battle, the last inform me^ how to behave themselves in spiritual
conflicts. Isidor.

Euphumia, has also under it three lower orders, Virtues, Archangels, Angels,
Angels working miracles, showing miracles, and comforters.

Saint Denis writes of three Hierarchies, the first above heaven, of three
persons, the second in heaven, of Angels, the third under heaven, of Prelates.

The Sphere, taken generally, contains all perfect round bodies, whether
they be sollid or not; whether contained under one only Superficies or more,
and so may every Orb be called a Sphere: perticulerly taken, and in his
proper signification, nothing is a Sphere but a perfect round body being
solid, contained under one Superficies or face, in whose middle is a point,
from which all lines that are drawn to the Superficies, are equal the one to
the other.

This is divided into two parts, Elementall, which contains the four
Elements, Fire, Air, Water, Earth, which are subject to alterations;
Aethereall, that compasses the ^^ementall substance in his hollownes* being by
nature lightsome, unchangeable, and cont^ineth ten Spheres.

The first and highest, is called the first Mooueable, containing all the
other, and by his natural motion moves from the East to the West, and so to
the East again in 24. hours space, and carries by violence all the other
Spheres.

The next is the heaven Christaline, which naturally but very slowly, moves
from the East toward the west, in many years passing but one degree. This
motion has caused the stars to alter their longitudes.

The third is the Firmament of fixed stars, whose motion by nature is upon
two little Circles, the one about the head of Aries, the other of Libra, which
is called the motion of Trepidation.

The other seven Spheres are of the seven Planets, of which Saturn is the
highest, yet slowest in proper motion, cold, dry, and pale, who ends his
course in thirty years, he moves from west toward East.

Jupiter is temperate, fair and bright, moving from West to East, whose
course (...) preformed in twelve years.

Mars is hot and dry, of fiery color making his revolution from West toward
East in two years.

Sol is a King among the Plants in the mid^ of his throne, the golden eye of
heaven, lightning the universal frame with his beams making one perfect
revolution in three hundred sixty five days and six hours.

Venus is cold, moist, and clear, her cours^ is like unto Sol, never above
eight and forty degrees from him, when she shows in ou^ Horizon she is
called Lucifer, the day star and when she follows him, she is called
Hesperus, the evening star.

Mercury is never above 29. degrees from the Sun* his course is like unto the
same.

The Moon lowest of the seven, running over the whole Zodiac in 27. days
and eight hours, and somewhat more. Al these seven make their revolution
naturally from West to East, and yet by violence of the first moveable, are
carried from East to West.

The Sphere of heaven goes upon two Poles, the North and the South, which are
never seen of us.

The Center of the Sphere is the middle point of the same, and the Axe of it
is a right line, passing from one side of the same (by his Center) to the
contrary side, about which the roundnes of heaven moves, as a wheel about an
Axletree, but the line it self stand^th still.

The ends of this line Axis, are called Cardines caeli, because they move
about the hollownes of the Poles.

The Hemispheare is half the Sphere, that is the part that is seen of us,
and for default of our sight, it seems to us to touch the earth.

In the body of the highest Sphere and first Moveable, it is imagined that
there are ten Circles, the six greater are the Aequinoctial, Zodiac,
Horizon, Meridian, and two Colures, the lesser four, are the Tropicke of
Cancer, the Tropicke of Capricorn, the Articke, and Antarticke.

The Equinoctial, called the Equator, or girdle of heaven, deuideth Heaven
into two parts alike, the which be called Hemispheares, so called, either for
that it is equally in the midst of heaven, or for that the Sun coming to his
circle, makes both day and night equal.

The Zodiac is a great circle, and takes his name of the Greek word
signifying a living creature, and of the Latins Signifer, for th^^ it bears
the twelve signs.

Horizon deuideth the half of the Heaven which we see, from the half which
we (...) not, in Latin it is called Finitor, and makes principal points,
East, West, North, Sout^

The Meridian passes from the Poles of (...) world by our Vertical point,
cutting the H^^rizon in the North and South points.

Colures do declare the times called Aequ^^noctiall and Solstitiall, that is,
when the da^ and night be equal in length, also when the day and the night are
at the longest, passin^ by the sign Libra into Aries, and turn (...) to their
own point.

The Tropicke of Cancer is a circle, equall^^ distant from the Equinoctial,
lying between^ it and the North Pole, and touching the E^clipticke in the
beginning of Cancer, it is calle^ Tropicke, signifying a returning, because the
Sun being brought to this point, fallet^ in his noone height, and returns
again.

The Tropicke of Capricorn is betwixt the Equator and the South Pole, and is
described by the Sun in the shortest day of vvinter, (...) which time the sun
enters into Capricorn*

The Articke Circle is a less circle of the Sphere, described by the
Northern Pole, of the Ecliptic* Proclus says it is described by the foremost
foot of Vrsa mayor, and thereof takes his name.

The Antarticke is a like circle described by the South Pole of the Eclipticke,
and is called Antarticke of a Greek word, which signifies Opposition, because
it is opposite to the other.

The four greater circles are still the same through the whole world, and are
said to be moveable circles, for so much as in the motion of heaven, they be
also moved, of the which the Aequinoctiall and the Zodiac are moveable
perfectly: but the two Colures are imperfectly mooueable, and never show the
whole circle in any crooked Sphere.

The other 2. greater circles be called fixed, for that they never move by the
motion of heaven, but they be changeable in every region, for so much as the
Vertical of every Region is diverse, by the which the Meridian of necessity
must pass, and is the Pole also of the Horizon.

By the twelve signs the Planets that be called Sidera errantia move not, for
they err, for they have most certain moving, but they be called errantia,
because they hold their course against the course of the Firmament. Marcianus.

Caput Draconis, and Cauda Draconis, the hea^ of the Dragon, and the tail, are
two star that are of the natures of Planets; this Dra^gon kept the garden of
the Hesperides, an^ for his continual watching was placed i^ Heaven. Ovid.

Cepheus was sometimes King of Egypt, the husband of Cassiopeia, and Father of
Andr^^meda the love of Perseus, at whose birth the Gods swore that none of his
kind should taste of immortality, and therefore he (...) stellified.

Boots or the Northern VVagoner, kee^peth the two Bears, the same circle is
calle^ Ar^ophilax, and is beautified with man^ stars.

Corona, or Ariadnes crown, made of ni^^ silver stars, which was the garland
that Venus gave unto her when she became Bacchu^ love after that Theseus
forsook her. Ovid.

Hercules, after his many great labors, (...) the consent of all the Gods,
was taken v^ into Heaven.

Lyra, or the Harp of Orpheus, by vvho^^ melodious touch he drew stones,
byrds and beasts after him; after his death vva^ fained to be a sign in Heaven.

Cignus the Swanne, under whose shape Jupiter ravished Laeda, was by him made a
star.

Cassiopeia, sometimes the pride of Egypt, for brauing the Sea Nymphs Nereides
with her beauty, was changed into a star, who in the motion of the heavens
is drawn backwards.

Perseus is next her, the son of Danae, who^ Jupiter begot of her in the
shape of a golden shower, he overcame Medusa by the help of Minerua, and
rescued Andromeda, but at his return, his grandsire Acriseius meeting him,
was by Medusas head turned to a stone, which Perseus much lamenting, was by
the Gods taken up into heaven.

Auriga or the VVagoner, the Poets feign to be Hippolitus, who stying his
mother Phaedras lust, was for his chastity by the Gods made a star.

By him stands the great Jupiters Nurse, by w^om he was fostered, when he
was conveyed by his mother Ops, from Saturn, who would have devoured him.

Serpentarius the Serpent holder, having the picture of a man, is composed of
tvventi^ four stars, holding a Serpent in his hand^ and as it were striving
there-vvith, he is feigned to be Esculapius the son of Apollo, who when
Hippolitus was dead, restored him again to life, and after was called
Vi^^bius. Ovid.

The Serpent Phoebus placed by his son for that by his means he restored
^lau^^ king Minos son from death to life.

Sagitta the dart, is that strong steeled arro^ with the which Hercules killed
the Griffi^^ that tired upon Prometheus heart, when he^ was chained to the top
of Caucasus, for ste^^ling fire from heaven.

Aquila the Eagle, or the bird of Jove, wh^^ stole the fair Phrygian Ganimede,
an^ brought him to Jupiter, who served him wit^ N^^^ar and Ambrosia.

The Dolphin is that Fish which when ^^rion was cast into the sea, first
receive him kindly upon his back, and afterwar^ set him sa^e on shore in
Italy, in recom^pence whereof, the Gods placed him in the firmament.

Equiculus, the little horse of Bacchus, (...) whom he used to ride when his
idle brain^ was ouerburdened with too much vvin^ after whose death, his
master desired the Gods that he might in requital of his seruic^ be made a
star.

Pegasus, the flying horse, engendered by the sun, of Medusas blood, could be
managed by (...), until Bellerophon undertook him, who ^^ding up into the
skies, fell down from him (...) to the Seas, but the horse kept his way still
(...) heaven, where he rests.

Andromeda the wife of Perseus, (at whose ^^rth the Gods promised her
immortality,) ^^ter her death had her place amongst the ^^arres.

The Triangle signifies the three squared form of the thrice happy land of
Cicilia, the Country of Ceres, which she desired the Gods to be placed in
heaven, for the love she ^^re to the Land.

All these stars above mentioned, have their residence in the Arcticke clymes,
keeping their continual motion with the Spheres.

Aries is the golden Ram, that carried Phryxus and his sister over Hellespont
from their cruel mother.

Taurus the Bull that Jupiter transformed him into, when he stole Europa the
daughter of Agenor.

Within his form are the seven stars: once Atlas daughters called
Atlantides, of ^^e which Electra the fairest, the same night that Troy was
burned, pulled in her head, and would not see the flames, since which ^^me,
there be but six of them seen, who are also named, Hyades, and Plyades.

Gemini, Castor, and Pollux, were begot (...) Jupiter one Leda, when he
transformed him^selfe into a Swan.

Cancer the Crab, when Hercules was figh^ting with Hydra, bit him by the heel,
who^ he espying killed, but Juno for that she se^^ her, made her a sign in
heaven.

Leo was the Nemean Lion, whom Hercul^^ slew, and Jove placed in heaven to
grace hi^ Son.

Virgo the Poets feign to be Justice, vvh^^ forsaking earth flew to heaven,
enforced b^ the wickedness of men.

Libra are the balance of Justice, wheret^ she wayed the unequal actions of
men's dis^ordered lyfes.

Scorpio was made a sign for killing Ori^^ with his sting, who proudly
boasted, that the earth bred no monster, but he could subdue

Sagitarius is Crocus, the son of Euth^^mia, that nursed the Muses, who
sucked tha^ milk the Muses left, whom at their reque^^ Jupiter made a sign.

Capricornus was the disguised shape of Pa^ the God of sheepheards, half fish
and half Goat, when the Giant Typhon warred a^gainst the Gods, which when the
wars were ended, Jupiter placed among the stars.

Aquarius is Ganymedes of Troy, whom Jupiter caused his Eagle to fetch to be
his ^^ge.

Pisces are those fishes, that when Venus and Cupid sporting themselves by
Euphra^es, were compassed by the great Giant Tiphon, for fear of him took the
River, and were sustained by them whom she changed to stars.

These stars following, are of the Southern climate.

The VVhale is placed next to the signs, which should have devoured Andromeda.

Orion was the son of Hyreus, who entertained Jupiter, Neptune, and Mercury,
as they travailed, who desired of them a Son, who after his death was thus
metamorphized.

Eridanus or Padus, the River wherein Phaethon was drowned, which for quenching
of that flame, is among the stars.

The Hare is at his feet with two fierce dogs pursuing it, this fearful
beast Phaethon delighted in, when he lived.

Iasons ship in the which he brought to Colchos, the golden fleece was
placed next to Orion.

The Crow was so changed by Apollo, and the Cup likewise, with Hydra the
Serpen^ told him, kept him from the well, whethe^ he was sent with the Cup for
water.

Centaurus called Chiron the Schoolemaiste^ of Esculapius, Achilles, and
Hercules, was b^ the Gods stellified.

The Wolf was placed next to him, an^ an Altar, holding the Sacrifice in his
hand^ ready to offer, signifying his devotion.

The wheel whereon Ixion was tortured for offering dalliance to Juno.

The Southern fish is called Venus daugh^ter, so transformed in the Sea.

Of Religion. From the beginning of the creation of the world, Abell and Cain
did religiously sacrifice^ God, but Enoch was the first that set downs what
manner he should be called upon.
THE ancient Romans through the in^stinct of nature only, did so reuerenth
think of Religion, that they sent their chi^^dren, and the most noble men of
Rome the^ Sons into Hetruria, to learn the mann^^ of serving God. Liuius.

They had never any greater means to extend the borders of their Empire, and
the glory of their famous Acts over all the earth, then Religion. Polybius.

Among the Athenians no King was created, before he had taken orders, and was
a Priest, they killed all those that envied their religion.

Their chiefest oath was this, In defending religion, both alone and with
others will I fight against my foes. Demosth.

The Aegiptians of Philosophers chose their Priests, and of Priests their Kings.

The Lacedaemonians when they laid hands upon those that fled to the temple of
Neptune for succor, Sparta was so shaken with earthquakes, that few of their
houses escaped. Not. Comes.

The Phocians were condemned in a great sum of money, by the Amphyctiones,
because they had tilled ground, which was consecrated to the Gods, which sum,
when they refused to pay, they pronounced their Country, as confiscate to the
Gods, whereupon arose a war, called the holy war, made by the rest of the
Grecians against the^, which in the end was their ruin. Diodorus.

Epicurus first began to rise, against the religion of God. Lucretius.

The Germans in the time of Tacitus, (...) neither law nor religion, nor
knowledge nor form of common wealth, whereas no^ they give place to no nation
for good in^struction in all things.

The Chananites were the first that vve^^ ignorant of the true worshipping of
God because their first Author and original Cham was cursed of his Father
Noah. La^^tantius.

The Hebrews worshipped the true Go^ at the first, but when they increased in
number, as the sands of the Sea, they went into diverse Countries, and left
there true religion, fayning new Gods and ceremonies* after their own
inventions. Idem.

The Romans allowed the service of (...) Gods, and to that end builded a
temple to them all, called Pantheon, yet would they never receive the true
God, to wit, Jehovah the Lord GOD of the Hebrews. Eusebius.

Ecebolius in Constantines time a Christian, in Iulianus a Gentile, lay along
in the Church Porch, crying, tread me under foot, for that I am unsavory salt.
Idem.

Vitalis a Soldier, when Vrsicinus a Physician endured martyrdom for
religion, seeing his courage to fail, boldly spoke to him, ^oe not Vrsicinus
now cast away thy self, that have cured so many, nor after so much blood of
thine spilled, loose the merit which is prepared for thee. Antonius.

The unchristianlike behavior of Christians, have caused the Turks even to
detest the true religion.

The cruelty, blasphemy, and covetousness of the Spaniards, have altogether
alienated the poor Indians from the religion, which they gave out to be true.
Beuzo.

The Princes of Italy support the Jews, rank enemies to religion.

Constantine was the first of the Roman Emperors, that forsaking errors and
heresies, confessed and adored the majesty of the true God. Lactantius.

Iouianus refused to govern those that were not sound in faith; I (says he)
that am a Christian, cannot become your Emperor, that are the Disciples of
Julian a runnagate from Christ. Eusebius.

The liberality of Princes, and especially of Matilda a Duchess of Italy, who
at her death made the Pope her heir, begot ambition in the Bishops of Rome,
and ambition destroyed religion. Aeneas Syluius.

Gratianus at his first entering, finding a places full of Arrians, and the
laws of Valen^^ his Uncle making for them, fearing some general tumult, if he
should presently distress^ so many, gave leave that every religion might have
churches and Oratories with free^dome, but being once joined with Theodotius,
he commanded that all their heresie^ should be depressed; He sent the
confession of his faith to Saint Ambrose. Eutropius.

Lycurgus reformed the estate of the Lacedaemonians, Numa Pompilius of the
Romans, Solon of the Athenians, and Deucalion of all the Grecians, generally
by making them devout and affectionate toward the Gods in prayers, oaths,
oracles, and prophecies, through the means of fear, and hope of the divine
nature, which they imprinted in them.

Alexander after he had sacked Tyrus, marched toward Jerusalem, to destroy
it, because the Jews refused to aid him with victuals and munition, but when
he saw the high Priest coming toward him attired in his holy garments, he so
reverenced him, that he not only spared the City, but also gave gifts to the
temple. Josephus.

Cains a Roman Emperor sent Petronius (...) Syria with commandment, to bid
bat^^^e to the Jews; If they would not receive (...) Image into their temple,
which they (...) to do saying: They had rather dye then (...) from the laws
of God. Idem.

The King of Calecut is chief of his religion and for this cause goes before
the other Ki^gs of India in dignity, and is called Samory, that is to say, God
on earth.

Canutus not full 32, years before the con^^^st, apparently proves, that
Princes kept their authority to command, for matters of re^igion, more then
1000. years after Christ.

Charles the great, to Christian religion at ^ononie, Padua in Italy, and Paris
in France erected Academies.

Xerxes through counsel of his Magi, commanded all the temples and churches
^hroughout Greece to be burned, saying, ^ha^ it was wicked and impious, that
Gods should (...) but up in Churches. Cor. Agrippa.

In old time the Persians had no temples at (...). Pausanias.

Theodectes a Poet, mingled his Tragedies (...) holy Scriptures, and therefore
was struc^en with blindness, until he had recanted his ^^piety. Josephus.

A Jew often baptized for money sake, came to Paulus the Nouatian Bishop to
that end, but the water twice vanishing out of the Fount, he said, O man,
either thou dissemblest egregiously, or else thou art baptized unwillingly.
Eusebius.

Of Prayers and Thanksgiving. The Maker and Redeemer of the world, di^ use
great measure in all things, except in praying, wherein he was always long,
which he showed most clearly in Gethsemany, where ho^ much the more the agony
did oppress him, (...) much the more did he enlarge his prayers.
THE Hebrews called the 100. and 1^ Psalm, and the next six following the
great Alleluya, which the Apostles said for grace at Easter and Pentecost.

The first earthly man of the Hebrews, (...) called Adam, as homo tanquam ex
humo, the other heavenly of the Chaldeans, Enoch which signifies true man, or
that man which has undertaken, and hops to call upon God. Ambrosius.

Iacobus minor, the son of Joseph brothe^ of Christ, was so like him, that in
the betray^ng, for fear they should mistake, Judas ^aue him a kiss; his knees
with continual ^rayer, became as hard as a Cammels hoof.

Bartholomew the Apostle, by his prayers, ^estored the destracted daughter of
Polemi^s King of India, to her former senses. Ma^ullus.

Arcadius was called of Chrysostom, the ^ost Christian and godly Prince, who a
little before his death wone estimation of holiness, ^ot without the admiration
of a great multi^ude, saved from destruction by his prayers. Theodorus. P.
Diaconus.

God gave Narsetes victory, more through ^he zealous prayers that he used, then
his ^orce and valor; he never went to Sea, nor ^egan any battle, nor
determined of war, ^or mounted on horseback, but first he went ^o the temple
and served God. Blondus.

The Emperor Heraclius, after his wars ^ere ended, entered Constantinople,
sitting ^n a Chariot without ornaments, and openly ^aue thanks to the Son of
God for his ^reat victories. Orosius.

Tiberius that virtuous Emperor, being ^riuen to a blessed necessity, as he
walked in ^he midst of his Palace, he saw at his feet a ^arble stone, which
was in form of the cross; and because he thought it religious to spurn it
with his feet, he caused it to be taken up, and under that found another, and
so a third of the same form, which when that was taken up, there was found two
millions of Ducats, for the which he thanked God.

Marcus Aurelius having felt the help of Christian prayers, ceased his
persecution. Eusebius.

Prayers are of the Poets feigned, to be the daughters of Jupiter, because Kings
and great men have a number of followers and suitors. Orpheus.

Apollo being prayed unto to sing an Him^^ to the great GOD, began with this
verse, Which made the first man and called him Adam. Justinius Martyr.

The lessons of Pythagoras, Plato, and their Disciples, began and ended with
prayers.

The Brachmans among the Indians, and the Magi among the Persians, never began
any thing without praying unto God.

Cleanthes in his Iambicke verses, praye^ God to vouchsafe to guide him by his
cause, which guides all things in order, the which cause he calls destiny,
and the cause of causes. Simplicius.

Pray said Nestor to his children, for unless God help us, we shall all
perish. Homer.

The Romans after many great victories, ^etermined to make a very rich crown
of ^old, and offer it to Apollo, but the common ^reasure being poor, the
women defaced their Owches and Jewels to make it with all, ^or which, they had
granted three things to ^eare on their heads, garlands of flowers, to go in
chariots, and openly to the feasts of ^he Gods.

Theseus asked of the Gods three things, good fortune, want of inward sorrow,
and such glory as was neither false, counterfaite, nor ^ained: of three other
boones which he prayed of Neptune, the third was, in his fury cur^ing his son
Hyppolitus, and wishing his violent death, which after it was granted, he
repented him. Cicero.

Demonides having crooked feet, lost both of his shoes, whereupon he desired
God that his shoone might serve his feet that had ^ound them.

When Alcibiades was condemned by the Athenians, they commanded the religious
people of either sex to curse him, which one of them refused to do, saying,
that they had entered religion not to make unjust, but just prayers. Thucydides.

Sylla, Tiberius, Caligula, and Nero, neue^ could but command and kill, on the
other side, Augustus, Titus, and Traianus, could not but pray and pardon, in
such manner that they overcame praying, as the other fighting.

The Lacedaemonians custom was, not to crave any thing of their Gods, but what
was of importance and consequence, saying tha^ all small matters were to be
obtained by man^ industry.

Pliny in an oration he made in the praise of Traiane, commended the custom
of the Auntients, to make invocation before the beginning of their work, and
said, that there could be no assured nor wise beginning of any enterprise,
without the especial aid and counsel of God.

In Athence was a temple dedicated to Mercy, which the Athenians kept so well
watched and locked, that without leave and license of the Senate, none might
enter therein; in this temple were only the Images of pitiful men, and none
entered there to pray and do sacrifice, but those that were pitiful
Macrobius.

Isocrates prayed God to save and keep him from his friends, rather then his
enemies, saying, of his enemies he could be wary, because I trust them not, so
can I not of my ^^iends, because I have assured confidence (...) them.

Octauius prayed GOD that it might be ^yde, that by him the common wealth of
^ome was preserved from all danger, and at ^is death to carry with him that
hope, that (...) might remain many ages in that estate ^e left it. Suetonius.

A poor man craved an alms of the Em^erour Maximilian, and told him, that
they ^ame both of one Father, to wit, Adam, and ^o consequently were brethren,
desiring bro^herly to deal with him: to whom the Em^erour gave a small piece
of silver, whereat ^hen he saw the poor man discontented, he told him, that he
ought to take it in good worth, saying that if every one of his bre^hren would
give him as much, he should ^uickly be richer then himself.

Anthony distressed by the King of Par^^ia, held up his hands to heaven,
saying, if a^y disdain of GOD remained of his for^er fortunes, he desired it
might fall upon ^im, so the Roman army might be freed, and have the victory.
Appian.

Virginia the daughter of Virginius, for that her Father was a Plebeian, was
forbidden to do sacrifice with other Roman matrone in the temple of
Chastity, wherefore she mad^ a temple of her own house to the Goddess* for
which, the Senate made her a Patritia^ Liuius.

Claudius defiled the fair matrone Obe^^na, as he found her praying in the
temple (...) Minerua, who condemned for sacrilege, escaped punishment by
bribes.

Brutus not satisfied in killing Caesar, mad^ his prayers unto Jupiter, and the
host (...) heaven, to plague Caesar and his posterity.

When the Cretans were ungently entreated of the Romans, they did not pray
(...) their Gods to send them pestilence, war and famine, or sedition, but
that they would suffer new customs, manners, and fashion to be brought amongst
them.

The prayer of old Cato, was that the cou^^ of pleas might be set with linnes
and (...), to take the professors of the braw^^^ study of law. Plutarch.

Alexander caused his Horse Bucephalus be buried; Augustus his Parrot; and
Heliogabalus his Sparrow* at whose obsequie^ he prayed and caused the body to
be embalmed.

Of Virtue. The Hebrews, by reason of the ten Com^aundements, boasted that
they had the cheifest ^od, and the sum of all Virtue.
MArcus Marcellus building a Temple which he called the Temple of Honor, (...)
so place and situate the same, as none could ^aue any entrance therein, except
he came ^^rough the Temple of Virtue. Liuius.

The Romans did not only assign the ^hiefest places to men of virtue, but
likewise ^ubliquely they gave them Spears, Horse-^appings, and Garlands.
Tacitus.

When the Roman Victors rode in try^mph, a slave sat behind them striking
them (...) upon the neck, that they should re^ember themselves and not be
proud, and that every man should hope by virtue to ^ome to the like dignity.
Plutarch.

Fabius for his virtues was surnamed Maxi^^us, where before he was called
Gurges.

Alexanders virtues purchased him the sir^ame of great. Plut.

It is recorded of Fabius, that it was as hard ^o draw him from his honesty
and virtues, as the sun from his course. Eutropius.

Camillus, for a disgrace happening to him in Rome, was banished into Campania
where his virtues and service in the wars o^ that country succeeded so happily
with him* that he returned to Rome not as an offender, but in great triumph.

No Athenian excelled Alcibiades, eythe^ for virtue or vice. Justinius.

Socrates made him to weep, for that he showed him by lively reasons that he
was (...) less estimation then a base hind if he ha^ not virtue, and that
it behooued him to b^ sorrowful.

The Rhodians and the Lydians had a law that those sons which followed not
they fathers in their virtues, but lived viciously should be disinherited, and
their lands give to the most virtuous of that race, not admitting any impious
heir vvhat-soeuer* Varro.

For that Artaxerxes Mnemon was a virtuous Prince and delighted in peace, the
succeeding kings of Persia were called by his name*

Basilius, Emperor of Constantinople, a^ his death exhorted Leo his son to
virtuous actions, and not to become slave to hy^ own affections; by good life
and study o^ ^odlines to beautify his soul, showing him^^lfe the image and
Lieuetenant of the Knig (...) heaven. Theophrastus.

Demetrius, the scholar of Theophrastus, (...) he had ten years governed the
state of ^hence, having in memory of his virtues, ^^ree hundred and threescore
statues erected (...) Greece, yet were they all through envy ^oken down,
which when he heard of, he (...), Though they burn my pictures, yet cannot
^^ey burn the virtuous cause of them. Theoprastus.

Alexander willed that the Grecians and Barbarians should no more be
disguised by ^^eyr garments, but that the Grecian should be known by virtue,
and the Barbarian by (...); accounting all virtuous men Greci^ns, and all
vicious Barbarians. Quint. Cur^^us.

Menander King of the Bactrians, was so ^ell beloved of his subjects for his
virtues, (...) after his death the principal cities con^^ded which of them
should have the ho^or of his burial; for the appeasing of which ^ife, it was
concluded that each of them (...) remembrance of his worthynes) should ^ake a
tomb.

Harmocrates the last Tyrant in Sicilia, at the very instant of his death
exhorted his son to live so uprightly, that his virtues might make him to be
envied.

Alexander praised greatly this virtue in the Philosopher Calisthenes, that for
others he asked many things, and for himself nothing. Plutarch.

Into the grave Senate of Areopage, no^e were received, except they had made
some notable proof of their virtues. Sabellicus.

A rare example of a Romans virtue was i^ Mes^ala, who having Claudius in his
custody, who before had proscribed him, restored him to his estate, and
preserved him fr^^ danger. Appianus.

Juno through her riches, Mercury through his eloquence, Venus through her
beauty M^^s through his threats, and the rest of the Gods having all conspired
against Jupiter, (...) were not able to pull him out of heaven: (...) which the
Poets signified, that a vertuou^ man can by no means be turned aside from
justice.

Plato wrote 54. Books or Dialogues which did all intr^ate of virtue; in which
that he might not be thought ungrateful toward his Master Socrates, who would
never write any thing, he brings him in re^hearsing that which he heard him
speak.

Anacharsis led with the only love of ver^ue, left the kingdom of Scythia to
his youn^er brother, and travailed into Grecia, where ^e learned philosophy of
Solon.

Pelopidas, general of the Thebans, is more ^raised for his notable virtue he
shevved, ^hen he was prisoner in the hands of Alex^nder the tyrannous K. of the
Phereans, the^ ^or all his virtues gotten before. Thucid.

The Emperor Rodolphus, otherwise of ^afe parentage, by his virtues mounted
to (...) Monarchy.

Maximilian the Emperor, answered one that desired his Letters patents to
ennoble ^im, I am able to make thee rich, but virtue on^^ must make thee noble.

Alexander Seuerus never kept in his court (...) ill disposed persons, or
suffered any ^^ough never so near to him in blood, once ^ound faulty, to
escape unpunished. Lactan.

Marius esteemed it a great point of virtue and high courage, to be skilful in
cosenage. Plutarch.

Two of the most famous Cities in the ^orld were in two extremeties, Rome the
^ead of vice, and Alexandria the end of all ^ertues. Aurelius.

Of Justice. Between the two zodiacall signs, Leo and Libra, is a virgin
called Astraea or Justice, the which in times past dwelled upon the earth, an^
being abused and neglected of mortal men, (...) took ber flight to heaven.
THe Egyptians who were the auncien^ Lawmakers, in their Cities caused Iu^ges
to be painted without hands, and the President or chief Justice, with his
eye^ blindfolded, thereby signifying, that Iustic^ ought neither to be briber,
nor respecter o^ persons. Pausanius.

Beza faineth Justice and Mercy to be two Sisters standing by the throne of
God.

When the Hebrews asked a King of Samuel, they added this, to judge al
nations.

The Areopagites judged by night, and i^ the dark. Quintil.

Aristides, for his impartial dealing in (...) matters, was surnamed the Just.

Mycerinus the son of Cleops, surpassed (...) the Kings of Egypt for true
justice. Herod^t.

Iunius Brutus, a consul of Rome, condemned his two sons Titus and Tiberius
to be^^eheaded, for that they conspired the reentre ^f Tarquinius race into
Rome. Liuius.

Philip and Alexander his son, when any ^ame to complain, stopped one of
their ^ares, which they reserved for the defen^ant. Plutarch.

No man durst ever solicit Cato Censorius (...) any dishonest cause. Cicero.

The Emperor Julian, though otherwise a ^yrant, condemned no man before his
cause ^as heard. Eusebius.

Cambises commanded Sisamnes skin ^or his injustice to be ^lead of, and
covering ^he judgment seat therewith, appointed ^is son to judge in his
place. Herodotus.

Seleucus, Governor of ^ocris, his son ^eeing taken in adultery, whose
punishment ^as loss of both his eyes, to satisfy justice, and in some sort
the people, who entreated ^im to remit the punishment, caused one of ^is
sons, and another of his own to be ^ulled out. Valerius.

A boy was condemned at Athence for that ^e used to catch young Quails and to
pull ^ut their eyes* and so to let them fly again, ^im the Areopagites
thought not worthy ^o live, fearing that if he were remitted for ^hys
offense, he would not stick in time to attempt greater cruelties. Quintil.

Phocion refused to help his son in law Charillus in judgment, being
accused for bribery, saying withal, that he had made him his allie in all just
and reasonable matters only.

Philip was importuned by an old woman to hear her cause, to whom when the
King made answer that he had no leisure, she replied, then be no King; which
he well regarding, set all business aside to hear her complaint. Valerius.

This King being once overtaken vvit^ sleep, and not well hearing the
justification and defense of Machetas, he condemned him in a certain sum,
whereupon Macheta^ cried out, I appeal to Philip when he is th^rowly awake:
which when he heard again he aquited him.

Philip the first King of Macedon, vva^ slain by Pausanias a mean gentleman,
because he would not let him have justice against Antipater.

When Aristides was to determine a controversy between two, one of them
said, My adversary Aristides has done the wrong. But he answered; My
friend, declare only wherein he has wronged thee for I am here to do thee
right, and not my ^^lfe. Laertius.

Antonius Venereus, Duke of Venice, cau^^d his son to die in prison because
he had ^^uished a maid.

Papinian a Pagan, although he was com^aunded by the Emperor Caracalla (whose
^eward and familiar he was) to defend an ^niust cause, would not do it.
Marsilius.

Cleon of Lacedemon, minding to deal in ^ublique affairs, called all his
friends together, and told them that he renounced and ^ischarged himself of
all friendship, because (...) caused men sometimes to swerve from iu^tice. Plut.

Aurelianus the Emperor, was so fearful of placing an unworthy man in the
seat of judgment, that he never preferred any to the dignity of Senator, but
with the consent of the whole Senate. Pau. Diaconus.

Traianus allighted from his horse as he was going to wars, only to do
justice to a poor woman. Eutropius.

Mardus sat in judgment upon his Son Cartanes, and would have put him to
death, but Artaxerxes seeing his justice, pardoned his son. Aelianus.

Agesilaus requested by his Father to give sentence against equity, graciously
denied him with this answer; You have taught me^ o Father, from my youth to
obey the laws, (...) therefore I will now obey you therein, by judging nothing
against the laws.

At Athence, if any man committed wilful murder, judgment was prosecuted in a
place called Martius Pagus, it against his will, the sessions was kept in
Palladum, if the murderer were apprehended, and the deed doo^^ chance medly,
in Delphico.

Domitius always punished the poor, and those that were of no power, but the
rich and mighty he pardoned. Suetonius.

Demetrius the besieger, having receiue^ many requests and supplications of his
subjects, threw them all into the water as he^ went over the bridge, whereupon
his subjects conceived such hatred against him, that (...) Army forsook him
and yielded to Pyrrhus* who drove him out of his kingdom. Diodorus.

The Roman Censors, disfranchised a citizen of Rome, because he breathed and
yawned a little too loud in their presence. Vale^ius.

Augustus Caesar, being desired by Tacitus to come to his house, to judge of
an offense which one of his sons had committed, did (...) Tacitus requested,
but first he commaun^^d that every one should first set down his ^inde in
writing, and then he gave his cen^re, fearing that if he had spoken first, they
^ould all have said as he said. Seneca.

Ferdinando the fourth, adiudging two ^ights to death more through anger then
^^stice, one of them cried aloude, saying: O ^niust King, we cite thee to
appear within 30. ^^yes before the tribunal seat of Jesus Christ, (...)
receive judgment for thine injustice, upon (...) last of which days he dyed.
Paulus Di^conus.

The name of law was unknown among the Greeks in the time of Homer. Josephus.

Minos, Zoroastres, Trismegistus, Caron^as, Lycurgus, Solon, Draco, Numa, and
other law-giuers, have ever fathered their ^awes upon some God, the better to
have them in authority, nature teaching the^, that ^t appertained unto God
alone, and that otherwise the laws would not be observed.

The Princes of Persia and Media, gave cou^^el to Darius, that he should
never change any law after it was once made.

Diodorus writ of certain people, among who^ no man ought to speak of the
change of a law, except he wore a halter, with which he was hanged if his
opinion too^ not place.

The Citizens of Marseills, were much renowned for that they remained constant
(...) their laws and customs without changing*

Lycurgus, after he had brought the Lacedaemonians to receive his laws, he
ma^^ them all swear that they would alter no (...) of them during his absence,
and after that,(...) never returned into his country again.

Orpheus was cut in pieces by the women of Thrace, because he had changed the
laws.

The Emperor Galba was greatly praise because he would neither change
auncie^^ law, nor create new.

Plutarch exhorted Traiane to take mo^^ care in seeing his ancient laws well
preserved then in making new, and above (...) things, that his life should
serve for a law.

Solon requested that his laws might (...) preserved for an hundred years
space, to the end that they might never be changed.

In Greece were certain Officers called Nom^thetes, who took great regard
that no man should derogate from any good laws.

The Almaines were praised for changing their customs, which were found to be
but (...) before. Tacitus.

When Varus was vanquished in Germa^^e, they put out the eyes of all the
Lawyers ^^ich they could find, and from some they ^^lled out their tongues
also. Florus.

Galeaze Duke of Millan, caused a Lavv^er to be hanged for delaying of a suit
a^^inst a manifest and clear debt.

Ferdinando the Emperor, sending a vice^^^ into the Indies which had been
newly ^^scouered, forbad him to carry over any ^awes with him, to the end he
should not ^^we there the seed of suits.

Frenchmen in matters of trial and law, ^oe so simply behave themselves,
that they ^^icke to their first judgment, and never appeal further. P.
Aemilius.

Horace makes mention of a statue of Mar^^a, which none durst behold that
undertook not a just cause.

Astraea which maintained good laws, and ^y the equity of them gave quiet and
con^entment to every one, is now flowen to ^eauen, impatient of such
iniquities. Ovid.

There was an ancient law in Rome, that no Bakers, Bruers, Butchers, or such
like me^hanicall trades might be Senators.

M. Caelius was said to have a good right hand, but an evil left, because he
could plea^^ better against a man then for him. Plut.

The Romans and the Lacedaemonians ha^ a law, that no man should sup when he
list nor with what he list.

It was also a law among the Lacedaemonians, that he which had delivered three
sor^ to the common wealth, should be priuiledge^ from watching, both by day and
night; he^ which delivered five, should not be burdened with any public
office, so highly esteemed they procreation of children.

It was not lawful for the Spartans to take from their enemies any thing, no
not so much as the booty or spoil in war. Aelianus.

Vlpitian the Lawyer, wrote the manne^ how the Emperors should torment and
punish the Christians. Lactant.

Dracones laws were written with blood, and not incke. Demost.

Draco set down equal punishment for (...) manner of offen^es, being the
first Athenian Lawgiver, whose decrees Solon abolished, save only those which
were against murder.

Aristotle makes mention of a Country, where the inhabitants were to assure
the safety of the wares, and to repay unto passengers that loss which they
had sustained (...) thieves and robbers. Aristo. de repub.

^anlius Torquatus, caused his sons head be cut off, because he fought
against his (...) body to body, contrary to the Edicts (...) out of his rank,
although he came away ^ith victory. Liuius.

Vectius was presently slain, because he^ (...) not when the Trybune of the
people ^^ssed before him. Plut.

Fabius Maximus his son (being one of (...) Magistrates of Rome) seeing his
Father ^arre of coming toward him on horse^^^ke, and that the Sergiants in
regard of ^^therly reverence, had not caused him to ^^ght, commanded him to
set foot on the ^^ound, which the Father presently obeyed, (...) embraced his
son, making more ac^^unt of him then if he had done otherwise. ^lutarch.

Of Prudence. The Poets, to declare the excellency of this ^ertue, feign
Wisdom to be a woman, and (...) be borne of no mortal creature, but of
Iupi^^r himself; who^ Painters so set forth, that on that side soever any one
beholding it did stand, either before her, or behind her, he had a (...)
sight of her.
GOD enabled Solomon to dispute of (...) herbs and plants, even from the
Cedars in Libanus, to the Pellitorie root (...) grows out of the wall.

The Oracle of Apollo pronounced th^^ the Chaldeans and the Hebrews only
(...) wisdom parted between them.

The Grecians boast, that all the wise me^ were of Greece. Pausanius.

Socrates being (according to the iudg^^ment of the Physiognomers) given to
(...) wickedness, by the study of wisdom refo^med himself, and became a good
examp^^ of a godly man. Plato.

The wisdom of Fabius and Marcellus (...) so admired and honored of the
Romans, th^^ the one was called the Buckler, the other (...) Sword of the
Roman Empire. Plut.

Among the Romans was a College of (...) men, called Augures, by whose
authority, (...) state was sometimes governed. Varro.

Homer in the whole discourse of his (...), where Minerua always accompanie^
V^^ses, gives us to understand, that Pr^dence ought always to guide a man to
a^^^^ine to the end of his enterprise.

Men praised the prudence of Fabius, be^^use he broke the point of fortune, and
hin^red the advancement of Hanibal by cunc^^ion, temporising, and attending his
aduan^^ge, which is a virtue named long suffe^^nce. Cicero.

Caesar the first Roman Emperor, by his ^^udence, prepared his way to so
great a ^onarchy, by reconciling together Pompey (...) Cassius, two of the
greatest Roman (...), by whose favor he obtained after^^rds, the dignity of
consulship. Plut.

^olon, with the divine knowledge of wise^^m, governed the Athenians, Lycurgus
the ^^cedemonians, and Parmenides the Eleati. ^ycis the Pythagorian, invented
laws for ^aminondas, Plato for Dion, Aristotle for ^^exander, Anaxagoras for
Pericles, Pytha^^ras for the Princes of Italy, and Agrippa (...) the Emperor
Octauius.

^ntisthenes bad many guests to the ban^^et of wisdom, and none would come,
(...) Diogenes, vvhere-vpon, being angry ^t none would taste of his learned
cheer, (...) excluded Diogenes, who the more he (...) forbidden, the more he
came, in the end ^^tisthenes beat him, thereby to drive him from his company,
which he constantly (...) during, Antisthenes entertained him for (...) prudent
perseverance. Laertius.

M. Cato, when he saw that Pompey h^ joined himself with Caesar, told him that
did put Caesar's yoke upon his neck, wh^^ then he perceived not, but shortly
it wou^^ weigh heavy upon him, and then should (...) find himself taken.

Themistocles, at what time he was (...) Athence, and enforced to go into
(...), being entreated of the King to show (...) estate of his Country, he
wisely besought (...) one year, to learn the Persian languag^ and then he
would tell him. Valerius.

Pe^ilius enjoined upon pain of death, his Sovereign, to make an Ass to
spea^ knowing it a matter impossible, demaun^ seven years space, hoping in
that time, (...) either the King, he, or the Ass would die.

Simonides being at a banquet with Pau^nias, he took occasion to desire him to
(...) some precepts of wisdom, at which (...) laughed, and said, Remember
thou art a (...) which then he not regarded, but afterwa^^ in his misery, with
great sorrow remembre^ Theophrastus.

Cato, for the love that he bear unto wi^^dome, entertained Athenodorus,
Ulysses, as ^omer says, embraced Carylus, Pyrrhus e^^eemed Artemius, Traian
desired Plutarch and Scipio Panetius, who was learned, in all ^rts both good
and evil. Plut.

Euclides of Megara, desirous to hear the ^isedome of Socrates, who read
Philosophy (...) Athence, between which two Cities, ^^ere was mortal
emnity, so that no Citti^^n of the one durst be seen in the other, without
great danger disguised himself like woman, and so heard Socrates.

Agesilaus sustaining great losses by Epami^^ndas, commanded his Soldiers to
^ake head against him only, because that ^ne but wise and prudent men knew how
(...) conquer. Thucidides.

^he Athenians being divided and banded ^o three contrary parts and factions,
Solon ^ould not join himself with any one of ^^em, but kept him indifferent
to all, seeking (...) all means to reconcile them together, in (...) end being
chosen their pacifier, he refor^ed their estate, and placed them in greater
(...) then before.

^hales, although numbered among the sea^^n wisemen of Greece, refused to
interme^^ in common wealth matters.

Demades, a man very pollitique, and prac^tised in state, being asked what
Tutor he ha^ to instruct him in wisdom, answered, the tr^^bunall of the
Athenians, meaning the Cou^^ and experience to excel all the precepts (...)
Philosophy. Valerius.

Antonius the meek, was a virtuous (...) Emperor, and so well advised in all
his do^ings, that he never repented him of an^ thing he did. Eutropius.

Romulus, the first King, and founder of the City of Rome, chose 100. of the
eldest and (...) in the same Country, by whose wisdom he willed it should be
governed. Patritius.

Julius Caesar gloried in his good fortune but yet the bringing of his great
enterpri^^ to pass, was by his wisdom and experien^^ in warlike affairs.
Suetonius.

The Lacedaemonians made more acco^^ of an exployt done by policy, then by ar^
whose Captains when they had by the^^ pollitique stratagems overcome any,
sacri^^^ced to their Gods an Ox, if by force Cock. Thucidides.

Alexander about to destroy the City (...) Lampsacus, Anaxemines his master
came to^wards him, intending to desire him to (...) it, but the king imagining
wherefore he cam^ (...) swear that he would not grant that which Anaximines
should request, who desi^^d Alexander to destroy Lampsacus, which ^^quest by
his oath he could not grant, and (...) by this policy he saved his City.
Valerius.

The Italians unable to excuse the great ^^ults, treacheries, cowardice, and
dissimula^^on of their Nation, go about to color their ^^llanies with the name
of Italian prudence.

One bought a draught of fish of certain fi^^ers in Milesia, whose hap was to
take with^^ their net a golden Tripos, which the fi^^er-men refused to give
their chap-man, ^^ying, that they bargained for fish, the mat^er was brought
before the Magistrates, who ^ere commanded by the Oracle, to give it to ^he
wisest man; first it was given to Thales, he ^aue it to Bias, Bias to Pittacus,
until it came ^o Socrates, who gave it to Apollo. Valerius.

Tully cried out in his latter age, O vtinam ^unquam sapuisse^, would I had
never known that wisdom meant.

Quintus Catulus did his Country as much good by his wisdom, as Cneius
Pompeius by valor, for of small force is the war a^road, unless there be
good advise at home. Cicero.

Phillip of Macedon, being in hostage three years together, learned prudence
of Epaminondas, by which virtue he got into hi^ hands, the monarchy of all
Greece, and (...) great part of Asia. Curtius.

Caesar, when he took upon him, the government of the Gauls, waged war
there 10. years, guided by unspeakable prudence, that was accompanied with
diligence, so that by these, he subdued 300. Nations, took 800. Towns, and in
many battles discomfited three millions of men. Eutropius.

The Roman Kings kept Eagles in their camp, against thunder and lightning.
Macrobius.

The Emperor Tiberius, wore in his Hat^ Bay branch, to keep him from thunder
and lightning. Idem.

The Aegiptian mariners, were wont in sto^^my and tempesteous weather, to hang
vp^^ sail, on the which was sewed the Phoca^^ skin, which is a kind of fish,
called the (...) Cow. Plinius.

Alexander Seuerus was a very wise Prince, which he attained unto, by the
counsel and instruction of that learned Lawyer Vlpianus.

The 7, Sages, or wisemen of Greece, were renowned throughout all the world, of
whom the first was Thales Milesius, who invented (...) card to sail by.
Laertius.

The second was Solon, who gave the first ^^wes to the Athenians, and judged no
man ^^ppy before his death.

The third was Chilo of Lacedemon, who (...) Ambassador into the Orient for
the A^^enians.

The fourth was Pittacus, who was not only Philosopher, but also Captain of
the My^^enes.

The fifth was Cleobulus, that descended from (...) ancient line of Hercules.

The sixth was Periander, of whom the Hi^^oriographers doubted, whether his
Philo^^phy or tirany were greater.

The seventh Bias, that was Prince of the ^yraneans, a learned Philosopher,
and a va^^ant Soldier, who overcame the Meti^enses; this battle was the
first that any ^hilosopher of Greece fought.

The Grecians had their Philosophers, the Persians their Magi, the Indians
Gymnoso^hists, the Aegiptians Priests, the Hebrews Prophets, the Assirians
Chaldeans, the La^^nes wise men, the Frenchmen Druides, ^ll which in every
of these Nations, and ^hroughout all the world, were renowned for their
wisdom and profound learning.

Of Temperance. The property of this virtue consists in the things which
belong to the keeping of man's li^^ in his body, and using the pleasures thereof
m^^derately, being a mean in our seeing, bearing smelling, tasting, and
feeling.
MOses abstained from his ordinary re^fection, the space of 40. days, when
upon mount Sinai, he was to receive the t^bles of the law from God. Exodus

Minos, as it is feigned, when he was to re^ceaue laws from Jupiter, fasted
nine days Homer.

Daniell and his companions, neglecting the Kings table, lived with pulse and
water one^ly. Bib.

Plato forsook Dionysius courtly feasting and betook himself to his
philosophical diet.

Saint John Baptist passed over the greates^ part of his age in the wilderness,
eating nothing but Locusts and wild honey.

Bartholomew the Apostle, when Polemion King of India, sent him Cammels richly
laden with gold and silver, for that he had dispossessed his daughter of an
unclean spi^^t, refused them saying, that he came not to ^^ceaue rewards for
his hire, but that he might ^ew the way of salvation, to those that believe.
^arullus.

Anacharsis the Scithian philosopher, coun^^led Kings and Princes, to write
about their ^^ctures, Rule lust, temper the tongue, bridle the ^elly. Aelianus.

Augustus was of a very spare diet, his ^anner was to sit down to meat, when
his ^uests had half dined, and would be the first that rised. Plut.

Pericles never supped, nor came at any ^anquet. Thucidides.

Scipio for the space of fifty and four years, neither bought nor sold any
thing, he was so ^e^l contented with a little.

Scipio in the flower of his age, at the taking of the City of Carthage, had a
young Da^osell to his prisoner, of rare and excellent beauty, and when he
understood her birth, and that she was betrothed to Lucius of Spain, ^e sent
for him, and restored her unto him, without abusing her any way, besides giving
her a dowry. Plut.

Alexander did the like with Darius wife, who excelled all the dames of Asia
for beauty: the like of Cyrus. Curtius. Herodotus.

Phryna the harlot, lying with Xenocrat^ upon a wager, to prove his continency,
say^ she lay not with a man, but with a blocke^ Laertius.

C. Gracchus, as long as he governed Sa^dinia, would never suffer a woman to
come into his house, except it were to demaun^ justice.

Pyttacus being constrained to take upon him the charge of an Army, accepted it
with great grief, saying, O how hard a matter is i^ to be a good man?
Laertius.

Torquatus, and Fabritius, absented themselves from Rome, the one because he
would not have the dictatorship, the other the consulship.

Of all those which sought the ouerthro^ of Rome, never any sober man went
about the same but Caesar. Cato.

Vespasian was of that temperance, that be would not drink nor eat, but once a
day, and that very sparingly.

Socrates, by his great abstinence, lived (...) his life without sickness.

M. Val. Coruinus, lived free from sickness, an hundred years by his abstinence.

Massinissa King of Numidia, never sat at his table, never sawced his meat,
and was ^^ntent with that bread he allowed unto his ^^uldiours.

^yrus, when one of his minions moved him (...) see Panthea, saying, that her
beauty was (...) worthy to be seen; that is the cause said ^^rus, why I will
abstain from the sight of (...). Xenophon.

^edaretus having escaped the election of (...) of those three hundred
Senators, which ^^uerned the estate of Sparta, returned ioy^^^, saying, that it
was an easy matter to find that City three hundred better, and more ^onest
men then himself.

^imaeus Duke of Sauoy, willingly gave o^^r his Duchy, into his Sons hands,
and ^^came an Hermit, and after that, being cho^^^ Pope, he gave up the seat
willingly to another. Guichardine.

Amurath, the second of that name, after he (...) obtained infinite victories,
became a ^onke, of the straightest sect amongst them. Charles the fifth,
resigned his Empire into (...) hands of the Princes Electors, and with^^ew
himself into a monastrey. Guichard.

Cato the younger, travailing over the de^^rts of Lybia, endured great thirst,
and when Soldier offered him water, in his motion (...) threw it upon the
ground, in presence of them all, that his Army might know that h^ would be in
no better estate then they. V^lerius.

Socrates, when soever he felt himself thirsty, would not drink before he had
cast away the first pitcher of water, that he might acquaint his sensual
appetite, to expect the convenient time of reason. Plato.

The Germans in Julius Caesar's time, a strong and warlike people, lived only
of milk, cheese, and flesh, not knowing what wheat and wine were, nor what
it was to labor the ground, or to sow. Varro.

Liuia commends the barrainnes and sterility of a Country, more then the
fruitfulnes saying, that men borne in a fat soil, are commonly doe-littles and
cowards, but the barraine Country brings forth temperate and sober persons;
the Athenians were situated in a very unfruitful place.

The feasts of Pythagoras, Socrates, Xenocrates, and the Sages of Greece, were
the discourses of learned matters and philosophy.

The Aegiptians used in the midst of their banquets, to bring in the Anatomy of
a dead body dried, that the horror of it might hold them within the bonds of
temperance. Hero.

In the old time Vines were planted and ^ressed, that wine might be drunk,
rather in ^ime of sickness, then of health; in so much that it was not sold in
Tauerns only, but also ^n Apothicaries shops.

The Emperor Rodolphus, when drink was brought unto him in the war, against
Octotarus King of Bohemia, at what time he was ^n a place, where his whole Army
was troubled with thirst, would not receive it, but said, that his thirst was
for all his Army, and not alone for himself.

Pythagoras lived only of herbs, fruit, and water, he never drank wine, nor
that great Orator Demosthenes.

The Kings of Aegipt were forbidden wine, which they never drank, except on
certain days, and that in measure. Sabellicus.

Alexander refused the Cooks and Paysterers, which Ada Q. of Caria, sent unto
him, saying, that he had better then they, namely, For his dinner early rising,
and walking a good while before day, and for his supper a little dinner, but the
Persian delicacies soon changed this.

C. Fabritius was found by the Samnite Ambassadors that came unto him, eating
of Rape roots, which was all the fare he had.

Hanibal fed upon no other meat, then the meanest of his Soldiers did.

The Priests of Aegipt, the Sages of (...) and Persia, and Jupiters Priests,
serving (...) Gods, did never eat any flesh, nor drink a^ny wine. Pausanias.

Anacharsis a Seithian Philosopher, being demanded of his estate, how he fed,
how he did lie, and how he was clothed, answered, I feed on hunger, I lie on
the ground, and I am clothed like a Scithian. Laertius.

Dyonisius made suit to Aristides, for his daughter in marriage, but he knowing
him to be an intemperate Prince, soberly answered, that he had rather kill his
daughter with his own hand, then give her in marriage unto Dionysius.

Valerius Publicola, after he had been consul four times, died so poor, that
he had not sufficient to defray the charge of his Funerals, but was buried of
the common tresury. Valerius.

The ^^ke of Menenius Agrippa, when by the counsel of Epimenides of Create,
the Athenians were delivered from a plague, which their neighbors were
infected with, they in regard of his love and advice, sent him rich rewards,
which he refused. Plato.

Apollonius Tyanaeus had diverse rich gifts sent him by Vespasian, which he
would not ^ccept, saying, that they were for covetous minded men and for those
that had need of them. Stobeus.

The Romans laughed Sylla to scorn, that being a man most intemperate, did
not withstanding use to exhort, and compel others to sobriety, temperance, and
frugality. Suetonius.

Lisander contrary to him, allowed those vi^es in the Citizens, from the which
himself refrained. Thucidides.

Pericles, when his companion Sophocles and Praetor in Rome, commended the
beau^y of a young woman, whom they met, said, It becomes a Praetor to have not
only hands free from corruption, but also continent eyes, void of unchaste
looks. Idem.

Hortensius was much reproved, for that at a supper (prepared for the Augurs)
he set before them a boiled Peacock. Suetonius.

Cassius was deemed intemperate, because publicly he drank water, and could
not for a short time endure the thirst thereof.

Duronius was removed from the Senate, for that he being Tribune, repeated the
law concerning the restraint of feasting. Patri^ius.

When the Pres^nts which King Pyrrhus, after his overthrow, were brought to
Rome and showed about the streets, hoping ther^by to win good will of the
people, the^^ was not one man seen to put out his hand toward them, so as the
King found himself no less vanquished with continency, the^ force of arms.

Diogenes laughed those to scorn, that by sacrifice sought for help of the
Gods, and notvvithstanding led an intemperate life. Gellius.

Cato by prescribing too spare and temperate diet, killed his wife and child.

In the presence of Gorgo, the daughter of Cleomenes, but 9. years old,
Aristagoras entreated Cleomenes, that the Lacedaemonians would send an Army into
Asia, promising to give him 10. talents, which he refusing, offered him 50, the
wench took her Father a side, and said, Father, if you get you not hence, this
guest will corrupt you, vvhereat he departed, without harkening to Aristagoras
any more. Herodotus.

The Lacedaemonians were very temperate in their diet, and had certain public
places, called Phidities, where they fed, of which came, that when men would
speak of a small pittance, they would like it to a meal of ^he Phiditie.

The Esseans a certain Jewish sect, who were holier and of better
conversation then ^he Pharisees, abstained from wine and women. Josephus.

The temperance and staiednes of Titus Quintus, got more countries to the
Romans then all the forces under him had done.

It was felony for the Magistrates of Locris to drink wine without the
license of a Phi^ition, and the Romans never drunk wine, before they were
twenty years old. Diodo.

In the time of Saturn, the world did neither eat flesh, nor drink wine,
wherein they agree with our Divines, who put us out of doubt, that the use of
flesh and wine, was unknown before the universal flood.

Of Fortitude. The virtue of the mind aduentureth nothing ^^^shly, neither in a
good cause fears death, be (...) in apparaunce never so terrible: whose
extremes are fear and foolish boldness.
Four kinds of people the Romans found hard to overcome, the Mermidons, the
Gaditanes, the Saguntines, and the Numantines, the first were strong, the
second val^^ant, the third fortunate, but the Numantine were strong, valiant,
and fortunate. Trebe^^lius Pollio.

Amongst all the Cities of the world, onel^ Numantia did never acknowledge her
better, or kiss the hand of any other for he^ Lord.

The Lacedaemonians never used to ask the number of their enemies, but where
the^ were.

Judas Macchabeus being begirt with 2^ thousand men, was counseled to fly,
(...) forbid (quoth he) that the sun should see^ fly, I had rather die then
stain my glory by (...) ignominious flight.

The Numantines when they were besi^^ged slew nine Consuls, whereupon, the
Romans did capitulate with them that the^ should be perpetual friends. Liuius.

Five thousand resolute Romans, ouerca^^ thirty thousand of Methridates
souldio^^ whom he had chosen throughout all (...) kingdom. Appian.

Julius Caesar, entering the Temple of He^^cules in Gades, seeing the heroycall
gests (...) Alexander set forth upon the vvalls, fell (...) the like passion
for Alexander, as he did (...) ^^hilles. Plutarch.

Q. Mutius adventured alone into the tents (...) King Porsenna, either to kill
the King, or (...) be killed by him, for which he purchased (...) surname of
Sceuola. Liuius.

Horatius Cocles resisted the whole Army the same king, until the citizens of
Rome (...) to take up the draw bridge, and then all armed leapt into the river
Tyber, and escaped his enemies. Liuius.

Perdiccas entered into the dangerous den a Lioness, and took away her
whelps. ^^rtius.

Starchaterus to increase his strength, fed ^^ on Bears flesh, and often
used to drink ^^eir blood. Olaus.

Alexander thought himself happy if he ^ight be named Achilles, Caesar if he
might ^e called Alexander; Achilles sought no ^eater name then Theseus, Theseus
desired (...) of Hercules.

Although Scythia was barren yet was she out, though rude and barbarous, yet
was (...) very valiant, and hard to be subdued. ^iannus.

Leonides at Thermopyla, having under (...) charge but four thousand
soldiers, ^^liantly encountered with the huge Army of Xerxes, and overcame
it, to his immorta^ fame and Xerxes eternal infamy. Iustin^^*

Pyrrhus seeing the fortitude and valour^ the Romans, said, If valor were
lost, the mould thereof might be found in a Romans heart; adding, that he
would quickly conquer all the world if he were King (...) Rome, or the
Roman soldiers subject unto him.

Solon made a law, that the children whos^ parents had been valiantly slain
in battle, should for the prowess of their parents, (...) ever after
maintained of the Common treasury. Thucidides.

Lucius Dentatus was in sixescore battles and eyghteene times came away
conquere^ He received in token of his valor, eyghteene Lances, twenty Bards
for horses* foure-score Bracelets, and 36. crowns, an^ by his means nine
Emperors triumphe^ in Rome.

It was all the manner of the Lacedaemonians* to be greatly inflamed with the
desire o^ conquering. Plato.

Eumenes, (though never so distressed) thought himself strong enough, as long
a^ he had his sword in his hand. Plut.

Aristomenes the Messenian, being taken (...) the Lacedaemonians and delivered
fast ^^und to two soldiers, he drew near to ^^fire, burned his bonds in
sunder, killed his ^^eepers, and saved himself. Valerius.

Lysimachus was commanded by Alex^^der that he should be devoured of a Lion,
^^at he valiantly fought with the beast, and ^^retching forth his arm, thrust
it into his ^^roate, taking hold of his tongue, and so ^^rangled him,
whereupon he was ever af^^r more esteemed of Alexander then he ^as before.
Aelianus.

Cassius answered a Chaldean Astrologer ^ho counseled him not to fight with
the ^arthians until the Moon had passed Scor^^o, I fear not (quoth he)
Scorpius, but I fear (...) Archers: because the Romans were put (...) ^light
by Parthian Archers. Appian.

Agis upon the point to give battle to the ^^ycaonians, when his soldiers
said, that ^^eyr enemies were many; answered, The ^rince that will subdue
many, must of necessity ^^ght with many. Tbucid.

Leonides being informed by his soldiers ^^at the enemies against whom he
was to ^^ght, were so many in number, that their ^rrovves darkened the beams
of the sun, ^o much the better (quoth he) for we shall the^ fight in the
shade. Licosthenes.

Alcibiades, when his Captains suddenly made an alarm with great cities
that they were fallen into their enemies hands, would say unto his soldiers,
Be valiant and fear not, for we are not fallen into their hands, but they into
ours. Thucidydes.

Scaeua a Jew, at the siege of Jerusalem having long time defended his fellow
soldiers, after much slaughter by him made, abode still fighting, having his
eyes stopped, his body vvounded, and his shield struck through in sixscore
places. Josephus.

Julius Caesar, perceiving the Neruians to have the better hand, caught a
Target from out a soldiers hand that began to fly, and taking his place, did
such feats of Arms, that all his Army recovered courage, and got the
victory. Plutarch.

Alexander swimmed over dangerous waters, scaled towns, and put himself
foremost in perrils and paines-taking. Pyrrhus, Haniball, Sertorius and Caesar,
are reported to have done the like.

Eutycus being blind, was set without the array of the battle by Leonidas;
but being ashamed to leave his companions, caused a slave to lead him to the
place where they ^ought, and there valiantly behauing himself, ^e was slain.
Valerius.

Sylla the Dictator, having condemned to ^eath all the inhabitants of Perouza,
and par^oning none but his host, he would needs ^ie, saying; that he scorned
to hold his life of the murderer of his country. Appian.

The Polonian Ambassadors answered A^exander when he threatened their country;
We fear (said they) but one only thing, which is least the sky fall upon
us.

Pompey dreadlesse of a great storm when he was sent by the Senate into
Italy, was the first that went a shyp-board, and commanded the sails to be
spread, saying: It is necessary that I go, but not necessary that I live.
Plutarch.

Xerxes great Navy that drank whole rivers dry, was rather a sign of his
wealth then magnanimity. Justinius.

Bias holding wars with Iphiorates, and put to the vvorst, his soldiers
cried out, saying: what shall we do? to whom he answered, Tell those that
are alive, that I dyed fighting, and I will report unto the dead, that you
escaped flying. Laertius.

The women of Lacena went souldier-like into the field with their husbands.

Thomyris Queen of Scythia, overcame Cyrus, cut off his head, and cast it into
a bowl of blood, saying; Satiate sanguine quem sitiisti. Justinius.

The women of Scythia, called Amazons, lived as conquerours over men, and
were never conquered by men, until Alexander destroyed both them and their
country.

Semyramis, when news was brought her that her city Babylon was besieged,
all vnattyred and undressed, she took her armor, and by her vvonderfull valor
repulsed her enemies. Justinius.

Zenobia, Queen of the Palmerians, after the death of her husband governed the
Empire, and long held battle against the Emperor Aurelian, who said, That
it was mo^e valor to conquer a woman so stout as Zenobia, then to vanquish a
king so fearful as Xerxes.

Penthiselea, Queen of the Amazons, and Hyppolita, the first encountered hand
to hand Achilles; the other Theseus, whom he for her valor and courage
afterward married. Homer.

Artimesia Queen of Caria, after the death of her husband, showed such
admirable fortitude against the Rhodians, that she burned their Nauies, entered
their Cities, and ^^used in them her Image to be set up for a ^onument of her
chivalry.

When Epaminondas besieged Sparta, and ^as gotten into the Town, Isadas a
young ^an, all naked, his body anointed over ^ith oil, having a partisone,
thrust himself ^^to the midst, beating down all his ene^ies before him, and
himself escaped away ^nvvounded. Loncerus.

The Ephori at his return gave him a crown ^n honor of his provvesse, but they
amerced ^im at a thousand crowns for being so ad^enturous.

Of the Soul. The Soul is called Anima whilst it is in the ^ody and gives
life, Men's while it minds, Animus having will, Ratio for that it judges
rightfully, Spiritus while it breaths, and Sensus whilst it feels.
THe Soul has five virtues, of the which the first is feeling, by this virtue
the soul is moved, desiring those thing that belong to the body. Augustine.

The second power is wit, by this the soul knovveth all things, sensible and
corporal, when they are present.

The third is Imagination, by which it be^holdeth the likeness of bodily
things (...) they be absent.

The fourth is Reason, that judges between good and evil, truth and falsehood.

The fifth is Understanding, the which comprehends things not material, but
intelligible, as God and Angels.

The three first virtues are situate in the soul that is coupled to the body,
and gives life and inner wit to perfection of the body, and these be common
both to men and beasts.

The other two, Reason and Understanding, be in the soul in that it may be
departed from the body, and abide being departed, as an Angel by two manner
of respects, for it beholds the higher things, and thereupon is called
Intellectus, and the lower, and for that cause is termed Ratio.

In diverse bodies the soul is threefold, Vegitable, that is, gives life and
no feeling, as in plants and roots, which the Philosophers liken to a
Tryangle in Geometry, for as that has three corners, so has this soul three
virtues, the first begetting, the second nourishing, the third growing.

^ensible, that gives life and feeling, and not (...), which is in beasts;
this soul is lyke^^d to a Quadrangle, for it is a line drawn (...) one corner
to another before it makes (...) Triangles, and the sensible soul makes
(...) triangles of virtues; for where-soeuer (...) soul Sensible is, there is
also the soul ^egitable, but not e contra.

The Reasonable soul gives life, and feeling, and reason, which is in men;
this soul is ^^kened to a circle because of her perfection and containing, for
of all the figures of the ^ame length, the circle is most, and most con^ayneth,
and whosoever has the soul Reasonable, has also the Sensible, and Vegitable,
sed non e contra. Aristotle.

The soul being once made, shall endure evermore in body or out of body, and
that shall never be said that it was made by the Image of GOD, if it were
closed in the bonds of death. Augustine.

Plato calls the soul a being, which only moves it self, Zeno terms it
a number which moves it self, Pythagoras an harmony, Democritus a subtle
and uncertain spyrite, Aselepiades says it is a manner of cord that sets
the five Senses a work, Porphyrius, Idea, Hippocrates, a subtle spirit spread
through all the body, and Epic^^rus a kind of fire and air.

Pythagoras maintained Palingenesia, which is, that souls departed, return
into other bodies; He said that he remembered tha^ he was Euphorbius, at the
sack of Troy. Ovid.

There was an ancient law under Saturn, that when good men departed out
of this life, they be sent into the fortunate Isles, which Isles the Poet
Pyndarus describes, and the wicked are sent into the Iaile of vengeance,
which he calls Tartarus.

Plutarch imitating Plato, brings in Thespesias raised from the dead, to
discourse of the life to come, De sera numinis vindicta.

The Thracians were surnamed the neuer-dying Getes, who were of opinion,
that after their departure out of this world, they went to Zamolrix or
Gebelezie, that is in the Getish of Goatish tongue, to him that gave them
health, salvation, and all kind of happiness.

Cleombrotus a Philosopher, when he had read a Treatise of the immortality of
the soul, presently slew himself, so did Cato of Vtica. Plutarch.

That which Virgill says in his second Eg^^gue, concerning the drugge or spice
of As^ria called Amomum, and the going thereof ^uery where, is of some
interpreted to be ^eant of the immortality of the soul, the ^octrine whereof
Pherecides brought thence ^^to Greece, that it should be understood
^hroughout the world.

The taking of Enoch into heaven of God, ^vas done that the world might
thereby ^nderstand and believe, that there is immor^ality after this life.

The Indians burn themselves before they ^ome to extreme age, terming it the
letting of men loose, and the freeing of the soul from the body, and the
sooner they did it, the vviser they were esteemed. Porphyrius.

Zeno said, that he had rather see an Indian burn himself cheerfully, then
to hear all the Philosophers of the world discoursing the immortality of the
soul.

The people that dwell by the river Niger, otherwise called the people of
Seneca in Africa, offer themselves with great willingness to be buried quick
with their masters; whereupon Zeno said, that all the demonstrations of
Logic and Mathematick, had not so much force to prove the immortality of the
soul, as this only deed of theirs. Alexander asked a Gymnosophist, vvhe^ther
there were more men alive then dead he said there were more alive, because
no^^ are dead. Plutarch.

All the learning of the Sages and Scythians, was grounded upon the
immortality of the soul.

The Scholars of Hegesias hearing there Master discoursing of the
immortality of souls departed out of this life, were so ravished with his
words, that they willingly killed themselves. Plutarch.

The souls of Saints in heaven, know nothing what is done upon the earth;
for if they did, said August: my mother Monicha would be with me every night,
to comfort me in my heaviness. de ciuit. Dei.

Pliny the elder, denying the immortality of the soul, whilst he was over
curious in searching out the cause of the burning Aetna, was burned therein. A
just punishment for him, to end his life by smoke, who esteemed the soul no
better then a vapor.

Origin attributes unto the souls departed, a place upon the earth, where
they learn those things which they knew not while they lived; As the Papists
frame a Purgatory, so he an Eruditory. P. Mart.

Philoronimus a priest of Galatia, lived six ^^eres in dead men's vaults and
Sepulchers, ^^at be might always remember, that he ^as dead to the world,
and alive to Christ. ^^aclides.

Pope ^eo commanded two Philosophers (...) discourse of the soul, the one to
prove ^e immortality, the other that it was mor^ll; and when the Pope was to
give iudge^ent, he said to him that had maintained ^he immortality, Thou have
argued the truth, ^ut the reasons of the other savor of more plea^^re and
liberty. Luther.

The souls of Tyrants are composed of arogancie and cruelty. Plutarch.

Of all the five Senses, the sight is most piercing and subtle, for the kind
thereof is ^erie.

Benedictus had such a power in his eye, eue^ to his superiors, that with a
look, he caused a furious and audatious King of the Goaths to quake and
tremble.

Plautianus had such a terror in his countenance, that the lookers on him were
dau^ted; for this cause when he went abroad, he had ^^teambulones to Marshall
the way, and give warning of his coming, that they might not behold him.
Herodianus.

Comodus was of so perfect aim and sigh^ that what soever he shot at, he
killed, and (...) Herodotus writes, he slew a hundred wild beasts at a hundred
shot.

Amongst all living creaturs, GOD hat^ only given immoouable ears to men and
Apes. Aristotle.

Those that dwell by the river Nilus, are very deaf, by reason of the horrible
noise and (...) thereof. Ambrose.

The Emperor Claudius, seeing the meat that was prepared for the Salian
Priests, did forth^with leave all his serious affairs, and went to dinner
with them. Suetonius.

Griffons have so quick a smell, that they smell carryon over or beyond the
Seas. Ambrose.

Touching is a virtue in the sinews of all the body, being the sense wherein
all the other imprint their passions. Auicen.

There is an herb called Spartonica, o^ S^ytica, which being tasted or
held in the mouth, the Scythians thereby are able to endure hunger and cold
twelve days together. Pliny.

Of Clemency. This virtue by the Grecians is called Philan^ropia, which
signifies the law of mankind, her ^ranches are thankefulnes, pity, and
libera^itie.
TItus Son of the Emperor Vespasian, for his wonderful clemency, was called
Deliciae humani generis. Josephus.

Antonius for his pity, was surnamed Pius, ^he (as never Emperor before him
did) reigned without the effusion of any blood.

Traian, when he was blamed by some of his friends, for his over much clemency,
answered, I will be unto my Subjects, as I would my Subjects should be to me,
for the gentleness of a Prince, never hurts his estate. Suetonius.

Phillip King of Macedonia, would not punish Nicanor, although he openly spoke
evil of him, saying, when he heard thereof; I suppose that he is a good man,
it were better to search whether the fault be in us or no.

Dion having ouercom Dionisius, and resto^ed his Cuntries liberty, forgave
Heraclides one of his most dangerous enemies. Plut.

Antigonus hearing certain Soldiers railing upon him hard by his tent, who
though that he was not so near, showed himself, saying, can you not go
further to speak ill of me!

Caesar, when he heard that Cato had slain himself at Vtica, O Cato, (said
he) I envy thee, this thy death, seeing thou have envied me, the saving of thy
life. Plutarch.

Adrian bearing great envy to a worthy Roman, before he was Emperor, the same
day he was elected, meeting his enemy in the street, said to him aloud,
Euasisti, meaning, that he being now a Prince, might in no wise revenge an
injury. P. Diaconus.

Pythagoras was so pitiful, that he abstained from cruelty, even toward
unreasonable creatures, that he would buy birds of the Fowlers, and let them
fly again, and draught of fishes, to cast them again into the Sea. Loncerus.

Augustus made one his Servant, that would have killed him.

Domitian, when he was first chosen Emperor, did so abhor cruelty, that he
would not suffer any beasts to be killed for sacrifice.

The Snakes of Syria, the Serpents of Tyrinthia, and the Scorpions in Arcadia,
are gentle, and sparing of their natural soil, though cruel in others.
Plinius.

Scipio, having taken Hasdruball captive, restored him again without ransom.

Darius, understanding that his Subjects were sore taxed with Subsidies, blamed
his Counsel, rebuked their Law, and in an oration unto his Subjects
signified, that he was oath his estate should hinder theyrs, which gentleness so
wone them, that they offered their lands and lyfes at his feet. Herodotus.

The Emperor Aurelian, the gates of Tiae^a being shut against him, he sent
word, that unless they yielded, he would not leave one flogge alive in the
City, which they notwithstanding refused to do, but he ouercomming them, was
so pitiful, that he spa^ed them, commanding to kill all the flogs.

Porus King of India, conquered of Alex^nder, and being commanded to ask what
^e would, fearing that pity was far from Alexander, desired clemency, which
he gran^ed. Brusonius.

Alexander was so famous for clemency, that Darius wished, that he might
overcome Alexander, to show him courtesy, or that A^exander, and none else,
might conquer him. Plutarch.

The Romans were renowned, for the honorable funerals of Siphax king of
Numidia, whom they took prisoner. Valerius.

Prusias King of Bythinia, being banished by Nicomedes his own Son, came to
the Romans, who entreated him every way according to his worthiness and estate.
Diodorus.

So did they with Ptolomey banished by his own brother, and restored him
again to his kingdom.

Marcellus, after his Soldiers had conquered Syracusa, not without great
slaughter of many, mounted up an high tower of the Castle, and with tears
lamented the ^^full fall of Syracuse. Valerius.

Metellus besieging the great City Centobrica, in the Country of Celtiberia,
when he saw their miserable condition, and their women coming out with their
children to crave mercy, he withdrew his intended forces, removed his camp,
and spared the City, to his eternal commendation.

In Athence there was a temple dedicated to Mercy, into which none might enter,
except he were beneficial and pitiful, and then also with license from the
Senate. Macrobius

Arcagatus a notable Surgeon, was highly esteemed among the Romans, as
long as he had pity upon his Patients, whose cure ^e had promised, but when
he began to be ^nmerciful, he was not only despised of grave men, but in
derision called Vulnerarius. Gel^ius.

Rome was called the haven of succor, the ^nker of trust, the key of courtesy,
wher-vnto ^ll helpless Princes fled.

Pompey having conquered Tigranes King of Armenia, and he kneeling at his feet,
yielding his crown and scepter, he took him in his arms, put his crown
upon his head, and restored him again to his kingdom. Plutarch.

Julius Caesar was as willing to revenge the death of Pompey, as L. Paulus was
courteous and favorable to his foe Perseus. Idem.

Haniball, although a deadly enemy to the Romans, yet in princely clemency he
wone more commendacions by the burial of Aemilius Gracchus, and Marcellus,
then he got fame by ouercomming three thousand Romans. Valerius.

Polycrates the tyrant of Samos, was very gentle toward those women that were
the wives of the dead Soldiers, restoring them to their liberty, and giving
them wherewithal to maintain their after estate.

Vespasian, after that Vitellius had killed his brother Sabius, and long
persecuted his son, being at last subdued, he spared his daughter, and
bestowed a great sum of money with her in marriage.

Agesilaus, after he had overcome the Corinthians, did not so joy in his
conquest, as he lamented the death of so many men. Plut.

Augustus, when he had conquered Alexandria, the City which Alexander built,
moved with pity in sight of the Citizens, expecting nothing but death, said,
for the beauty of your City, and memory of Alexander, and the love I bear
unto Pyrrhus your philosopher, and pity of all, I spare your City, and grant
you life. Aelianus.

Certain drunkards abused in wanton spech Pisistratus wife, and being sober
the next morning, came to ask him forgiveness, he gently said, learn to be
sober another time.

Camillus rebelled against Alexander Seuerus, the Emperor of Rome, and for
that, being condemned to dye by the Senate, was pardoned by him. Eutropius.

Fabius forgave Marius, the treasons he practiced against him.

Cicero said of Julius Caesar, that he extolling dead Pompey, and erecting his
statues, did set up his own.

Alphonsus, by his clemency and gentleness, ^one Careta, so did Marcellus
overcome Siracusa.

Diogenes, Heraclitus, Apermanthus, and Ti^ion of Athence, were ungentle and
uncivil persons, and for their strange manners, termed haters of men.

Phocion the Athenian, would in nothing fulfill the request of the people, and
therefore he was hated worse then a Toade.

The Spartans, for their obedience and humility were more honored, then
either Thebes renowned for her Gods, or Athence for her wisdom. Plut.

Marius being appointed by the people of Rome twice to triumph, divided the
glory between himself, and his fellow Catullus. Appian.

Dion, after he was made King of the Syracusans, would never change his
accustomed fare and apparel, which he used as Studient in the University. Plut.

As Alexander was on his voyage, to conquer the Indians, Taxiles, one of the
Kings desired him, that they might not war one against another, If thou
(said he) art less then I, receive benefits, if greater, I will take them of
thee: Alexander admiring his courteous spech, answered; At the least we must
fight and contend for this: whether of us twain shall be most beneficial to
his companion. Curtius.

Traianus was so meek and courteous, that he was fellow-like to all men; during
all his reign, there was but one only Senator condemned, who was adjudged to
death against his will. Eutropius.

The kingdom wherein the Emperor Augustus most delighted and ioyed, was of the
Mauritanes, and the reason was this, because all other kingdoms he got by the
sword, and this kingdom by intreatance. Suetonius.

Alexander did write to Publian his bit-maker, Julius Caesar to Rufus his
gardener, Augustus to Pamphilo his smith, Tiberius to Escaulus his miller,
Tullie to Myrlo his taylour, and Seneca to Gipho his rent-gatherer, P. Aemilius
to his plough-man, C. Dentatus to his carpenter; such was their affability.

Of Phaleris the tyrant is written, that never man did him service that he did
not gratify, either write him a letter that he did not answer.

Herod by humbling himself before Augustus, saved and increased his kingdom.

Pyrrhus could very well skill to humble ^imselfe toward great men, and this
helped ^ery much to the conquest of his kingdom. Plutarch.

Pyrrhus, after many victories, when his men of war called him Eagle, I am,
quoth (...), an Eagle by your means, being borne up by ^our knighthoode and
chiualry, as the Eagle is ^ast up by his feathers, giving the honor and ^itle
to his Souldier^. Valerius.

Xerxes dismissed certain spies which ^ame from Athence, and pardoning them,
showed them notwithstanding his Army and forces.

Augustus, when he entered Rome in a triumph, one in a certain Comedy, said, O
good Lord, and every man turned that word to Augustus, flattering, and clapping
their hands for joy, but he gave a token, that he liked it not, and made
prohibitions, that men should not use the name of Lord unto him.

Caligula denied all men's requests. Suetonius.

After that Pericles had the managing of the public affairs, he was never
seen abroad in the streets, nor at any feasts.

The Macedonians forsook Demetrius, because he was uneasy to be dealt with,
and very hard to be spoken unto.

Dion was blamed of Plato for his ineffability, and of all the Sicilians.

Lucullus Soldiers would not follow him, because he was so ungentle to them.

Nicias for his over great sternnes was envied, although he was otherwise
virtuous; so likewise was Coriolanus. Liuius.

Of Liberality and Hospitality. Liberality gives with judgment, and is the
mean between prodigality and avarice; hospitality is four fold, glorious,
only to be well thought of, covetous, entertainment for ones money, courteous,
that receives our friends, and religious, which cherishes those that serve
God.
ALexander sent to Phocion, Captain of the Athenians, an hundred talents of
silver for a gift, and the names of four famous Cities, to choose and take
which he would. Curtius.

The people of Leueani had a law, that if any stranger entered into their soil
before sun setting, and was not received into one man's house or other, being
desirous to be lodged, they paid an appointed penalty for their inhumanity;
this law was profitable to the ^ayfairing man, and allowable to Jupiter, the
^uer of hospitality.

The Persian Kings gave to their Embassa^ors, to every one a Babilonian talent,
which ^lxx. pounds of Athenian coin, besides Bracelets, Jewels, a chain, and
a Persian word, which they called Acinax. Curtius.

All these were valued at a thousand Persian ^eeces of silver, besides all
this, they gave a Median royal robe, which was called Doro^horica.

Ptolomaeus, the son of Lagus, had a singular delight and pleasure, in making
his friends rich, saying, Better it is to enrich other, ^hen a man to enrich
himself.

The Apolloniatae expel (according to the Lacedemonian law) strangers out of
their Country; contrary to the people of Epidamnus who prohibit none.

Alexander preferred Abdolominus a man of no parentage, and base condition to a
kingdom, because that his benefit should rather seem to have been bestowed
freely, then deserved by nobility, and that his own greatness ^ight the more
therein be seen. Justinius.

Plutus the God of riches, which at Sparta was kept blind, with Herod the
Sophist, was said to have received his sight, because being very rich, he was
very bountiful, and knew how to use his wealth to the use of the pore, which
caused many to love and follow him. Caerius.

Lucius Lucullus house was common of receate for all the poor Greeks, that
travailed from Athence, Sparta, and Thebes, yea, from all Greece to Rome.

Pomponius Atticus, sent to Cicero being banished, two hundred thousand
Sesterties, and unto Voluminous and Brutus as much.

Phryne a Curtezan of Greece, after Alexander had subdued the City of Thebes,
and made the walls thereof level with the ground, she offered to reedifie them
upon this condition, that upon every gate of the City, this sentence should be
set; This City Alexander the great threw down, and Phryne the Curtezan
builded upon again.

Atta^us King of Asia ready to dye, beque^thed his kingdom by testament to the
Romans, to bestow where they would, for that they were so liberal, sometime
to him, when fortune favored him not.

Artaxerxes, made those Soldiers that came from Lacedemonia to aid him,
which came a foot, to go home a horseback, they that came upon horses, he
sent back in cha^iots, and he that had a Village when he came to him, he gave a
City at his departure.

Alexander married upon his own charges, ^he most part of the Nobles of
Macedonia, unto the Ladies of Persia.

Aristides having all the state of Athence under his government, gave his
wealth to the poor Citizens, reserving a small sum to bury him with all.

Democritus Abderita, being very rich, as may be gathered by the feast which
his Father made to Xerxes army, which consisted of more then two thousand
millions of men, gave all his patrimony to his Country, reserving a little
portion for himself, that he might study Philosophy, and then went to
Athence. Herodotus.

Caesar at one time gave to Paulus Consul 9. hundred thousand crowns, for
fear least he should oppose himself against his enterprises, and to Curio the
Tribune fifteen hundred thousand, that he should take his part.

Cymon of Athence, gave a yearly pension to the poor, fed the hungry, and
clothed the naked. Lactantius.

The Romans had a law, that no man should presume to make a public feast,
except before he had provided for all the poor of his quarters. Patritius.

Epaminondas having notice of a rich man, that had no care of the poor, sent a
needy fellow unto him, and commanded him under great penalty, to give him
presently 600 crowns; the Citizen hearing this, came to him, and asked him
the cause thereof, this man (said he) is honest and poor, and thou which bast
greatly robbed the common wealth a^t rich, compelling him to be liberal in
spite of his teeth.

Alexander by his liberality, made away for his noble plat-formes, whereby he
became monarch of three parts of the world, destributing liberally all his
demaines amongst his followers.

He caused proclamation to be made during his wars, that all they that were
indebted upon any occasion whatsoever, should bring their conditions unto him,
and he would discharge them, which he performed.

He gave at one time to his Master Aristotle 800. talents, as a reward for his
pains and expenses, he had been at, in describing the nature and property of
living creatures. Plutarch.

He sent to Anaxarchus 50. talents, but he ^efused them, saying, that he knew
not what to do with so great a sum, what, said Alexander, has he no friends
to pleasure? seeing all King Darius wealth will not suffice me, to di^tribute
among my friends.

Perillus besought him to give some money toward the marriage of his daughter,
where^pon he gave her 50. talents, but he said, that it was too much by half,
but he replied, If ^alfe be enough for thee to take, yet it is not enough for
me to give.

He gave to a poor Aegiptian, asking his ^almes, a rich and populous City,
and when the other amazed, supposed that he had mocked him, take (quoth he)
that which I give thee, for if thou art Bias that demaundest, I am Alexander
that gives.

Titus loved so liberality, that remembering one evening with himself, that he
had given nothing the same day, said, O my friends, we have lost this day.

Dyonisius the elder, entering into his sonns lodging, and beholding their
great store of rich Jewels and gold, said unto him, My Son, I did not give
thee these riches to use in this sort, but to impart them to thy friends.

Pertinax who succeeded Commodus, surpassed all the Emperors that ever were,
for exceeding liberality, he forbad that his nam^ should be set upon any Castle
within his dominion, saying, that his lands were not prope^ to him only, but
common to all the people o^ Rome. Suetonius.

Haniball, after he was vanquished by Scipio, fled into Asia to King Antiochus,
who took him into his protection, and right honorably entertained him.
Appianus.

The Germans are very courteous toward Aliens and Strangers, and it is an
horrible act accounted amongst them, to molest those whom they ought to defend,
from any which intended to hurt them. Caesar.

The entertainment of the greater Scipio toward Massinissa, brought such
profit to the Romans, as he of some writers, is called the third preserver of
the City of Rome from destruction, and therefore is joined companion with the
elder and younger Scipio.

Lot, for his hospitality, escaped the fire o Sodom and Gomorrha.

Rahab, for her hospitality, was saved with all hers from death.

Elias restored from death, the Son of her which had lodged him.

Archelaus being requested by one of his Minions, to give him a Cup of gold,
wherein ^e drank, delivered it to his page, and bid ^im give it to
Euripides, saying; Thou art ^orthy to ask and to be denied, but Euripides
worthy of gifts although he ask not.

Marcus Antonius Emperor of Rome, after his great battles, in one day gave
away hundred Lions together; he made sale of ^ll his plate and jewels, to
augment his soul^iours pay. Eutropius.

The privileges belonging to hospitality, ^re so great, as the Romans
observed the ^ites thereof to their enemies, and vvoulde ^euer fight till such
time as the prisoners to whom they were indebted for meat, were set ^t liberty.

Jupiter was called of Homer and Virgil, Hospitalis, the Harbourer.

The Almaines made so great account of those with whom they had eaten and
drunk, that they imparted their houses unto them.

The Lucans had a law which condemned that man to be fined, which suffered a
stranger to pass vnlodged after the sun was down.

Scipio being blamed for his great bounty, ^unswered, That Treasurers and
receivers were to make account of money, and Captains of feats of Arms.

Valerius Publicola, for relieuing the poor^ with his goods, was called
Publicola.

Nerua Cocceius in the one year that he was Emperor, gave unto the poor
fifteen hundred thousand crowns; for the doing whereof he sold his jewels
and his plate.

Tullus Hostilius King of the Romans, was so pitifully minded, that he gave a
great part of his goods to the poor.

Philemon and Baucis, for their entertayning of Jupiter and Mercury into their
cottage when the inhabitants of Phrygia denied them hospitality, had their
wishes granted, that they might dye both together. Ovid. lib. 8.

There was a law made by King Cyrus, that what King soever of Persia did come
unto Babylon, he should give a piece of gold unto every poor woman in the
city, for the which cause, King Othus vvoulde never come thither.

Pompey being sick in Pusoll, his Physicians told him, that his remedy was to
eat of certain Zorzales that the Consul Lucullus did breed; but he
answered; I will rather die then send to crave them, for the Gods have not
created Pompey to ask, but to give. Plutarch.

Pompey flying into Egypt for succor to ^tolomy, then very young, was betrayed
^y Phocinus and Achillas. Plut.

Othosilanus, to win the love of his men ^f War, made a feast unto them,
and gave (...) every warrier a piece of money, besides ^^ndry other rewards.

Lycaon caused those stranger-guests that ^ame to him to be slain, for which
cause Jupiter turned him into a Wolf. Ovid.

Busiris did the like, and therefore he was ^illed of Hercules.

Moneses a noble Parthian, fled to Antho^ie from his cruel King, who comparing
his ^isery to Themistocles, and his felicity to Xerxes, gave him three
Cities, as Xerxes ^id to Themistocles, for his bread, drink, and ^eate, and
as some write, two more for his ^odging and apparel. Appian.

Pomponius Atticus, when he saw Brutus and Cassius were driven and expelled
out of Rome, he sent them 100000. Sextercies, as ^ friend that aided them at
their need when others had forsook them.

Gillias a Sicilian of Agrigentum, clothed ^he poor, fed them, bestowed their
daugh^ers in marriage, lodged strangers, and gave ^ntertainement to five
hundred men, whom the sea had cast upon that coast. Valerius.

Buza a noble Lady of Pouile, relieved ten thousand Romans which had escaped
from the battle of Cannas. Idem.

Hiero King of Sicile, gave unto the Romans in time of their need, thirty
thousand quarters of Wheat, two hundred of Barley, and 250. pound weight of
gold.

Q. Flaminius, having conquered the Lacedaemonians, discharged them of all
tallages, and impositions contrary to the manner of other conquerers, who are
wont to lay burdens upon the backs of them whom they had conquered.

Alexander was reputed the most bountiful and liberal of all Princes, who gave
to none but to Philosophers, men of war, and Counselors.

One day a Iugler (by his subtle slight) threw a dry pease a great way
through the eye of a needle, hoping to have some reward, but the King making no
reckoning of him, commanded one to give him a bushel of those pease to
practice his feats withal.

Alexander gave his Treasurer charge, to give to Anaxarchus the Philosopher
whatsoever he asked, and when he had asked a^ hundred talents, the Treasurer
astonished ^hereat, told Alexander, who answered, That Anaxarchus knew well
enough, that he had a friend that both could and would bestow so much upon him.

Caesar gave a great sum of money to e^er^ soldier of the old bands.

Bellisarius was beloved of his followers for his liberality, because he gave
them horse and armor whensoever they had lost them, so it were not through
their own negligence. P. Diaconus.

Vitellius, contrary to Caligula, never denied any man his request.

Scipio dyed poor, notwithstanding he had subdued two mighty Cities, Numance
and Carthage, so bountiful was he all his life time.

Lisander esteemed liberality to others, more then his own private welfare.

Fabius Maximus, at his own charge redeemed many Roman prisoners that were
taken captive by Haniball.

Of Patience. This virtue causes a wise man to prepare himself to entertain
all kind of fortunes therefore God has so disposed things, that he will not
suffer man to have a prescience of things to come.
OF all men, one man named Anarchus Augustus, was most patient in torments, and
one woman named Laena, most patient for silence. Pliny.

Plutarch gave the Emperor Traiane counsel to be patient toward furious
folks, considering that time moderateth as many matters, as reason does change.

Socrates being counseled to revenge a wrong received, answered, What if a
mastie had bitten me, or an Ass had struck me, would you have me go to law
with them?

Ptolomey King of Egypt, demanded merrily of a Gramarian, who was the Father of
Peleus, who answered, that he desired first to know who was the Father of
Lagus; noting thereby his base parentage, whom when he was counseled to
punish, said patiently, If it be unseemly for a King to be mocked, it is also
as indecent for him to mock another.

Valentinian was of a subtle wit, grave countenance, stout in his affairs,
in adversities patient, and a great enemy of the vicious, temperate in eating
and drinking; and a friend to religious persons. P. Diac.

After Sylla the Roman had resigned his Dictatorshyp, and became a private
man, a certain young man greatly reviled him, and gave him evil language even
before his own dwelling place, he now patiently bearing his speeches without
any reuengement, who before had caused many of his countrymen to die, for
smaller offenses toward him. Appian.

When Nicodromos the Musician had smytten Crates the Thebane on the face, he
ware a piece of paper on his forheade over the wound, where in he wrote, This
did Nicodromos; He would of purpose scold with harlots, thereby to inure
himself to bear al reproaches the more patiently. Them. Phal.

When the persecuted Christians complained against their adversaries to Julian
the Emperor, desiring justice; he ansvvered them, It is your Masters
commandment, that you should bear all kind of injuries with patience.

Mauritius the Emperor, beholding the death of his children with great
patience, when he savve his wife put to death, cried out, O Lord thou art
just, and thy judgments are right.

Darius, what ill hap soever chanced unto him, he took it patiently, and
was never troubled in mind for the same. Herodotus.

Anaxagoras was much commended for so patiently bearing the death of his
son, for when news was brought him that his son was dead, he said; I knew
that I had begotten a mortal man. Laertius.

Eretricus one of Zenos scholars, being asked of his father what he had
learned, answered, he would tell him by and by; but he thereat angry,
struck his son, who presently said unto him, This much have I learned, to
bear patiently the words and blows which my father gives me.

Lycurgus having lost one of his eyes by the misbehauiour of Alcander toward
him, the Citizens brought Alcander unto him to be punished; but he contrary to
their request, patiently dismissed him, and pardoned the offense. Thucidides.

Eusebius when a wicked woman of the sect of Arrius had willingly thrown a
stone at him, and therewithal had vvounded him to death, he was so patiently
minded, and so far from taking revenge, that he swore all his friends that
were about him at the very hour of his death, not to punish her for the same.

Xenophon, Dion, and Antigonus, are fa^ous for their singular patience.

The Gymnosophists of India were so patient, that from sun rising till sun
setting, they continued upon the hot sand without either meat or drink.

The Lacedaemonians were most patient in travail, wind, weather, and wars.

Diogenes walking one day abroad in Athence, wherein there was many images of
such ancient men as had best deserved of the Commonwealth, asked his alms of
them all one after another; and being asked why he did so, I learn hereby
(quoth he) to take denial patiently.

The Hebrew Doctors figure the Ass as a perfect symbol of patience,
fortitude, and clemency. Cor. Agrippa.

Because the Ass patiently yields his body to so many burdens, in reward
thereof, he is never troubled with the lousie sickness. Idem.

The Ass was so respected in the old Testament, that when God commanded
every first borne to be slain for sacrifice, he only spared with men, Asses.

Christ would have the patient Ass a witness of his nativity. Idem.

A certain Philosopher usurped the name not to the true use of virtue, but for
ostentation sake, to whom one said, that he would not repute him a wise
Philosopher, unless he did with patience endure contumelies and injuries,
which he a while did suffer, but boasting said; Now do thou see that I am
a right Philosopher, but the other presently replied, I had understood so much
if thou had held thy peace. Boethius.

Tyberius Caesar was commended of Suetonius for suffering in free cities free
tongs.

Philip of Macedon, asked the Ambassadors of Athence what pleasure he might
do to them? to whom they answered, that it were the greatest pleasure to
Athence, if he would hang himself; which the King patienly endured, saying;
Your reproachful words do make King Philip better able to revenge your malice
by wars, then move him to answer your unseeming speeches with words.

Alexander Seuerus being by some of his friends informed that he was greatly
maligned of his people, and blamed of the Senators for the slender regard he
had of the City, he said: It belongs to Princes to requite the good, and
not remember the evil. Herodian.

Harpalus was of exceeding patience, being bidden by Astiages to supper, where
he had two sons of his ready dressed, and laid in a silver charger before him
on the table to be eaten. Justinius.

Of Education. There be two ages (as Aristotle says) wherinto the institution
of youth is to be divided, namely, from the age of seven years until
fourteen, and from fourteen to one and twenty: for they that divide the
ages by seven, most commonly say amiss, but it is rather meet to follow the
division of nature, because every Art and institution, will supply the want of
nature.
IN Persia, Lacedemonia, and sundry other Provinces, the Princes and the
Nobility, had alvvayes a special regard to commit the education of their
children to such men of learning, as might instruct them in matters of
wisdom, whereby they might prove profitable to their c^untry.

Lycurgus, to prove that education could alter nature, brought up two whelps
which had both one Damme, the one to hunt, the other to keep house, and
afterward, to try the conclusion, he set down before them an Hare and a pot
of pottage, the one fell t^ the pottage, the other ran after the Hare
Aelianus.

Socrates and Themistocles were both by nature vicious, but by education
virtuous, the one made a perfect man by Philosophy, the other by the example of
Miltiades.

M. Portius Cato, would needs be Schoolemaister to his own children, which
institution did much avail them, not so much because he was Cato, as that he
was their Father. Plutarch.

Julius Caesar, adopted his nephew Octauius, and brought him up himself.

Amongst the Heluetians or Switzers, when one was condemned to death, order was
taken that the execution thereof should be done by the Father, who was the
cause of his evil education; that he might come to his death by the author of
his life, and that the father might in some sort be punished for his negligence
used toward his child.

Traianus and Adrianus, at their own charges caused five thousand noble men's
Children of Rome, to be brought up in learning, virtue, and feats of Arms,
for the profi^ of the Commonwealth. Eutropius.

Eteocles, one of the most noble Euphorie of Lacedemonia, freely answered
Antipater asking 50. pledges, that he would not give him children, least if
they were brought up far from their Fathers, they should change the ancient
custom of living used in their own country, and become vicious, but of old
men and women he would give him double the number, if he would be so pleased to
accept of them.

Leo the Emperor wished, that Schoolemaisters might receive the pay of men at
Arms.

Alexander caused thirty thousand children of those nations he had conquered,
to be brought up under professors of sundry Sciences; by whose policies, if he
had lived, he had thought to have held all the whole world in awe. Plutarch.

Hipperides an Orator of Greece, said to one who told him that he had sent a
slave with his son to govern him, You have done very well, for in sted of
one slave, at his return you shall receive two.

The Citizens of Rome, did throw Scemides with her son Heliogabalus, alive
into the river Tyber, to bear him company, for that she bare and brought up
such a gulf of mischiefs. Suetrnius.

Plato had his education among the priest of Egypt, where he learned such
instructions* as made his phylosophie so perfect, that what^soeuer proceeded
from the mouth of Plato, was accounted divine.

The Lacedaemonians were wont to make choice of men of learning and wisdom
for the education of their citizens, and them they called Public Tutors, for
which respect they were holden virtuous men in action, valiant of courage, and
excellent in martial discipline.

The Philosophers in Greece, made certain plays for the instruction of young
men, which discipline, eternal memory has preserved till these our days.

In Julius Caesar there wanted no fortitude, for he overcame many, neither
clemency, for he pardoned his enemies; neither liberality, for he gave away
kingdoms, neither science, for he vvrote many books, neither fortune, for he
was Lord of all men, but he vvanted good manners, which is the foundation of
a quiet life. Suetonius.

King Philip of Macedon, vowed his son unto Aristotle as soon as ever he was
born, and afterward did put him happily into his hands, and he trained him up
in philosophy.

Comodus the Emperor, was a very virtuous child in the beginning, and had good
education; but in the end he proved a most wicked Prince. Suetonius.

Nero wanted no good instructions, and such a master he had, as never any had
a better, yet among all the Emperors of Rome, not any one was worse then he.
Tacitus.

Julian the Apostate, took away all beneuolences and contributions to schools
of ^earning, to the end the children might not be instructed in the liberal
Arts, but brought up in ignorance.

Caligula the fourth Emperor of Rome, was brought up with such cost and
delicacie in his youth, that they doubted in Rome, whether Drusius Germanicus
his Father, employed more for the Armies in vvarres, then Caligula his son
spent in the cradle for his pleasures. Suetonius.

The Mother of Alexander the twenty six Emperor of Rome, was so careful of
her sons education, that she kept continually a guard of men to take heed,
that no vicious man came unto him to corrupt him in evil. Herodian.

Of Wit and Memory. A good wit has three degrees, of hope, of practicing, of
perfection; the first is in children, the second in young men, in being
perceived 3. ways, by desire to learn, by quick conceit, by a good memory;
The third of perfection, is in the elder sort, when they quickly conceive,
faithfully remember, and fruitfully put in practice those things which they
have learned.
ESdras the priest had the laws of the Hebrews at his fingers end.

Al^ibiades, wheresoever he was, and in what country soever he soiourned,
could easily frame himself according to the manners of the people. Plutarch.

Such another was Marcus Antonius, for at Rome he vvoulde live like a Roman,
and would seem a right Senator, in Egypt who more licentious?

Seuerus the good Emperor, because of his stable wit and judgment, was called
Seuerus Pertinax. Eutropius.

Clemens the sixth was of so good a memory, that whatsoever he once learned,
he never after forgot.

Mithridates was of so great a memory, that he could call every one of his
Soldiers by name. Appian.

Anthony of Gueuara, sometimes his memory would be so good, and wit so quick,
and skill so excellent, that he could divide an hair, and sweep a grain, at
other times, he wished not only 5. but 10. senses, which we call wits.

The first lesson that Socrates taught his Scholars, was, Remember, learn to
forget that which thou have ill learned. Lirinensis.

The Sophists of Greece could with their eloquence and copiousnes of wit, make
of a Mouse an Elephant, and a mountain of a molehill.

The Scholars of Pythagoras learned his precepts by heart, using their wits and
memories for books.

Portius never forgotte any thing that he once read before.

Seneca could rehearse after one by hearing, two hundred verses.

Aelius Adrianus, amongst a great army of Soldiers, if any one were missing,
straight knew who it was. Justinius.

Scipio could call all his Soldiers by name. Plutarch.

I. Caesar could read, talk, hear, and aun^swere at one time. Pliny.

Carmedes, a Grecian, never heard any thing, but he could repeat it word by
word, without writing.

Pythagoras was willed of Mercury, to ask what he would, but immortality, and
he should have it, of whom he obtained to keep in memory, all things that he
had heard and seen. Laertius.

Lucullus is recorded of Tully for his excellent memory.

The Aegiptians used characters and figures for their memory, which was called
local memory. Baptista.

Hortensius could pronounce out of hand with his tongue, what he wrote with his
pen. Pliny.

Cyneas being sent from King Pyrrhus to Rome, the second day in the Senate
house, before all the people of Rome, he named all the Senators.

Cyrus could call every Soldier in his camp by name. Xenophon.

Cassius Seuerus, said, that although his books were burned, he carried all
his learning in mind and memory.

^ublius Crassus, at one instant, heard five sundry languages spoken, and
answered each of them in the same tongue.

Julius Caesar at one time caused his Secretaries to write unto four several
persons, of sundry matters, and would oftentimes indite a letter to one of his
Secretaries, read in a book, and hear another speak, all at one time.

Seneca rehearsed two thousand sundry names, having only heard them
pronounced before, beginning at the last, and continuing to the first.

One asked Domaratus, who was the honestest man in Sparta, He that resembles
thee least, said he.

One asked an Aegiptian, what he carried folded up, it is wrapped up, quoth
he, because thou should not know.

Another asked, what God made before he made heaven, who answered, hell, for
such inquisitiue persons.

Virgill for all that with his so divine a wit and judgment, took all hope
from his posterity, for any to follow him at any time, yet would he follow
Homer.

Pythagoras very wittily, and after a subtle manner, found out the measure of
Hercules body by his foot, measuring the space where every five years they
kept their games a^ Olympus. Pliny.

The Aegiptians marked the well memoried man, with the figure of an Hare or a
Fox, for that the Hare hears best, and the Fox is of greatest memory, and if
any want memory, they compare him to a Crocodile. Baptista.

Some are of opinion, that the sign Capricornus was Pan, whom Jupiter for the
dexterity of his wit so metamorphized.

Aelius Adrianus the Emperor, would at one time write, hear, and talk with
his friends. Justinius.

Homer in his description of Ulysses, makes him of little stature, but of an
excellent wit, and of the contrary, he sets forth A^ax with body and members
of great corpulency, but very simple in mind and judgment.

Alexander Seuerus, and Charles the fifth, writ down those thar did them
service, and the rewards which he had given to many of them; and if in perusing
his notes of remembrance, he saw any man that had done him service, and was
not worthily recompensed, he caused him to come before him, and asked him why
he had not sued for recompense. Rauisius.

Messala was of so weak a memory, that he forgot his own name. Pliny.

Caluisius forgot his friends names, with whom he daily kept company. Seneca.

Curio a Judge, was so forgetful, that he forgot the case which he should
give judgment on. Cicero.

Atticus was of so weak a memory, that he could not remember the four
elements.

Bamba, King of the Goths, by a drink given by Heringeus his successor, lost
his memory.

The Poets feign, that there is a river in hell called Lethe, of the which who
soever drinks, forgets all what he remembered before.

The Thracians were so dull, that they could not count above four.

Heraclitus Seuerus, was dumb before the Emperor.

Cicero was astonished at the presence of the Senators, and Demosthenes at king
Phillip.

Theophrastus many times in the midst of his Oration, was at a stand.

Hipparchion when he would have contended with Ruffinus, had not a word to say,
from whence the proverb came, Hiparchio is domb.

Orbilius by extremity of age, forgot his Alphabet and letters.

A certain Roman vaunted to Scipio, that he could call more men by their
names then he, to whom he answered, you say true, for my study has not been
to know many, but to be known of all.

Salust was much commended for the dexterity of his wit, especially in writing
of an History. Petrus Crinitus.

The invention of the Art memoratiue, is fathered upon Simonides.

Lasterna and Axiothea, were two Grecian women, very well learned, and amongst
the Scholars of Plato much renowned; the one was of so perfect memory, and the
other of so high understanding, that Plato oft-times being in the chair, and
these two not come, he would not begin to read, saying, I will not read, for
that there wants here understanding to conceive, and memory to retain.
Hyzearchus.

The fifth Queen of the Lidians was Mirrha, which of her body was so little,
that they called her a Dwarf, but in quicknes of wit so high, that they
called her a Giant. Strabo.

Archelaus the Philosopher, learning Geometry of Hipponicus, was so dull, and
yet so well learned therein, that he would say that Geometry fell into his
mouth as he gaped.

Hermogenes, when he was but fifteen years old, was reported of to be an
approo^ed Sophist, but afterward he utterly lost the habit of this faculty,
of whom Antiochus Sophista, said, Hermogenes is become in his old age a child,
who in his childhood was an old man.

The Emperor Adrianus was of a wonderful memory, in so much that he could
recite the names of all his absent followers, besides, he was in labor so
painful, that he in proper person visited all his provinces. Tacitus.

Themistocles to one offering to teach him the Art of memory, desired him to
teach him how to forget. Plut.

Demosthenes was very hard to conceive, and yet none more famous then he among
the Grecian Orators, upon the sudden he could not declaime, and being thereto
entreated, would answer, non sum paratus. Laertius.

Cicero should once have pleaded upon small warning, but by an occasion it was
deferred until another day, which news his Servant Erotes brought him, at
which he so rejoiced, that he made made Erotes of a bond man, a free Citizen
of Rome. Plut.

Cecillio was so foolish, that he atempted to tell the waves of the swelling
Sea, as they boiled in the tumbling stream. Aelianus.

Chorebus, and Melitiades, were famous for their follies, of the which, the
latter came to succor the Princes, after Troy was destroyed. Homer,

Of Diligence. Diligence has reference, to the body, and the mind, in the
mind, it is study, in the body, labor, and by so much the more the exercise of
the mind is painful, as the virtues of the one excel the other.
THE Aegiptians, when they signified labor, figured an Ant running into the
corn.

Cleanthes in the night carried water, in the day, was one of Chrysippus
Auditors, who being an hundred years old, read Philosophy. Laertius.

Sophocles, Plato, Isocrates, Hierome, continued their studious labors, to
their second birth, ending their lyfes with their works. Volaterranus.

Diodorus Siculus travailed the better part of Asia and Europe, least he should
err, as many before him had done, in the worlds description.

Nicaula, the Queen of Aegipt and Aethiopia, to hear the wisdom of Solomon,
came from the farthest part of Arabia to Iudaea.

Publicola was blessed in his endeavors, got fame by his industry, woone
battles by his forwardnes, and dyed fortunatly through living laboriously.
Plut.

Philotis by labor overcame the Latins, and by his study and policy, got
that victory which the Romans detracted by their fear.

The stuttering of Alcibiades, did not so much hurt him, as his industry in
wars renowned him. Thucidides.

If Demosthenes had seen any Citizen up before him, and at work, it did
greatly grieve him; his continual labor and diligence in study, made him
prove so rare an Orator.

Marius so charged his Soldiers, and employed them in the ditches near unto
the Rhyne, that they were after termed the moyles of Marius. Appian.

Nicias a paynter, was so earnest, and intentive to his profession, that he
forgot to take food and sustenance to succor nature. Aelian.

The Romans allowed every hour of the day, a several kind of exercise.
Martialis.

Caesar in the wars betwixt him and Pompey, used such diligence, that coming
ou^ of France, he made himself Master of all Italy in three score days,
without any effusion of blood, and drove away his enemy. Plutarch.

Caesar, although he was weak, and of tender complexion, subject to the
falling-sicknes, used not the infirmity of his body for a cloak to live idely,
but took the labors of war for a medicine, fighting against disease with
continual labor and exercise, lying for the most part in the open air with
his Soldiers. Idem.

Claudius enjoying an assured peace, caused the channel Fucinus to be made,
that Rome might have the commodity of good waters, about which work 30^
thousand were daily employed, for the space of twelve years.

Adrianus seeing a general peace within his Empire, continually undertook new
and strange iourneyes, one while into France, another into Germany, then into
Asia, causing his men of war to march with him, least being idle they should
forget their martial discipline. Justinius.

A wise Roman counseled the Senate not ^o have peace with Carthage, least
the Romans being in safety should become idle, and grow too civil
dissentions.

Gelon King of Syracusa, led his people oftentimes into the fields, as well to
labor the ground and to plant, as to fight, both that the earth might be
better being well dressed, as also because he feared, least his people should
grow idle.

The wise and ancient Kings of Aegipt, employed their idle people, in digging
of the earth, and building of those Pyramides, which are reckoned amongst the
seven wonders of the world.

M. Aurelius speaking of the diligence of the ancient Romans, writes, that
they all followed their labor so earnestly, that having necessary occasion one
day to send a letter two or three days journey from the town, he could not
find one idle body in all the City to do it.

Too much diligence is hurtful, which Apelles reproved in Protogenes, who
would never keep his hands from the table, not knowing when a thing was well.

Alexander in the night time, used to hold a silver ball in his hand, when he
went to bed, having a silver Basin upon the ground under his arm, that when he
was a sleep, the falling of the ball might awake him, and put him in
remembrance of his enemies. Brusonius

Julius Caesar divided the night into three parts, to Nature, to his own
Country, about his own businesses.

Phillip King of Macedon, when his Soldiers slept, he always watched.
Brusonius.

He never slept, before his friend Antipater would watch.

King Phillip doubted more the diligence of Demosthenes, then he feared all the
force of Athence.

Demosthenes, that he might avoid all occasions of the Cities pleasures, and
with more liberty apply his studies, caused the hair of his head to be close
shaued off, for three whole months together.

Plautus writ his Comedies in the day, and in the night grinded in a mill.

Solon ordained that the high Court of Areopagus, should have authority and
charge to inquire whereof every man lived, and to punish those whom they found
idle and dissolute.

Julius Caesar obtained many victories by his diligence, in such wise, that he
amazed the Carnuts that had revolted from him.

Traian and Adrian were so diligent and skillful in war matters, that they
knew the account of their Legions, and called the most part of their Soldiers
by name. Eutropius.

Epaminondas never gave him self respite from dealing in matters of state,
saying, that ^e watched for his Country-mens sakes, to the intent that they
might make good chere at their ease, while he travailed for them.

Scipio sent against Hanibal, marched at the sun set, riding all night toward
Carthage, and by day he was there, and made a ditch and trench about it, and
the same day prepared to give the assault. Appian.

Crispus differing from others, and seeming to be more prone to pleasure, did
notwithstanding apply himself to the handling of important matters, which he
performed with most diligence under a show of idleness. Tacitus.

Agrippa did wisely admonish him that intended to conserve his credit in
Court, to observe two things, the one, that with his labors he should mollify
the hardness of matters, the other, that he should leave the glory of atchiuing
them to others. Diodorus.

Caesar used such expedition in the last encounter with Pompey at Pharsalia,
that he writ to the Senate, Veni, vidi, vici, I came, saw, and overcame. Plut.

Of Constancy and Perseverance* In every good action advisedly begun, is
required, constancy, and perseverance, which are called by Tully, the health of
the mind, resisting all dolours that seeks to confound it, and containing in
their power, the whole force and efficacy of wisdom.
POmponius Atticus was much renowned for his constant behavior toward
Mithridates, whom he esteemed as one of his Princes about him. Appian.

M. Regulus was not so commended, because he had been twice consul, and, once
had gloriously tryumphed, as for keeping his faith given to the Carthagenians,
and suffered his eyelids to be cut off, and so to stand against the Sun
until he died.

Zeno being cruelly tormented of a King of Cyprus, to con^es what he urged,
because he would not satisfy his mind, bit off his tongue, and spit it in the
tormentors face.

The constancy of Caius Marius was wonderful, who to recover his health, did
not only give himself to be sawed in sunder, but stood so quietly while it was
doing, as if not he, but another man had felt the pain.

Although a thousand troubles encombred the commonwealth, yet Socrates was of
an unchangeable spirit and mind, and in all cases constant. Laertius.

Alcibiades hearing the sentence of his condemnation to death pronounced, said;
It is that leave the Athenians condemned to dye, and not they me; for I go to
seek the Gods, where I shall be immortal, but they shall remain still amongst
men, who are all subject to death.

Polycarpus dying, said to the proconsull: Why lingerest thou? use either
beasts or fire to destroy me. Loncerus.

Ignatius being condemned, said boldly; I am the wheat of God, and I shall be
grownd with the teeth of beasts, that I may be found fine manchet.

Cyprian said a little before his end, I am iam gladio feriendus deo gratias, I
thank God I shall straightway be smitten with the sword.

S. Lawrance tormented upon a fiery Gridiron, said to the Emperor, Look o
wretch, thou have roasted one side, turn the other. Eusebius.

Gordius, as he was led to the place of punishment, was exhorted by some to
leave (...) opinion, and to save his life, to whom he aun^swered, that the
tongue ought to utter nothin^ that is injurious to the Creator thereof. P.
Diacorius.

Socrates had alvvayes one and the same countenance all his life time, he was
never sadder, nor pleasanter for any thing that happened unto him. Plato.

P. Rutilius being unjustly banished, never changed his behavior, neither
would put on any other Gown, then that he used to wear, although it was the
custom of such as were banished to alter the same.

Q. Metellus surnamed Numidicus, for conquering Numidia, being banished, went
into Asia, where he frequented plays, and receiving letters from the Senate to
call him home again, the news he bare with as great modesty as his exile
with constancy, not departing from the Theater before the sports were ended.

One casting Diogenes in the teeth with his banishment from Pontus by the
Synopians, answered; I have bounded them with the Country of Pontus.

Aristides when Dionisius desired his daughter in marriage, he answered, that
he had rather see her dead, then the wife of a Tyrant. And having slain her,
he was again asked if he continued in that mind; I am (quoth he) sorry for the
fact, but glad that I have so spoken.

Cato, notwithstanding the affliction of his Country, in him was never seen
any alteration, but had alvvayes one cheer, and one countenance, as well
being repulsed, as when he was Praetor. Plutarch.

It is recorded of Saint Anthony and Saint Hillary, that they suffered
wonderful temptations in the desert, and yet did not forbear even there, to
do great service to their Creator.

Aulus Vitellius* a most victorious Emperor, of all others was so inconstant,
that he would say and unsay with one breath, and was as wavering in all his
actions, as a vvethercocke.

Sextus Pompeius, for his wonderful mutabilitie was much defamed.

The Commonwealth of the Sicyonians, endured longer then that of the Greeks,
Egyptians, Lacedaemonians, or the Romans, and the reason thereof was, because
that in seven hundred and forty years, they never made any new laws, or
brake their old. Lact.

The Egyptians rather choose to dye the^ to reveal any secrets, though they be
never so much racked and tormented. Macrob.

Aesope the bondsman of Demosthenes, wa^ often urged by torture to confess his
Masters dealing with Julian, but could never be brought to acknovvledge any
thing, until at the length, Demosthenes himself disclosed it. Fulgosius.

Anasillus, Captain of the Athenians, was taken of the Lacedaemonians and put
to the torture, because he should tell what he knew, and what the King
Agesilaus his master did intend; to whom he answered; You Lacedaemonians,
have liberty to dismember me, but I have none to reveal my Lords secrets.
Plutarch.

Octauius Consul of Rome when Marius was banished, at his repeal was warned
by the Augurs to take heed of him and Cinna, but he, constantly determining
not to leave the city while he was Consul, went to them in his roabes, with
the Rods and the Axes carried before him, and his friends bringing him a
horse to flee, he refused so to do, but abode the stroke of Censorinus, who
carried his head to Cinna. Appian.

Labienus, who in Syllas time had killed many that were proscribed, thinking
that himself might well be reproved if he should not suffer death resolutely,
went home to his house, sat down in his chair, and tarried the coming of
those whom Anthony sent to take away his life. Appian.

Of Friendship. The Romans perceiving the necessity of Friendship, shadowed
the same in the shape of a young man, whose head was bared, and upon his
breast was written Summer and VVinter; who having his breast open, and putting
his finger to his heart, had therein set, Far and near, and on the skirts
of his coat were drawn, Life and death.
ARtorius a Roman, at the siege of Jerusalem being in a place that was set
on fire, looking from the top of the house, saw one of his friends by Titus,
to whom he said, Friend Lucius, get on thy armor and come near, that I may
leap down upon thee, and thou may receive me. Lucius stood for his friend,
who light upon him with such force that they both died, which friendship, Titus
caused to be noted to after ages. Vrbanus.

Alcibiades being desirous to know whether he had so many friends as he
thought, he called them all one after another into a dark place, and showed
unto them the image of a dead body, saying that it was a man who^ he had
killed, and requesting them to help him to carry the same away, amongst them
all he found none but Callias that vvoulde harken unto him.

Cyrus alvvayes placed his friends on his left side, as near his heart.
Xenophon.

The friendship of Jonathan and David, could not be hindered by the wrath of
the Father of the one, nor any io^e changed, although he knew that his friend
should afterward reign over him, notwithstanding he were by inheritance to
succeed next his father in the kingdom.

There was but one Orestes, and yet Pylades called himself Orestes, and was
condemned to die, under that name, only to save the life of his companyon.

Dion of Syracusa, was slain of Callicrates, whom he alvvayes highly
favored, and supposed to be the most assuredst friend he had living in the
world.

Voluminous hearing of the death of his friend Lucullus, came to Anthony,
desiring him to send his soldiers to kill him upon the grave of his friend
and bury him; which he denying, Voluminous went to his grave, and there
killed himself, leaving a brief by him, wherein was written, Thou that
knew the faithful love between Volumnus and Lucullus, join our bodies
being dead, as our minds were one being alive.

Asmundus so dearly loved his friend Asotus, that after he was dead, he
would needs be buried with him alive. Saxo.

The Oracle of Apollo, pronounced the amity between Chariton and Menalippus,
to be heavenly, divine, and celestial.

Blossius humbly desired pardon of Lelius, because he took part with
Gracchus, having no greater reason to excuse himself but his great love toward
him, which he confessed to be such, that he thought himself bound in
friendshyp to do whatsoever he would have him, yea, if it were to burn the
Capitol. Cicero.

Lucilius, when he saw that his friend Brutus was compassed about with
enemies, he with a few soldiers ran among the^, and said that he was Brutus,
that his friend might escape away. Plut.

Polytius gave Scipio counsel that he should never depart from the public
place of authority, before he had got some nevve friend and wel-willer.

Phocion, when a friend of his would have cast himself away, would not
suffer him, saying, I was made thy friend to this purpose.

Cicero writ to Atticus, that a friend was bound to wish but three things
unto his friend, that he be healthy, that he be well accounted of, and that he
be not needy.

Archidamus, when he was chosen Arbitrator to decide a certain contention
between two friends, brought them both into Dianas Temple, and made them
swear upon the Altar, that they would observe what soever he determined;
whereupon they yielded, I judge then (quoth he) that none of you depart this
Temple before you be reconciled. Thus were they constrained to agree between
themselves, and Archidamus freed from loosing their friendships who^ he deerly
loved.

The Egyptians showed signs of stronger friendship to their friends being
dead, then when they were living.

Scipio Affricanus, going against the Numantines, divided his Army into 500.
companies, and made one band which he called Philonida, the band of friends.

Mithridates, sought to drive Nicomedes forth of Bithinia, who was friend to
the Romans, and gave the Romans so much to understand; to whom the Senate
made answer, that if he warred upon Nicomedes, he should likewise fear the
force of the Romans. Appian.

Cicero and Clodius, Tiberius and Affricanus, from mortal foes became faithful
friends.

Scipio greatly complained, that men were very skillful in numbering their
Goats and Sheep, but few could reckon their friends.

Alexander held Aristotle dear, Darius Herodotus, Augustus Piso, Pampeius
Pla^tus, Titus Pliny, Traiane Plutarch, Anthonius Apollonius, Theodotius
Claudius, Seuerus Fabatus.

Pericles being desired by a friend to aid him with false witness, answered,
That he would friend him as high as the heavens; meaning, that men should aid
their friends so far as justice and gods laws did permit. Thu.

Plato seeing he could not bring the Commonwealth to happiness by virtue,
reduced all laws to friendship, devising all things to be common, affirming
that two only words, namely Mine and Thine, where the things that disturbed the
society of man.

Homer gives Achilles a Patroclus, Virgill an Achates unto Aeneas, Alexander
had his Hephestion, Darius his Zopirus, and Scipio his Laelius.

Dion and Julius Caesar, had rather die then distrust their friends. Plu.

Augustus wanting his old friends Maecenas and Agrippa, said, that if they had
lived, he had not fallen into the troubles he was then in. Seneca.

Scaurus and Cataline, the conspirators against Rome; and Brutus and Cassius,
the murderers of Caesar, held great leagues and confederacy together; but in
no sort they could be called friends, for there can be no true amity, where
is no virtue.

Among heavenly bodies, Mercury, Jupiter, Sol, and Luna, are friends to
Saturn, but Mars and Venus are his enemies.

All the Planets saving Mars, are friends to Jupiter, and all the rest of the
Planets saving Venus, hate Mars. Jupiter and Venus love Sol. Mars, Mercury, and
Luna, are his enemies, and all the rest of the Planets love Venus, except
Saturn.

Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn, are friends to Mercury, Sol, Luna, and Mars, are
his enemies.

There are inclinations of friendship, in vig^able and mineralls, as the
Loadstone has to iron, the Emerald has to riches and favors, the stone
Iaspis to childbirth, the stone Achates to eloquence, and Naptha ^ot only
draws fire unto it, but fire leapeth unto it where soever it is, the like
does the root Aproxes.

Such friendship is between the male and female Date tree, that when a bough
of the one shall touch a bough of the other, they fold themselves into a
natural embracing, and never does the female bring forth fruit without the
male.

Vines love the Elm tree and the Olive, the Myrtle likewise loves the Olive
and the Fig Tree; and if the Almond tree grovve alone, it will prove
unfruitful.

There is friendship between the Blackebird and the Thrush, between the
Choffe and the Heron, between the Peacocks and the Doves. Isodorus.

Cato the Censor, had a Ring vvhereon was engraven, Esto amicus vnius, et
inimicus nullius; Be friend to one, and enemy to none. Pliny.

Of Love. All the Arts and Sciences of the world, may in time be learned,
except the Art of Love, the which neither Solomon had skill to write, nor
Asclepias to paynt, nor Ovid to teach, Helen to report, or Cleopatra learn,
being a continual Schoolemaister in the heart; whose divine furies are
Prophetical, mystical, poetical, amatorial; consecrated to Apollo, Bacchus,
the Muses, and Venus.
THe Poets mean nothing else by those towns of Adamant which they write of,
but the love of Citizens, who by no force or policy can be overcome, so long
as in heart they hold together.

The Grecians, so long as they continued at peace among themselves, they were
co^querers of all men, but after that civil discention had once entered in
amongst them, they fell daily more and more to such ruin, that in few years
they became laughing-stocks to all the world. Plutarch.

Balsaria, when Calphurinus Crassus was taken captive of the Messalines, and
should have been offered for a sacrifice unto Saturn, she delivered Crassus
from death, and made him conqueror.

Caluce, after Troy was destroyed, when King Lycus her Father (sailing into
Lybia) had appointed to kill Diomedes for sacrifice, to appease the Gods for
vvind and vvea^^er, she delivered him from her Father, and s^ued his life.

Scipio Affricanus, esteemed so much the Poet Ennius alive, that being dead,
he caused his picture to be set before his eyes, as a memorial of his great
love. Plutarch.

Pomponius Atticus, thought himself happy, when either Cicero was in his
sight, or his books in his bosom.

Plato in his book entitled Conuiuium, interlaceth Comicall speeches of love;
howbeit all the rest of the supper, there is nothing but discourses of
Philosophy.

Alexander loved highly Apelles, insomuch that after he had made him draw out a
I^eman of his naked, whom he likewise loved dearly, understanding that he was
enamored on her, he bestowed her on him.

Alexander would have his picture drawn by none but Apelles, nor cut by any
in brass but only Lysippus, so greatly did he affect them. Curtius.

Stagerita, the town where Aristotle vv^^ borne, being destroyed by Philip of
Mac^^don, Alexander his son for the love he^ bare to his Master Aristotle,
reedified the same again.

Valerius, servant to Panopion, hearing that certain soldiers came unto the
City of Rheatina, of purpose to kill his master, he changed apparel with
his master, and conveyed him away, suffering himself to be slain in his
Masters bed, for the great love he bare him.

The Persians, for the affection they bare to their horses, when they died
buried them.

Alexander made a tomb for Bucephalus.

Seuerus the Emperor, for the love he bare to Pertinax, whom Iulianus slew,
willed that men should ever after call him Pertinax. Eutrop.

A Persian woman being asked why she had rather save the life of her brother
then of her own son, Because (said she) I well may have more children, but
never no more brothers, seeing my father and mother are dead.

Eros, the servant of Antonius, having promised to kill his Master when he
requested him, drevv his sword, and holding it as if he would have killed him,
turned his Masters head aside, and thrust the sword into his own body.
Plutarch.

Agesilaus was fined by the Ephories, because he had stolen away the hearts and
won the love of all his citizens to himself.

The Emperor Claudius did neither love nor hate, but as he was provoked and
induced thereunto by others. Tacitus.

Herius of Corinth, builded in the midst of the City a Temple to the Goddess
Venus, within which were enclosed more then 500. of the fairest maids of Asia,
whom their parents did there consecrate to the Goddess Venus, to the end they
might be Lovers, and stales to draw lovers to them; holding her for most
religious and holy, which was most amorous and dissolute.

Samocratius, Nigidius, and Ovid, writ many volumes of the remedy of love; but
it little profited themselves, for they al three died in persecution, not for
the abuses they committed at Rome, but for the loves they practiced at Capua.

The cause of civil dissension between Themistocles and Aristides, was the love
of Stesilia an harlot, whose beauty being vanished, their hatred was such, that
they never could be reconciled, but continued enemies even to the death.

The like hatred was betvveene Cato and Caesar, about the love of the harlot
Seruilia.

The Kings of Assiria never answered any Ambassador themselves, but by
messengers, they spending their time in courting their Concubines; and for
their vnkinglie love to women, they were ever condemned of all men. Pausanius.

Alexander, for the love he bare to the famous harlot Thais, caused that most
renowned and rich city Persepolis to be burned.

Publius Pilatus, was in love with the Images of Helena and Atalanta.

Pigmalion doated on an Iuory image that he had made with his own hands. Ovid.

Two young men of Athence, were in love with the picture of Fortune.

Cataline, for the love of Orestilla, killed his own son, because she would
not join in marriage with him while his son lived. Salust.

Estrasco a Roman, borne dumb, loved Verona a Latin, borne also dumb, who
lyking each other, came and visited each other, by the space of thirty years,
without the witting of any person, then died the husband of the Lady Verona,
and the wife of Estrasco, they married, and of them descended the noble lineage
of the Scipios. Aurelius.

The Poets feign, that in Leucadia there is a very high steep Rock, which is
a notable remedy to assuage love; from this, first leaped Cephalus, for the
love of Degonetes, whom he loved without measure.

Timon Misanthropos, loved none but only Alcibiades, and him he loved and
once kissed, because he saw in his face the destruction of Athence. Plutarch.

Xerxes (all the wonderful works of Jupiter both on sea and land set aside)
in Lydia fell so far in love with a Plane tree which happened to his sight,
that he tarried a whole day by it, and caused the boughs to be adorned with
chains of gold, bracelets and spangles, yielding there to great reverence.

Alcibiades was the Paramour of Socrates, and Dion of Plato, who both reaped
profit by their loves.

Alexander crowned the tomb of Achilles, and Hephestion that of Patroclus,
signifying thereby, that he loved Alexander, as well as ever Patroclus loved
Achilles.

Pausanias loved his wife so tenderly, that it cannot be described, the like
affection did Apelles bear to Pancasta, Alexanders lemo^.

Adrian the Emperor, doated on the love of Antinous a fair young man,
insomuch that he dedicated a Temple to him at Mantinea, and a City at Nilus.
Pausan.

The Achaians honored Fortune and Love both together, in Aegina, because none
can attain to Love without Fortune. Niphus.

Propertius, when he was in love, said he was not himself, but a shadow.

Hephestion was called the lover of Alexander, Craterus of the King. Plut.

When Cyrus went to overcome Babylon, the river Euphrates let him, and a
Knight whom the King well loved, ventured into the water, and was drowned, then
the king made a vow, that this great river should not come to any vvomans knees
which should vvade over, and therefore he parted it in the broad fields into
four hundred and threescore channels, and so took the city.

Perdiccas, for the love he bare to Alexander, refused a great reuenewe in
Macedonia, and followed him in his vvarres in Asia. Plutarch.

Turinga had so many lovers, that she could not reckon them upon her fingers
ends, but called for a bushel of pease to tell them by. Aurelius.

Demetrius having strongly begirt the City of Rhodes, for the love he bare to
Protogenes painted table, raised his siege.

Of Jealousy and Suspicion. This grief of the mind, as it is called
jealousy, belongs only to matters of love, and therefore has to name
Zelotypia, the love of beauty, whose branches are obtractation, emulation,
^nuie, and detraction.
POlycrates Samius, dearly affected Anacreon the Poet, who likewise loved the
Paramour of Polycrates, named Smerdias, but Polycrates kindled with the sparks
of jealousy, supposing that the Poet loved Smerdias exceedingly, shaued off
his golden locks, thereby to make him misshapen, whose loss Anacreon lamented
in a Poem. Aelianus.

Phanius was so jealous of his wife, that he locked her up, thinking by that
means to prevent all comers, but he was deceived, and what she could not
compass being at liberty, she effected being pent up.

Leucononia, the wife of Cyampus, was devoured of a dog, in sted of a wild
beast, hiding her self in the woods to follow and mark her husbands walks.

Argus hundred eyes, could not keep Io from Jupiter. Ovid.

Procris followed her husband Cephalus into thee woods, fearing that he had
some other Love, who being hid in the bushes, and desirous to come nearer to
him, he supposing some wild beast to be there, killed her. Ouidius.

Plutarch reports the like of Aemilius, who killed himself, when he saw it
was his wife.

The fish Canchar is jealous over her male, and strives often for him. Pliny.

Aemilia, the wife of noble Scipio, who although she knew things evident by
him, made much of his Paramour, as she made of her husband, and all for Scipios
sake.

Abraham was jealous of his wife Sara.

The Persians were so suspicious, that their wives had no liberty to go
abroad, and when they went, it was in Wagon.

The Thracians with such care and study kept their wives, that they would
trust no man in their companies, but their Parents. Herodotus.

An hundred threescore and ten Romain^ women poisoned their husbands, because
they were jealous of them. Valerius.

Galatius Maria, Duke of Millane, being at mass, was slain by a Citizen,
for a jealousy he had conceived, that this Prince had entertained his wife.
Guicchard.

The wild Boar pursued of dogs, the Lioness bitten with hunger, the Tiger
robbed of her young ones, or the Viper, whose tail is trod upon, are not more
cruel and fierce then a woman offended, but nothing sooner casts her into a
fury the^ jealousy. Ausonius.

Ariadne buried alive Zeno Isauricus the Emperor, that she might be revenged
of him for his jealousy.

Bomilchar, a Prince of Libia, being suspected of his own Countrymen the
Carthagians, that he had conspired with Agathocles, unto anoyance of the
Subjects, was hanged in the City of Carthage, in the midst of the Market.

Phillip King of Macedonia, married the sister of Attalus, and had divorced and
put away Olimpias, the mother of Alexander, upon suspicion. Justinius.

Between Cicero and Hortensius, was a learned jealousy about eloquence;
between Cicero and Salust was the like.

Between Demosthenes and Aeschines also, as appeared by their orations, made
against each other.

The like jealous contention, was between Xenocles and Euripides, the first by
his Oedipus, Lycaon, Bacche, Athamas Satyricall, the last by his Alexander, his
Palamede, his Trojans, his Sisiphus Satyricall.

Demetrius Pheraeus the tirant, who rather trusted an iron branded slavish
Thracian, then his wife Thebe, was by her slain, for a jealousy of
spousebreach. Cicero.

Of all people, the Parthians are most jealous of their wives, whereupon they
going out of doors, do never show their faces or breasts, and those that be of
great calling go in close vailes, that they may not be seen.

There is not in the world any Nation less jealous then the Germans, albeit
their women be very fair. P. Pius.

In his description of certain natural baths of Germany, whereat himself was
present, he did much marvel at the familiarity of the Dutch-women, who would
in presence of their husbands, step naked into the baths among them. Idem.

The Italians are as jealous as any of their women. Aeneas Syluius.

Fuluius pursued by the Roman Soldiers, fled to a woman servant, whom
first he kept, and after made free, and gave a dowry to marry her,
notwithstanding, for jealousy of another woman whom he had married she
betrayed him. Appian.

Mithridates having his Son in suspicion for coveting the kingdom, sent for
him, and held him with chains of gold, commanding him to be killed. Idem.

A Roman Senator named Attilus, fled from his Country, because he was
contemned, and being in great favor with Mithridates, was taken as one that
would betray him, and for that he was a Senator, the King would not torture
him, but killed him. Idem.

When Demetrius was returned to his kingdom, Cleopatra his wife killed him
for jealousy of his other wife Rhadogine. Pliny

Alexander did emulate in Lysimachus skilfulnes in war, in Seleucus an
invincible courage, ambition in Antigonus, in Attalus a divine majesty, and in
Ptolomey, an happy success of all his enterprises.

Marcellus was an imitatour, and did emulate the manners of Caesar. Cicero.

Aristotle emulated Plato, Cicero, Demosthenes, Virgil, Homer.

Of all beasts the wild Ass, by the Greeks called Onager, is the most
jealous, for in an whole Herd of females, there is but one male, and he is so
jealous, that he will not suffer any other to come among them, and when the
female chances to have a male Colt, the fire with his teeth will bite off his
genitories, as fearing he should cover his damme. Plinius. Solinus.

Of Beauty. Beauty is only human, consisting in goodly lineaments and
colors well disposed, more per^est in women then men, and yet without favor
^^perfect in both, therefore the graces are called the hand-mayds of beauty.
CLeopatra writ a book of the preservation of women's beauty.

Seneca reports, that the looking-glass was first inverted to this end, that
man might use it as a mean to know himself better by.

Appuleius earnestly persuaded his Auditors to look often into a glass, and
to behold them selves therein, to this intent, that he which thought himself
beautiful and fair, might be fair in conditions, and who so was foul and
deformed, to amend that defect by fair and virtuous behavior.

Zeuxis made choice of the five daughters of Croton, of all these to make one
figure most excellent in beauty.

Alcibiades, the Scholar of Socrates, was the fairest and welfauoredst Boy in
all Athence, whose soul he loved, which was Alcibiades better self.

Stesichorus a Poet, lost his sight for writing against beauteous Helena, and
recanting, had it restored to him again.

Socrates and Aristotle not vvithstanding their deep philosophy and knowledge,
the one becam a slave to fair Hermia, the other was bewitched with Aspasiaes
beauty.

Hercules laid down his club at Iolaes feet, and became a prisoner to her
conquering beauty. Ovid.

Demosthenes that famous Orator, hearing the prodigal report of Lais beauty,
came from Athence to Corinth, to co^pound with her for a nights lodging.
Laertius.

Poppeia, Neroes wife, had continually the milk of 5. hundred Asses, to bathe
her in, thereby to preserve her beauty.

When Helena was to be stoned to death, the executioners beholding her beauty,
had no power to hurt her. Stecichorus.

Rhodope an harlot, was the fairest among all the Aegiptians, whose slipper an
Eagle snatched up, and carried the same as far as Memphis, and there let it
fall in the lap of Psamneticus, as he sat in judgment, upon which, he was
presently enamoured of her person, and sent for her, whom he also married.
Herodotus.

Alcibiadon was an herb so called of Alcibiades, which he used to preserve his
beauty.

Virgill describing the state and constitution of the body of Eurialus, says,
that he was excellent in beauty, and in the greenenes of his youth.

The Princes of Troy made great question, whether they should deliver Helen or
no to her husband, in which dispute (such was the incertainty of their
affections) that they condemned her being absent, but when she came in
presence, the commanding power of beauty controled their power in doing justice.

The good Consul Marcus Marcellus, seeing the noble City of Sarragoce
burning, commanded to quench the fire, esteeming it great loss to burn things
so fair and goodly.

Titus having subdued the Country of Judea, and taken the great City
Jerusalem, when he beheld with judgment the rich and ^aire temple of Solomon,
the presence and majesty of the thing, carried him into that compassion, that
commanded no spoil should be offered to it, till he were gone out of Asia,
and returned to Rome. Josephus.

Venus gave Phaon a box of such a precious ointment, that being anointed
therewith, he became most beautiful. Ovid.

Among the Grecians, Alcibiades was reported to have borne the price, for the
most amiablest of countenance, and comlines of personage.

Among the Romans, Scipio and Demetrius Poliorcetes, were counted peerless.

Homer in describing such as were fair of favor, and comely in proportion,
compares them to tall trees.

Achanthus was so fair, that for envy he was metaphorphozed into a flower of
his own name.

Hylas for his beauty, was drawn into the water by the Nymphs. Ovid.

Diadumenus, Augustus taster, was so beautiful, that in a general contention
at Elis, who was the fairest, he bare the bell from them all. Niphus.

Of all the Grecians that came to the siege of Troy, Nereus was the most
beautiful.

The Madianites, perceauing the children of Israel to be impregnable and
invincible, so long as they sinned not, took of the beautifullest young women
they had, and sent to their camp, to entice them to sin, which was the cause
of their overthrow.

Spurina a young Roman, of wonderful beauty, because he perceived many to
be enamoured of him, he did in most pitiful sort mangle and cut his
nosethrils, so that he seemed not only deformed, but also odious to all men.

The Grecian women were fayrer then the women of Rome, but the Romans had a
better grace, and were more rich in apparel then they. Eutropius.

Amongst the Romans it was counted a great infamy, if any praised the beauty
of a woman, for in praising her, he let them understand that he knew her, and
knowing her, he courted her, and courting her, he opened his heart to her, and
this doing, he plainly defamed her. Macrobius.

Of Chastity. This virtue is generally taken for a chastice^ent of the
troublesome perturbations of man, (...) Varro witnesses) but is more properly
vnder^^ode of that power, which in no case will suffer (...) body to be
polluted or defiled, being an espe^iall branch of temperance.
NVma Pompilius, first instituted and erected a temple, for the Vestall
virgins, ^ho made this law, that th^se which had betrayed their chastity,
should be put into a Cave, in campo scelerato, with water, milk, and a burning
taper, and there be buried quick. Liuius.

The women of Teutonica hearing that their husbands were slain of Marius,
besought him that they might spend the remainder of their life's in the service
of Vesta.

Electra the daughter of Agamemnon, was called at the first Laodica, but after
the death of her father, she was named Electra, for that she continued all her
life a maid.

Phaedon of Athence was slain at a banquet, by the 30. Tyrants, whose
daughters to preserve their virginity, embracing each other cast themselves
headlong into a well* Thucidides.

S. Augustine would not dwell with his sister, because he might not be moved
with the least spark of incontinency, and being asked the reason why, he
answered, It is dangerous to see a woman, more dangerous to speak with her,
but worst of all to touch her.

Origin caused himself to be gelded, for that he would avoid the motions of
the flesh. Rauisius.

The Athenian Priests called Hierophontes, did usually drink^ kind of poison,
to aswage the insurrection of the flesh. Idem.

S. Hierome being half broyled with the heat of the Sun in the desert,
confessed that he could not refrain, from thinking upon the beautiful dames
of Rome. Eusebius.

Amabaeus, albeit he had to his wife a woman of rare beauty, yet he never knew
her carnally; the like is recorded of Dionysius the Tragedian. Aelianus.

Xenocrates, because he was not provoked to lust by the wantonness of Phryne,
was said of her and others, to be an Image and no man. Valerius.

Alexander sharply rebuked Cassander for kissing one in his presence, and was
angry with Philoxenus, for seeming to inuit him (...) dishonest actions by
letters.

When Pompey had put Mithridates to ^ight, he would not touch his Concubines,
^ut sent them all home to their friends. Ap^ian.

Dioclesian having taken the wife and daugh^ers of the King of Persia
prisoners, did as Alexander had done to the wife and daughters of Darius, which
deed caused the Persians to render unto the Romans, all they had taken from
them. Eutropius.

Nero being monstrous incontinent himself, was of opinion, that there was not
a chaste person in the world, but that men cloaked their vice with hypocrisy.
Tacitus.

The Lady Bona of Lombardie, fearing her chastity should be assailed in her
husbands absence, followed him in the holy wars to Palestine, and rescued him
from many dangers, to her eternal honor. Guicchard.

Androchia and Alcida, two virtuous Theban virgins, hearing by the Oracle of
Apollo, that their Country should be victor over the Orchimenians; if two of
their chastest virgins dyed voluntarily, courageously killed them selves.

Drias, the daughter of Faunus, did so little regard the company of men, that
she was ne^uer seen abroad, wherefore it was not lawful for any men to be
present at her sacrifice. Plut.

The women of Chios were so continent, that amongst them at no time was found
either an adultres or defiled virgin. Dion.

Pelagia with her mother and sisters, drowned themselves, thereby to preserve
their honor. Ambrose.

Lucia a virgin of Syracuse, knowing that the tyrant was enamoured of her, and
daily sought to dishonor her, pulled out her eyes, and sent them to him.
Sabellicus.

Chilo seeing Hippocrates do sacrifice, and vessels in Olympus to burn
without fire, counseled him either to live chaste, or if he were married, to put
away his wife. Herodotus.

In the wars of M. Torquatus, against the Gallogrecians, the wife of
Oriontes, being taken prisoner by a Centurion, who importunatly assaulted her
for love, caused him to be slain by her slaves after she was ransomed, and
carried the leachers head as a token of her chastity, to her barbarous husband.

Antiochus beholding a beauteous and religious woman, that was vowed to Diana,
so-daily surprised with the love of her, for fear he might be unhonestly
provoked, forsook the place.

The Soldiers of Frauncis Sforza, brought to him a young virgin there
prisoner, of incomparable beauty, whom he attempted with prayers, gifts, and
threats, but prevailing in none of these, he sent her home ransomlesse, and
gave her part of his spoils, for being so careful of her chastity. Guicchard.

The Turtle male or female, after the death of her male, never brauncheth more
upon a green bough. Pliny.

The Romans used to crown such wives with the crown of chastity, who after
the death of their husbands, lived in perpetual widow-hood, wher-vnto the
Stockdoue and Turtle did inuit them, these in regard of their continency
nature has adorned, with a circle or collar of feathers, which they wear
about their necks, as reward for their chastity. Idem.

Of 50, Spartaine virgins meruailously provoked by the Messanians, to yield
them selves to be abused by them, not one was found that would condescend, but
all rather chose to be slain.

Nicetes the Martyr, pulled out his own tongue, because he would not consent
to the vvanton dalliance of a wicked harlot* Loncerus.

Of Faith and Promises. By this the society of men is only maintained, upon
this, the authority, power, and safety of Princes depends; a virtue without
which not only the parts of Justice, but also all other virtues are imperfect.
NO Nation under the sun was comparable to the Romans, for keeping of
promise. Contrary the Carthagenians were called Faedifragi, truce breakers.

Ptolomey King of Aegipt, having by experience tried the fidelity of the
Romans, in his deathbed committed his heir being then a child, to their
tuition.

Amongst the Scythians, if any were perjured, he was by the law adjudged to
dye. Pausanias.

The Phrygians use no oaths at all, and compel none to swear. Stobaeus.

The joining of hands amongst the Persians, was the fairest sign of giving and
keeping faith inuiolate.

The Romans in old time dedicated a temple to Faith, the better to cause the
people to keep and reverence it. Pausanias.

When Antiochus vvoulde have usurped Egypt upon Ptolomey Epiphanes, whose
protection the Romans had already taken upon the^, they sent unto him
Popilius, who made a circle about the same Antiochus, and forced him before he
departed, to promise, that he would enterprise nothing against their said
pupil. Dion.

An honorable person being called into the Senate at Athence to depose,
touching some matters, the Senators would not have him to take the accustomed
oath, knowing him to be a virtuous and honest man. Cicero in an Oration pro
Balbo.

The Emperor Frederick, said to certain of his Minions that were
importunate to get into their hands the ancient demean of the Empire, That
he rather would be accounted of small liberality, then perjured. Phil. Comi.

Melius Suffetius, a dictator of Albany, was drawn in pieces with four
horses, for that he had broken his faith, and the City of Alba was rased
clean down. Liuius.

Caracalla the Emperor, having pursued the king of Persia, contrary to his
promise, was himself afterward slain.

Ladislaus King of Hungary, made a most honorable truce with Amurath, during
which, he was persuaded by Carninall Julian Ambassador from Pope Eugenes, to
break it, which was the cause that he with the chief of his Army and the
Cardinal, were slain outright. Guychardine.

Pope Adrian took a solemn oath to observe the peace concluded with the
Emperor Frederick, and afterward breaking it, as he drank was choked with a
fly. P. Com.

Michael Paleologue, being chosen Emperor of the Greeks, promised and swore,
that he vvoulde render up the Empire into the hands of John Lascaris when he
should come to age; but notwithstanding, he held it still; he died miserably,
and to his posterity ensued an infinite number of mischiefs, and was occasion
of the first beginning of the Turkish monarchy.

Christiern, King of Denmark, having broken his faith given to his subjects,
was deprived his Realm, and afterward lived myserably, although he received
many succors from the Emperor Charles the fifth.

Charles, Duke of Burgundy, having violated his faith promised to the
Switzers, and before that to the King of S. Poll, was vanquished, and all ill
hap accompanied him ever after. Guychar.

Andronicus Conuens, clean contrary to his faith given to the infants of
Emanuell and to them of Nice, usurped the Empire, but he was soon after hanged
up by the feet, and hewed in pieces for his perjury.

Alexander having vowed to kill the first that should come forth of the town,
put an Ass to death in stead of him that led her. Q. Cur.

Haniball being but fifteen years of age, was sworn by his father that he
should continually prove an enemy to the Romans. Appian.

Cassandra, for breaking her promise with Apollo, had this punishment, that
prophesied she never so truly, she should not be believed. Virgill.

The first temple Romulus built at Rome, was dedicated to faithfulness. Pausa.

Paulus Iouius, Bembus, Sabellicus, and Pandolphus, accuse the Frenchmen for
not keeping their faith according to their promise with the Venetians.

The Petelines in Calabria, and the Saguntines in Spain, chose rather to die a
miserable death, then to break the faith they had once plighted. Liuius.

The praise which Sylla gave Cinna, made him commit perjury.

The Indians use to cut off the lyps and the hands of perjured persons, to
show the offense they had committed against God and their neighbors.

The Oracle of Delphos made answer, that all things should prosper well, if
they forbad all oaths.

The Scythians use to swear by the vvinde and their sword, because the wind
gives breath to live by, and the sword kills.

It was in no case permitted to the Priests of Jupiter to swear, for that an
oath often ends in cursing and perjury.

Among the oaths of Judges, one was that they should take no present. Demost.

Socrates used to swear by a dog, Pythagoras by the number of four, the
Manichies by the light.

The Nazarites vow was, never to cut their hair, nor drink wine, nor pray for
the dead.

King David's poesy was, Voue et read.

H. The fourth Emperor of Almain, vowed to live an Hirmit ten years, and
called himself Godstall, that is, Gods calling. Polycr.

Stampitius, a holy Father of the Church, vowed unto God a thousand times, that
he would become a better man, but he never performed that which he vowed,
then said he, Hereafter I will make no such vow, for I have now learned by
experience, that I am not able to perform it, but commend my self unto Gods
mercy. Mag. Sent.

One promised to marry the daughter of Lisander, but her father dead, and his
state not found so good as he was supposed, the young man revolted; then the
Magistrates called Ephori, understanding thereof, by a common consent punished
the young man as offender.

Antigonus the King, held Zeno in great reverence, and one day being drunk,
he met Zeno, and bid him command him any service and he would do it, and
bound it with an oath, to whom Zeno said, Abi et euome, go and vomit.

Polymnestor, in whom King Priamus reposed his confidence, committed his Son
Polidorus unto him, whom he falsely slew, notwithstanding his solemn vow,
to have a most tender care over him. Virgill.

The people of Sarmatha, were most false in words, deceitful in deeds, and
treacherous one to another.

The wife's of the Scythians, while their husbands were at wars, brake their
vows, and married their slaves, whom at their return they killed. Valor.

Forsworn Crocalus, King of Sicilia, killed King Minos, under color of
friendship, and pretense of talking with him.

Cleomenes, brake promise with the Argiues, with whom he took truce for
certain days, and notwithstanding castily betrayed them in the night, slew
the^ sleeping, and imprisoned them contrary to his former promise.

The Argiues loved so well their hair, that being convicted by the
Lacedaemonians, they shaued their heads, bewailing their misfortune, and vowed,
never to let their hairs grow, until they had recovered their losses.

Lisander, admirable among the Lacedaemonians, never made any reckoning of
justice but when it was profitable, accounting only profit to be honest, and
saying, That it was requisite children should be deceived with the play of
Cockall, and men beguiled with oaths.

The Emperor Justinian, for breaking his faith with the Barbarians, and
violating peace with the Bulgarians, his own subjects rebelled, and Leontius
usurped the kingdom, first cutting of his nostrils, and then sending him into
banishment.

Of Silence and Secrecy. Nature has placed the tongue between the bead and
the heart, having above it the instrument of all the Senses, the eyes, the
ears, and nose, obedient unto reason, to the end it utter nothing before
counsel taken of the inward faculties of the soul, which are Understanding
and Reason, seated in the brain.
PYthagoras the Philosopher, commanded all the Scholars he received into his
school, to be silent five years, and to learn of others so long before
themselves did utter any thing.

Harpocrates, was the Superintendent, and the corrector of man's speech, and
was drawn with a ring fastened upon his lyps.

Augerona was fained to be the Goddess of Silence, drawn with her finger
upon her mouth, and a table upon her breast, whereon was written, Hear,
See, and say nothing. showing in what reverence they ought to hold secrecy.

The Egyptians did ever cut out his tongue, that had disclosed any secret, or
revealed any practice to the enemy. Diodo.

In the time of the Emperor Augustus, one Fuluius, for having disclosed a
matter of counsel to his wife, they were both put to death.

The Persians ordained most severe punishment, for those that could not keep
counsel. Q. Cur.

Homer blamed Thersiles for too much speaking, and praised Menelaus, because he
spoke little.

Phocion was said to speak better the^ Demosthenes, because when he spoke, in
fevve words he comprehended much matter.

Zeno was reported a great prater, in that his ears were founded upon his
tongue.

Pericles, before he mounted into his seat, would always request of God,
that not any word might pass his mouth, but only such as pertained to the
matter whereof he was presently to speak.

It was the property of Laelius, to talk often, and much at a time.

The Pie in this respect is said to be consecrated to Bacchus, because that
drunkenness is subject to much babbling. Ovid.

Valerius a Poet, was executed at Rome, for disclosing of secrets.

It is a custom among the Popes at Rome whensoever they admit any Cardinal,
to stop his mouth for certain days, that he may first learn of his seniors,
and then they open it again.

Amasis King of Egypt, sent unto Pittacus, one of the seven wise men of
Greece that was come to see him, a Mutton, vvilling him to send back that
piece, which he accounted as best, and that which he adjudged to be vvorst,
vvhereupon he sent unto him the tongue. Herodotus.

Cranes, when they pass over Cicilie, upon the mount Taurus, do fill their
bills full of Flints, for fear of making any noise, least they should serve as
a pray to the Egles that are there. Pliny.

The Quails in France, after harvest, use to do the like.

Aristotle counseled Calisthenes to speak but little, which he not regarding,
was commanded to be put to death by Alexander.

The ouer-bolde speech of Clytus to Alexander, caused his death. Plut.

The Lacedaemonians were always much commended for their briefenes.

Seleucus surnamed the Conqueror, having lost a battle, fled by many
crooked paths and by ways, and happened at last upon the cottage of a poor
pesant, who relieved him according to his ability; in the end, understanding
it was the King, and not able to suppress his joy, nor disguise with the King
who desired to be unknown, when he had brought him into the highway, said,
Farewell my Lord Seleucus. For which, the King made a sign to one of his
followers to kill him. Plut.

Papilius cut out his own tongue, and flung it in the Tyrants face, because he
would not discover a conspiracy. Pliny.

Anthony the Emperor, being one day at the house of Ouilius a Senator,
demanded of him, how it was possible for him to have so many pillars of
Porphorie, to whom he answered; When you enter into another man's house, you
must learn to be both deaf and dumb. Which the Emperor took in good part.
Plut.

Leontius the Emperor, after he had put Justinian his Sovereign to flight,
caused two of his tale-bearers to be burned.

Papyrius was much commended and rewarded of the Senate, because he feigned a
contrary tale unto his Mother when she demanded of him what affairs were
handled in the Senate house. Valerius.

Demetrius the Philosopher, was wont to say, that Birds in the vvoods had
liberty to fly where they list, and Grasshoppers in the field to sing when
they would, but in the City we must neither do nor speak.

Isocrates, least he should happen to be ashamed of the speech of any of his
scholars unlearnedly uttered, never received any into his school but only
those that paid double, first to learn silence, and then to learn to speak;
and to speak nothing but what they knew certain.

Alexander perceiving by Hephestion that he had read a Letter which his
mother had sent him, closed up his lips with his signet, to the end he should
be secret.

Pompey suffered one of his fingers to be burned, rather then he would
disclose what was done in the Senate.

Cleanthes being disired by one to instruct his son in some short and wise
sentence, said, Sige, that is, be silent.

Ulysses in his youth refrained from speech, until he had learned how to
speak wel^ Homer.

Metellus was so close, in the vvarres of Mecedonia, that he said, If he knew
his own coat to be privy to his own determination, he would burn it.

Ixion, is fained to be tormented in hell, for telling tales of Juno. Ovid.

Antigonus the son of Demetrius, was charged to kill Methridates, and not to
tell him; he dreamed that he sowed gold in Pontus, and Methridates reaped
it, which in duty to his father he kept not, but disclosed with his tongue,
but in love to Methridates he sought him out, and writ upon the ground with his
spear, Ely Methridates.

Demosthenes asked Aristodemus a Comedian, what he had for pronouncing such a
speech, he answered, A talent, but said he; I had more to hold my peace.

Philip writ unto them of Laconia, that If he entered, he would overthrow
them topsieturuy; to whom they writ back only this word, If.

Aristotle answered a great pleader of causes who at every sentence he
rehearsed, asked him, If that were not a strange thing? said, This is a greater
marvel, that any man can abide to hear thy babbling.

The city of Athence was taken and destroyed by Sylla, who by his spies was
admonished of the pratlyng of certain old men in a Barbers shop, where they
talked of a certain place that was weakest, and worst defended. Plutarch.

The overmuch talk of Flauius, was the only cause that Rome was no sooner
delivered from the tyranny of Nero.

Antigonus being demanded of his own son at what hour the Camp should
dislodge, said; Art thou afraid that thou alone shall not hear the trumpet?

Lisander answered a Megarian who thrust himself forward to speak aloude for
the liberty of Grecia, That speech my friend, had need of a great City. So
may it be said to those that freely reprehend others, that their own manners
had need to be reformed.

Lysimachus the King, asked Philippides what part of his goods he would
willingly have imparted unto him? Which you please (quoth he) so it be no
part of your secrets.

Dion of Alexandria, revenged himself on his foes more by silence then by
words, insomuch, that one perceiving by his injury he could not cause him to
speak, that he might have more scope to rail, hanged himself. Brusonius.

Lycurgus did promise that nine persons should feast together in reverence of
the nine Muses, but upon this condition, that if they did talk at the table,
they should have no wine to drink, and if they used silence, they might be
allowed wine. Macrob.

Country or Commonwealth. This general nurse and mother of mankind,
commands of us a duty beyond that which we owe to our natural parents, and
of more love and piety, whose safety ought to be preferred before all
affection, riches, and life; since in her preservation, all our riches, lands,
liberties, and life's are secured.
ARistotle being at Athence, was very careful for his country, the which
when Alexander had overrun and rased, by letters be moved him to build it
up again. Val. Max.

Dion of Syracuse, was so loving to his Country, that he never rested until
he had thoroughly freed it from the tyranny of Dyosius. Plutarch.

Damarathus a Lacedemonian, though banished his Country, and living at Athence,
yet thought it his duty to forevvarne his Countrymen of the expedition which
their enemies the Athenians speedily intended against them. Val. Max.

The Senate of Rome saluted Augustus by the name of Pater Patriae. Sever.

Caelia, being amongst many other virgins one of the hostages of King Porsena,
stole away by night from her Keeper, and mounted upon a horse, swamme the
river, whose virtue raised King Porsenas siege, and delivered her Country from
further fear. Val.

Paulus Aemilius, warring against Pyrrhus King of the Epyrots, when the Oracle
pronounced, that the Romans should be victors, if any one amongst them would
throw himself into a gulf, Val. Torquatus voluntarily offered himself. Plut.

Q. Curtius did the like in Rome, being armed, and mounted on horseback.

Scipio Affricanus caused to be written upon his grave, Unkind Country, receive
thou not my bones. Plut.

Leaena hearing that her son in battle died valiantly, never mourned, but
lyfted up her hands to heaven, and thanked God that she brought such a son
into the world, which in respect of virtue, for the defense of his Country
gave his life.

So dear was the love of his country to Ulysses, that he preferred his native
soil Ithaca, before immortality. Homer.

Coriolanus, bear unkind arms against his Country. Plut.

Nascia was most worthily renowned for the defense of his Country. Appian.

Q. M. Scaeuola, feared not to go to King Porsenas Camp, intending to slay
him that troubled his Country, but killing the Secretary in stead of the King,
he was brought to the fire, and so valiantly endured the burning of his hand,
that the King amazed thereat, and fearing some other stratageme, dismissed him,
who for the loss of his right hand, was surnamed Scaeuola. Liuius.

The Romans erected Images of all such as renowned their Country.

Codrus understanding by the Oracle, that except he were slain, his
Countrymen the Athenians, should never have the victory over their enemies,
went disguised into the battle in the coat of a common soldier, and
thrusting himself into the foremost front, was slain. Justin.

Aglauros cast himself headlong from the walls of Athence, understanding, that
if any one would voluntarily kill him self for his Country, they should be
conquerours.

Theopa, Eubula, and Praxithea, for the preservation of Athence, were offered
unto Minerua; to these was a temple erected called Leocorium, which is the
temple of the peoples daughters. Pausan.

Leonides, the Lacedemonian, and thirty men more of high resolution, yielded
their bodies to the bitter passion of dreadful death at Pylas, which was
pronounced upon them by prophecy, for the preservation of al Graecia. Rauisius.

All the riches in the world could not withdraw Epaminondas, from any the least
duty of his Country. Aelianus.

Socrates went to Amphipolis and Potidaea, two great Cities in Delos, to fight
for his Country.

Plato, from a famous Philosopher of Athence, became a renowned Soldier at the
siege of Corynth. Laertius.

Calvin, in the year 1556. when Perin had conspired against the estate of
Geneua, ran into the midst of their naked swords, to appease the tumult. Beza.

Antonius the Roman Orator, uncovered the arms and shoulders of Aquilius,
when he was adjudged to death, showing the skars of the wounds, which he had
received in defense of his Country, at which sight the Judges were so affected,
that they reuersed their verdit, and pardoned him. Valerius.

Cato of Vtica, answered one of his friends, who was come to give him thanks,
for defending him in judgment against a false accusation, that he was to thank
the common wealth, for whose love only he did speak, and counseled all things.

M. Otho, left behind him a wonderful example, of the love he bare to his
Country, for the benefit whereof he died willingly.

Camillus, being a banished man, rescued Rome, and put the Frenchmen to
flight, for the which, he was called the second Romulus. Plutarch.

Themistocles being banished his Country, and in service with King Artaxerxes,
poisoned himself with the blood of a Bull, in presence of all the Persians,
least he should be compelled to fight against his Country. Thucidides.

When Pisistratus had brought the City of Athence under his obedience, Solon
seeing that all his labor for defense of the common liberty, was in vain,
came and laid down his sword and target before the Senate doors, saying, O my
Country, I have by word and deed defended thee whilst I could.

Vetruria dissuaded her Son Martius besieging Rome, only by reducing to his
memory, the love he ought to have to his Country. Liuius.

Sertorius desired Pompeius and Metellus, to procure his reuocation, saying, He
desired rather to be called an obscure Citizen of Rome, then else where an
Emperor.

Pompeius loved the commonweal, but Cicero preserved it so, that unless
Cicero had preserved the estate, Pompeius should have vvanted place where to
triumph. Plutarch.

Julius Caesar and Cicero, being mortal enemies, Caesar in the Senate, said
unto him, I cannot deny this, o Cicero, but that in those things that touch thy
self, thou art careless and remiss, but in matters that concern the
comon-wealth, very importune. Suetonius.

Timagenes seeing the City of Thebes, besieged for his sake, chose rather to
yield himself to the Greeks, who were desirous of him, then to abide the
burning, spoiling, and sacking of his Country.

Aratus the Sicyonian, when his City was 50. years withheld by tyrants,
being departed from Argos to Sicyon, with a privy stolen entry got possession of
the City, overcame the tyrant Nicocles, restored home again 600. banished men,
and set the common weal at liberty. Cicero.

Aulus Fuluius, a Senator of Rome, because his Son (other wise of great hope)
was confederate with Cataline, in the conspiracy, killed him, saying, I begotte
thee not for Cataline, to go against thy Country, but for thy Country against
Cataline. Valerius. Max.

Gracchus, Son of that Gracchus, that had been twice Consul, whose mother was
Cornelia, daughter to Scipio, that conquered Africa, meaning well to his
Country, but managing it indiscreetly, was slain in the Capitol, by
Cornelius, Scipio, Nasica, and his followers. Appian.

Of Pleasure. How so ever by the Latins, Pleasure is interpreted in the worser
sense, by the name of Voluptas, the Greeks are indifferent, terming it Hedone,
whose deriuation is from sweetness or pleasantnes; it is accompanied with
delectation, recreation, oblectation, insultation, ill will, etc.
THE Scythians were so given to all kind of pleasure, that in beastlines they
exceeded brute beasts. Pausanias.

Sardanapalus was so subject to pleasure, that he consumed all his time therein,
whose poesy was, Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptas.

The Kings and Princes of Asia, were much given to pleasure.

The life of Dionysius, when he was in his best health, was lost by sudden
joy. Fulgosius.

M. Aurelius banished five wise men his Court, for clapping their heels, and
hands, and laughing outragiously.

Heliogabalus writ certain wanton books, and called them by the name of his
wife Semyramida.

Tharua the Roman Consul, died through sudden joy, while he was reading the
letters of the Senate, wherein they had ordained a common supplication and
thanksgiving to be solemnly made. Plut.

Sophocles dyed with immoderate rejoicing, for that his Tragedies went so
generally applauded. Plinius.

Diagoras the Rhodian, and Chilon hearing that their children had wone the
prize at the games of Olimpus, felt such a motion in them of the spleen, that
they were stifeled with joy.

Ep^curus, who placed his felicity in corporal pleasures, dyed miserably in a
vessel of hot water.

Xerxes propounded rewards to those, that invented new kind of pleasures.
Justin.

Socrates meruailed that Aesope made not a fable, wherein he might have
feigned, that God, since he could never couple pleasure and sorrow together,
might have knit them with an extremity, so that the beginning of one, should
have been the end of the other. Plato in Phaedro.

The Romans and the Athenians, to get the good will and love of the people,
builded Theaters, showing diverse devises of pastimes, as Comedies, Tragedies,
and dancing of Antiques.

The Greeks had 4. great games appointed, the first upon mount Olympus in
Arcadia, which Hercules invented to honor Jupiter, which was so famous, that
as the Romans used to account the time by their Consuls, so did the Greeks
by these games, which was appointed every fifth year.

The second games were called Pythij, and invented of Apollo, in memory that he
killed the Serpent Python; here they exercised running, leaping, wrestling,
ryding, and swimming.

The third, were called Isthmia, invented of Theseus, in the honor of Neptune
of Isthmos, a place in Arcadia, where he was worshipped.

The fourth, Nemea, which they make in remembrance of Hercules, for that he
killed a great fierce Lion in the Forest of Nemea.

In the first play, the garland of victory was of Olive, in the second, of
Oak, in the third, of Pine, in the fourth, the garland was of Poplar tree.
Pyndarus.

The Trojans in King Latinus Court, used for their recreation, the playing at
the ball. Virgil.

The Corinthians thought it the greatest felicity in the world, to spend days
and nights in plays, and esteemed more happiness to win a game, then a
Roman Captain to get a triumph.

Xerxes invented the Chesse-play, to warn a tyrant to avoid his tirany, and
by his play to let him understand, how dangerous the estate of a Prince is,
that does not use his Subjects well.

Another play was used in Greece, either upon the dice, or else closely in hand
called, Even and odd.

The Romans had four games, the first, Lupercalia, brought out of Arcadia by
Euander, and sacrificed unto Pan upon mount Palantine; the young men of Rome
ran naked one unto another, and he that was most swift of foot escaped
stripes, but he that was ouer-taken by the way, was sure to speed.

The second, Circenses ludi in a place appointed by Rome, environed about with
huge and strong walls, here was running of horses, fighting on horseback,
wrastlers, and leapers.

The third, Saturnalia, which Ianus did invent in memory of Saturnus his
fellow; this play was celebrated with much mirth, pleasure, and pastime: It was
always in the month of September, when every man saluted his friends with
rewards, at that time al things were common. Macrobius.

The fourth, Gladiatoria, where the youth of Rome came to behave themselves
among their enemies, at the long spear, the long sword, the staff, in that
play naked without armor, they came to fight against their enemies.

Claudius Caesar Emperor, writ a book of the Art of dicing and gaming, which
he and his successor Augustus greatly studied. Agrip^a.

Caesar being warned to beware of Anthony and Dolobella, being fat, merry, and
liberal speakers, said, that such were not be feared, but those rather which
were sad, and of an heavy complexion, as Brutus and Cassius. Plutarch.

Alexander, when many Philosophers had disputed in his presence, wherein
consists the good hap of this life he made answer. Believe me friends, that
in all this world, there is not equal delight or like pleasure, as to have
wherewith to be liberal, and not wherefore to chastise. Plut.

When Darius had ouercom the Lydians, he ordained that they should use
perfumes, and do nothing but dance, leap, and hant Tauernes, to the intent
that by that means becoming altogether effeminate, they might not have the
courage torebell afterward.

Pyrrhus seeing the Tarentines to be too full of delicacie, forbad all
assemblies to feasts, to mummeries, and such like, and brought the^ back to
the exercise of arms, showing himself severe to those that were enrowled in
his muster-booke, and bound to go to the wars.

Cineas told Fabritius, how a Philosopher counseled men to refer all their
doings to pleasure, who prayed God to give such wisdom to Romulus and the
Samnites.

Demetrius having given himself to al plesures, the Macedonians drove him out,
saying, That they were weary of bearing arms, and fighting for his pleasures.

Jews the 11. permitted all Comaedians and Stage Players, to speak freely,
and to reprehend such vices as were manifest. Ph. Com.

Of Apparel. Nature cannot be surpassed by Art, who many times disdaining that
she is provoked, by how much more the greater force she is pressed and
covered, by so much the more she rises up and shows her self; the natural
deformity of the body, can neither he altered with sumptuous attire, colors,
nor odours, but make it either more evident to be seen, or more doubtful to
be suspected.
ALexander having overcome the Persians, despised his own Country fashions,
and used altogether the apparel of the Persians, by the which he alienated
his Subjects hearts, for thus the Persians tryumphed over him, not he over them.
Fulgentius.

The Romans used three manner of gowns, Pretextatae, Palmatae, Candidatae; The
first, Gentlemen's children of 14. years old did wear; the second,
conquerours for their noble deeds, the third, Lords, masters, and Rulers of
the law.

Aristotle delighted to go brave, and in gorgeous apparel, with chains and
rings, and took therein great felicity.

Demosthenes and Hortensius, two famous Orators, went so neat in their
clothing, and with such wanton iestures, that Lucius Torquatus would often
call Hortensius, Dionisiaes Son, for that she had great pleasure in dancing,
and moving her body.

Augustus Caesar, would wear no other garments, then such as his wife and
daughters made, and those very modest.

Agesilaus King of Lacedemonia, never had but one kind of garment for VVinter
and Summer.

Diogenes beholding a stranger come from Lacedemonia, more curiously decked on
a feastiuall day, then he was wont, said unto him, What? does not an honest
man think that every day is feastiuall unto him?

Darius, the year before he fought with Alexander, altered his sword, or
Acynax which he wore by his side, being a Persian blade, into the fashion of a
Macedonian, which the Southsaiers interpreted, that they into whose fashion
Darius had altered the form of his blade, should become Rulers of Persia.

Dioclesian garnished his apparel and shoos with precious stones, where before
his reign the habit imperial consisted but in a purple cloak. Eutropius.

Sysinius going to visit Arsacius the Bishop, one of his familiers asked him,
why he wore white attire, and where he found it written, that a Priest should
wear white? Tell me first, quoth he, where it is written, that he should
wear black? But he could not tell. Then Sisinius said, thou can not prove
for black, but I can for white; Let thy garments be white. Sal. Our Savior
in the Gospel wore white; Moses and Elias appeared in white. Eusebius.

Diogenes returning from Sparta to Athence, was by the way asked from whence he
came, and whether he went, who answered, he came from men, and was going to
women, noting thereby the effeminacy of the Athenians, who were for that vice by
the Lacedaemonians and other Grecians had in derision.

The Senators of Rome used a garment set full of studs or tufts of gold, and
on their hose they wore like unto a moon, which were the cognizants and
badges of most honor. Fenestella.

Plutarch alleges four causes, why the Romans wore such hose.

The first, because they thought that the souls of great men, should by light
of the moon, be guided the next way unto heaven.

The 2, was that the sign of the moon, did show they were descended from the
Arcadians, who came into Italy with Euander, for the Arcadians did imagine
themselves more ancient then the moon.

The third, because in prosperity they should remember the inconstancy and
mutability of fortune.

The fourth, for that the sign of the moon does stir up men's minds to
modesty and obedience, moving them to pray unto God for wisdom, whereby both
to commaun^ and obey; even as the moon does take he brightness from the sun,
being a more noble and excellent light, so ought men to seek for wisdom from
heaven.

The women of Athence much delighted in gorgeousnes of apparel, and trimming
themselves. Aristophanes.

Among the Romans, no man might wear purple, but only Senators,
Magistrates, Priests, and young men of noble families. Fenestella.

Adrian the Emperor, ordained that no man should bring any strange fashions
into Rome. Eutropius.

Scylus King of Scythia, because he wore apparel after the Greek fashion,
was deposed for so doing, and his head smitten off, and his brother Octumasides
chosen King in his place.

The women of Lacedemonia wore their apparel short beneath, that one might see
their knees, and some part of their thighs, which was ordained, to make them
the stronger and more warlike.

The Athenians had their Gyneconomes, the Romans their Censors, the Venetians
their officers authorized, to restrain and moderate the excess in apparel,
jewels and imbroidery of women.

The Niece of Q. Martius, being great with child, the day that peace was made
between him and Rome, lacing her self too hard in her attire, to seem more
proper and comely, she was long before her time delivered of child, which with
the mother presently died. Porphirius.

Q. Hortensius, every time when he made himself ready, had a glass before
him, and as much time had he to straighten his gown plates, as a woman to
trim the hairs of her head; One day being Consul, going abroad in a narrow
street, he met with the other Consul, where through the straightnes of the
passage his plaits were undone, wherefore he complained to the Senate of his
fellow, saying, that he had done him great injury, and was worthy to loose his
life for unloosing his gown. Macrobius.

The Lacedaemonians go all a like apparelled, as well the meanest as the best.
Thucidides

Heliogabalus scorned to wear his apparel after the manner of the other
Emperors, saying, that their garments were made of greasy wool. Eutropius.

Lisander would not receive the apparel and Jewels, which Dionysius the tyrant
sen^ unto his daughter, saying, that those presents more dishonored then
honored his daughters; the like is written of Sophocles.

Julius Caesar would have his Soldiers so brave, that he suffered them to
wear their armor enchased with gold and silver, as well for the beauty
thereof, as also that they might be more stout in battle, for fear of loosing
it; bragging that his Soldiers could fight valiantly, though they were
persumed. Suetonius Tranquillus.

Of Music and Dancing. Aristotle would have youth to exercise them selves in
Music, and to be employed in those harmonies which stir up to commendable
operations and moral virtues, tempering desires, greedines, and sorrows, for
so much as numbers and melodies consist in certain proportions and concords of
the voice; it is the excellent gift of God, and as Art of numbers and measures
serves to Divinity, so does the Art of Music.
David made four Masters to ouersee the Himnes and Songs, one in the middle,
the right side, the left side, the last, to ouersee the Cymballs.

Alexander, with the Lydian tunes, was moved to pleasure and banquettings,
and with the Dorick sounds, to armor and war.

Plato and Aristotle, would have a man that is well brought up to be a Musition.

Lycurgus, notwithstanding his sharp laws, allowed of music.

The Lacedaemonians and the Cretans, (though otherwise warlike) used Harps, and
other soft instruments.

Among the first instructions that Chiron taught Achilles in his youth, Music
was one. Homer.

Marsias being rude and unskillful in music, contended with Apollo, but
being overcome, was deservedly punished. Ovid.

Thamyras vvoulde needs try maisteries with the Muses themselves, in playing
on the Harp, but being vanquished, was for his bold attempt bereft of both
his eyes, and in derision called Barula; from him blind Harpers are
denominated.

Themistocles was thought unlearned, and the less esteemed of, because he was
no musition. Cicero.

The Greeks judged none to be learned, unless he were seen in music.

The most part of the world did learn music, except in Egypt, where it was
forbidden, least the tender and soft minds of their youth, should be intised
to too much pleasure. Diodorus.

Aliates King of Lydia, in his wars against the Milesians, had Musitions,
pipers and Fiddlers, in sted of Trumpeters, to move them to vvarres. Herodo.

The Parthians caused their belles to be rung when they went into the field.
Plutarch.

The Lacedaemonians might not endure in their music more then in other
matters, any new invention.

Therpander, (in those days a famous musition) for that he invented to add
another string to a certain instrument then used, was banished his Country,
and his instrument broken.

Ambrose Bishop of Millane, when that he with other holy men, vvatched even
in the Church, least they should have been betrayed to the Arrians, brought
in singing to avoid tediousnes, and to drive away the time. August.

This Athanasius forbadde, to avoid vanities. S. Augustine was indifferent,
and it repented him, because he had sometimes fallen, by giving more attentive
heed unto the measures and chordes of music, then the words which were under
them spoken; for that measure and singing, were brought in for words sake, and
not words for music.

In the East parts, the holy assemblies, even from the beginning, used singing.
P. Mart.

Architas invented a certain musical instrument, to stay the running wits of
children. Pausa.

The Grecians learned to dance of Castor and Pollux, and used to dispatch
their business dancing.

The Sirians, before they met their enemies used to sing and dance. Plut.

The Roman Priests called Salij, used to dance in honor of Mars.

Diodorus a cunning Musition, being sent for by the harlot Lamia, refused to
go, yet Demetrius having his Armor on, the badge of a warrior, and his
Diadem, the cognizaunce of a King, was not ashamed to go to her house.
Aelianus.

The Philosophers called Peripateticks, condemned music in women, saying,
that between it and chastity there could be small agreement. Niphus.

Euripides is commended for reprehending such as use the Harp at feasts, for
says he, Music ought rather to be sent for when men are angry or mourn,
then when they are feasting and making merry, thereby to make the^ give more
liberty to pleasure then before.

A Musition by the only virtue of the Dorian tune, preserved the chastity of
Clytemnestra, the wife of Agamemnon, from the assaults of Aegisthus, who to
be revenged, slew the Musition.

Dionysius commanded, that all his servants should dance in purple roabes,
which Plato would not do, saying; I will not put on a woman's garments. But
Aristippus did, and when he began to dance, said, In dronken feats the sober
offend not. Laert.

Diogenes reproved Musitions, because they took great care that their
instruments should agree, and neglected their manners.

Neanthus handled the Harp of Orpheus, whereon expecting the trees to dance,
he did by his confused iangling thereon, cause the dogs to bark at him.

Epaminondas, to avoid the shame of ignorance in music, learned to play
upon diverse instruments. Cicero.

Nero, the same night which was the last of his life, (among the complaints
which instant death, fear and sorrow did minister,) this only thing he most
bewailed, that so famous a Musition as himself, should perrish from the world.
Tacitus.

A boy in Athence taking into his hand the instrument of an excellent Musition,
who was hired to teach him, and putting it to his mouth and straining his
breath whereby his cheeks began to swell, perceiving thereby the deformity
of his countenance, presently brake the pype, and disdainefully flung it
away. Petrarch.

Socrates when he was old, gave his mind to music and dancing. Appian.

Scipio ordinarily used to move his tryumphant and martial body, after the
time and measure of musical instruments, not vvantonly mincing with his feet,
but after a manly sort, which he said, should no ways disparage him, if
his enemies did behold him.

Bacchus instructed the people of East India to honor the heavens, and the
seven Planets, by diverse kinds of daunces. Diodorus.

Ganimede, Hebe, and the nine Muses, greatly pleased Jupiter with their
dancing. Orpheus.

King David, to show his cheerful heart for the return of the Ark of God,
daunced before it.

The dancing of Herod's daughter, was the cause of John Baptists death.

Progne in a dance, did find opportunity to murder her son Itis. Ovid.

The Ethiopians used songs of diverse tunes, and dancing before they went to
battle. Pausanias.

Timotheus the noble Musition, demanded always a greater reward of them whom
other taught, then of them that never learned any thing before. Quintil.

Gelo a Tyrant of Sicilie, when by horrible oppression of his people he had
brought him self into a general hatred, prohibited, that no man or woman
should speak to each other, (for fear of conspiracies) but in stedde of
words, they should use in their necessary affairs, countenaunces, tokens,
and moouings with their feet, hands, and eyes, which for necessity first
used, at the last grew to a perfect and delectable dancing; but he was slain
of them for his cruelty.

Homer, among the great benefits that god gives to man, recites dancing.

One daunced before Demetrius the Tyrant, and in his gestures and motions,
showed the aduoutry of Mars and Venus, and their discovery by Phoebus, with
Vulcans intrapping them; vvhere-with, contrary to his sullen disposition, he
forced him to laugh and cry out, saying; O man, I do not only see but also
hear what thou do, and it seems to me that thou speak with thy hands.

The same daunced before Nero, in the presence of a strange King, which
understood no other language but his own country, who by his dau^cing, made
the king to understand what was said; and at his departure, Nero bid him ask
what he would, and he should have it. Sir, said he, lend me this young man,
that by his motions I may understand the language of my confines and neighbors.

The majesty of Princes in old time, was showed in the dance named Eumelia,
and belonged to Tragedies, dissolute countenaunces in that which was called
Cordax, and pertained to Comedies, wherein men of base behavior only daunced.

The form of fighting in Armor, was expressed in a dance called, Enophe.

Hormus was a kind of Dance wherein daunced both men and maids, the man
expressing in his motion and countenance, strength and courage apt for the
wars, the maid, modesty and shamefastness, which represented a pleasant
conjunction, of fortitude and temperance. Lampridius.

Augustus, in the presence of many men, played on an instrument; A poor man
standing by with other, and beholding the Emperor, said with a loud voice to
his fellow, Scest thou not how this voluptuous Leachor, tempereth all the
world with his little finger? Which words he wisely noted, and during his
life, he ever after refrained his hands from any such lightness in open
assemblies.

Alexander when he had vanquished Ilion where Troy stood, being demanded if
he would see the Harp of Paris who ravished Helen, gently smiling, he
answered, I had rather see the harp of Achilles, whereunto he did sing, not
the illecebrous sports of love, but the valiant acts of noble Princes.

Lisander softened the walls of Athence, and burned their ships by sound of
Flutes.

S. Augustine rather liked the maid or wife that sows upon the Saboth day,
then he that daunced. August.

The Archbishop of Magdeburgh brake his neck in dancing. Mar. Hist.

The Tyrrhenes first found the Trumpet, which they afterward used in battle
to fear their enemies, and encourage their friends, likewise at solemn
feasts, that they might thereby assemble the people together, and to proclaim
the coming of the Jubilee in the beginning of the new Moon, crying, joy and
rest to all men. Isodore.

Buccina was a kind of Trumpet made of horn, of wood, or brass, which the
vvild Panims used to assemble themselves together. The Hebrews used Trumpets of
horn, in remembrance of the deliverance of Isaac, what time an horned vveather
was offered and sacrificed in his stead.

Tibia was an instrument of sorrow and lamentation which men did use in
office, and sepultures of dead men; being like unto a Shalme or Flute.

Lyra has the name for diversity of sounds, and was first invented by Mercury.

The Harp is called Cythera, first found by Apollo, which Virgill writes to
have seven strings, that is, seven soundes, and seven differences of voices.

The Psalterie, has the name of Psallendo, for the consonant answers to the
note thereof in singing. The Hebrews called the Psalterie Decachordon, an
instrument having ten strings, according to the number of the ten
Commandments.

Cymballs are instruments of music compassed like an hoope, and on the upper
compass, under a certain hollownesse hangs half bells, five or seven in
number.

Sistrum, has the name of a Lady that first found the same, who was Isis
Queen of Egypt; Among the Amazons the host of women is called to battle
with this instrument. It is like a horn, used in battle in sted of a Trumpet.

The Bell is also reckoned among the Instruments of music, who whilst he
profits others in sounding, he is himself consumed and wasted by often
smiting. This was invented by the Parthians.

Of Women. Although Pandora had wisdom from Pallas, eloquence from Mercury,
beauty from Venus, personage from Juno, and from every other God some gift,
(whereupon she is so called) yet in the nature of a woman, she brought the
whole world to confusion.
ALthough Eve transgressed before the man, yet is the original of sinning,
ascribed to Adam, because the succession is accounted in men, and not in women.

Thucidides was of opinion, that those women were most honest, of whose
commendation and disprayse there is least speech used.

Harmonia, daughter to Hiero the Syracusan, would willingly have dyed in the
defense of her Country.

Epicharia, a libertine of Rome, being made privy to a conspiracy intended
against Nero, was so constant in secrecy, that being rent with most cruel
torments, yet never would she bewray any of the parties. Tacitus.

Laeena bitte her tongue in sunder, and spette it in the face of Hippias the
Tyrant, in whose honor, the Athenian, dedicated before the Castle gate a
Lioness of brass without a tongue, to betoken the steady virtue of silence
in her. Pliny.

Araetia taught her Son Aristippus philosophy.

Mithridates wife and sisters, showed a far less fear of death, then
Mithridates himself. Appian.

The wife of Asdruball of Carthage, overcome by Scipio, showed a greater
resolution to die, then Asdruball himself.

Aspasia and Diotima, with sacrifice drove of a plague ten years, which
should have happened in Athence.

Aspasia loved and taught the eloquent Pericles of Athence.

Nichostrata, mother to Euander, shevved the Latins their Letters.

The Sabine women, were no less help to increase Rome, then the Troyans at
the first beginning.

The conspiracy of Cataline, for which Cicero is so praised, was first
disclosed by a woman. Salust.

Philip the son of Demetrius, laying siege to the city of Scio, proclaimed
that what bondman soever would forsake the City, and come to him, they
should have liberty and their Masters wives; the women hearing this, came to
the walls weaponed, and fought so fiercely that they repulsed Philip. A deed
the men could not do.

The Erythians made war upon the Sciots, who not able to hold out, compounded
to depart their City without armor, which when the women heard of, they
would not suffer, but counseled them to carry their shield and spear, and
leave their clothes, and answer their enemies, that this was their array,
which they followed, avoiding the s^ame of the other.

The Spartane women delighted to see their children die valiantly in defense of
their country.

The women of Sagunt in the destruction of their Country, took wepons in hand
against Haniballs soldiers.

When the Army of the Germans was vanquished by Marius, their women not
obtaining to live free in Rome, in service with the Vestals, killed themselves
and their chidren.

Portia the wife of Brutus, and daughter of Cato, when she heard that they both
were dead, being carefully watched of her servants, took the fire from the
harth and swallowed the coals. Appian.

The women of India are so courageous and bold, that they dare leap into the
fire with the dead bodies of their husbands.

Alexandra, wife to Alexander, was Bishop in Jury nine years.

Antiochus King of Siria, had a servant called Arteon, so like him of face and
person, that when King Antiochus dyed, the Queen Laodicea his wife dissembled
the matter, until she of her own decree, had made another King in Syria.

Zenobia Queen of the Palmerins, being very well learned in the Greek,
Latin, and Egiptian tongues, taught them to her two sons, and wrote an
Epitome of the Eastern Histories.

Chrysostom made a sermon against all women, because Eudoxia the Emperor
Arcadius wife, had bolstered Epiphanius against him; he mocked at her picture,
for which cause, she endeavored to banish him again, whereof he
understanding, made a notable Sermon with this beginning, Herodias rages a
fresh, stomaketh a new, daunceth again, seeks as yet the head of John
Baptist. Eusebius.

In the war that Conradus a Germane Emperor had with the Ca^ulies, he took
the Castle and Town of VVeimsburge; then the Emperor commanded to take all
the Gentlemen, but the Gentlevvomen should be let go with as much goods as
they could carry, but they forsaking their goods, carried away their children,
which the Emperor hearing of, commended their virtue, and gave the^ likewise
leave to take their goods.

The Romans had a law, that what soever a woman with child longed for, she
should have it, the cause was, for that Fuluius, Torquatus wife, longed to see
a vvilde man that passed by her door, whom the Knights of Mauritania had taken
in hunting, in the deserts of Egypt, and not seeing him, she dyed. Aurelius.

When the Romans upon a certain wager, did send from the vvarres to Rome, to
understand what every man's wife did at home, amongst them all, the most
praised, was the chaste Lucrecia; for that she only was found vveauing, and
all the rest idle. Liuius.

Assiria co^plaineth of the scandal of Semyramis, Armenia for Pincia, Greece
for Helena, Rome for Agrippina.

In the society of the Druides of France, were very many learned women, of
whom the Roman Emperor Aurelian did ask counsel. Vopiscus.

The greatest part of Asia was conquered and governed, more by the women
Amazons, then with any barbarous people. P. Diaco.

Porus king of India, for want of men, and too many women, was overcome of
Alexander. Curtius.

Haniball was always Lord of Italy, until he suffered women to go to the
vvarres with him, and when he fell in love with Tamyra at Capua, he
immediately turned his back to Rome.

Sylla, in the wars against Mithridates and Marius, and in the wars of the
Cimbres, had over his enemies so many victories, because in his Camp he
suffered no women.

Liuia Fuluia, told her husband, that unless she might lie out of his house
one night, he should never have any quietness with her. Aurelius.

Rotorra compounded with a Pirate on the sea, that no woman for 2. years should
serve his hundred soldiers but she alone. Idem.

Semyramis, when she had (through her importancie) obtained of her husband
Ninus, the government of the kingdom for five days, and that his nobles
should for that time obey her, she caused her husband to be presently
apprehended and cast in prison; who impatient of this disgrace, dashed out his
own brains.

Amongst the Amazons were two principal Queens chosen from them all, that both
at home and abroad their affairs might be well marshalled; Lampedo governed at
home, Marpesia fought their battles.

Clytemnestra, the wife of Agamemnon, to revenge an injury received from her
husband, committed adultry with Aegisthus, and afterward consented to his
death. Eurip.

Fuluia, the widow of M. Marcellus, seeing her husband buried in the field of
Mars, for grief scratched her face, tore her hair, and fell down into a
sownd, whom the Senators took up, but Cn. Flauius said, Let her go, for she
will do all the penance of widows; but presently, whilst the bones of her
husband were a burning, she agreed to be married to another, and more, to one
of the Senators which had lifted her up.

Septimius wife corrupted in love by one of Anthonies friends, was desirous of
his harlot to become his wife, causing him to speak to Anthony for her, and
foorth-with was Sept^mius condemned, whom she betrayed to the Soldiers, and
in one day he was killed, and she married. Appian.

Salassus, fearing the displeasure of Anthony, got him to the top of his house,
from whence when he saw his wife bringing the Soldiers to murder him, threw
himself headlong into the streets. Appian.

The ancient Britains, did not only make women their Rulers in peace, but
their Leaders in war. Tacitus.

The Germans preferred them before men themselves, and were of opinion, that
some sacred and provident thing remained in them, for which cause, they did
neither reject their counsels, nor set light by their aunswers, and many of
them were reputed amongst them for Prophetesses, and as their superstition
increased, they held them as Goddesses. Idem.

Zenobia writ a Chronicle of all the wars fought in Alexandria, and made a
collection of all the notable wars fought in the East parts.

So long as Mesa, the Grandmother of Seuerus lived with him, his estate was
sure, but following too much the fancies of his mother Mammea, he overthrew him
self.

Semyramis ruled worthily, and fought more valiantly then ever Xerxes durst,
with all his huge hoasts.

The mother of Seuerus did bear such sway with him, that he banished his
Empress from the Court and his bed, unto the uttermost Coasts of Africa.

The widow Empress of Valens, when the Goths had strongly besieged
Constantinople, where she was, fought with so great courage against them, that
she enforced the^ to raise their siege. Cassiodorus.

Penelope, was renowned for her chastity.

Alcesta, the wife of Admetus, chose to die, to prolong her husbands life.
Euripides.

The Essenians were open enemies to women.

Minerua was borne without a mother, as some write, so feigned, for that women
have no wisdom.

In the Spartane commonweal, they had certain officers named Gynecomones,
who had in charge to punish the insolency of women, and to suppress their
arrogance and pride; The Roman Censors had the like authority.

Of Marriage. This contract of marriage, called, the contract of God, (as by him
first instituted in paradize) is called the bond of mutual love and
reciprocal affection between man and wife, over whom he ought to rule, not as
the Lord over his Servant, but as our Lord and Savior does over the Church,
whose indissoluble knot who so seek to dissunder, combat with the Majesty of
God, damning themselves through a secret alliance which they make with satan.
CHrist honored a marriage with his presence, and a miracle.

Pompey coming among the Massagetes, who used once a week to accompany their
wives, demanded the cause thereof, who answered, Because we would not hear
chydings in the day time, nor their complaints in the night.

Venda, Queen of Russia, drowned her self, thereby to prevent them that made
war for her, to have her in marriage, seeing they could not win her by
gentleness. Olaus.

M. Aurelius gave this counsel, that a wise husband, and one that minds to
live peaceably with his wife, ought above all things to observe this rule; to
admonish her often, to reprehend her sildome, but never to lay hands upon her.

The Romans passed all other Nations, in pomp, ceremonies, and comlines of
marriage.

Cato, a sworn enemy to women, never struck his wife.

Xantippe, Socrates wife, reuiling and chyding him, in the end being carried
headlong into wrath, ouer-threw table and all; whereupon Euthydemus, whom he had
invited to supper, rose up to depart; but Socrates not showing him self angry
with his wife, stayde him, saying, What, do you not remember when we were at
dinner with you, a Hen leapt upon the table, and we said nothing, nor were
angry?

Cato deprived a Senator of Rome from his place, because he kissed his wife in
presence of his daughter. Plut.

Ruth, desiring to be covered with Booz cloak, requested that he would
acknowledge her for his lawful wife. P. Martyr.

Amongst the Greeks, the children that married without their Parents consent,
were publicly whipped, and the Lacedaemonians did not whip, but disinherite
them. Laertius.

The Thebanes, not only ordained they should be disinherited, but also cursed
of their Parents openly; Let no man esteem it light to be cursed of their
Parents, for in old time the Hebrews children made more account of their
Fathers blessing, then of their Grandfathers inheritance.

The wife of Thucidides the Historiographer, when she was asked how she could
endure her husbands stinking breath, answered, As no other but my husband has
come near me, so I thought all other men's breath had been of the same savor.
Plut.

Dionysius married two wives in one day, with whom he slept and took his
pleasure by turns, the one followed him in his warlike affairs, the other
entertained him in peace. Plut.

Paulina a woman in Rome, had been married to 22. husbands, who afterward
marying one that had 20. wives, dyed in his life time; wher-vpon the Romans
crowned him with Laurel, in token of victory, and caused him to carry a
branch of Palm in his hand, at his wives funeral. Hierome.

The Hebrews had such a reverence to married folks, that he which had married a
wife the same year, should not be forced to go on warfare. Orosius.

The Romans did lay a penalty upon their back, that lived a single life, nor
would they suffer them to bear any office in the commonweal. Plut.

Augustus being a sore punisher of evil behavior, examined a Soldier
because he did not mary his wife according to the laws, who had hardly escaped
judgment, if he had not gotten three children by her. Idem.

Albinus obtained his purpose of the Emperor Adrian, for none other desert of
his, but that he had begotten an house full of children. Eutropius.

Lycurgus made a law, that they which married not, should be kept in Summer from
the sight of Stage plays and other shows, and in VVinter they should go naked
about the market place, confessing that they had justly deserved that
punishment, because they lived not according to the laws.

The Greeks punished the breach of matrimony, with ten years wars. Homer.

Among the Hebrews, if a thief restored four times the value of that he
took away, he was acquitted, but an adulterers offense was punished with
death. It was also lawful among them to kill the adulterer.

Among the Hebrews and the Persians, he was most commended, that had most
wives, as though the Cuntry were most beholding to him that increased the same,
with the gretest number of children.

Tib. Gracchus, finding two Serpents in his chamber, inquired the meaning
thereof by a South-sayer, that if he slew the male first, he should dye before
his wife, but if the female, his wife before him; but loving his wife derely,
he killed the male, and dyed shortly after. Valerius.

Orpheus wife Euridice, dying upon her wedding day, he kept his love
inviolable, and would never set it upon any other.

Ninus, King of the Assirians, falling in love with Semeramis, the wife of
Menon his vassal, requested that he might have her to wife, and he should have
his daughter in marriage; but Menon loved her so well, that he would not yield
thereto, the King enraged, caused his eyes to be pulled out, and took her away
by force, and Menon for grief hanged him self.

M. Lepidus being driven into banishment, hearing that his wife was married to
another, dyed for grief.

When word was brought to Plautius Numidius, a Roman Senator, that his wife
was dead, he stabbed him self.

Silanus, after Nero had took his wife from him, slew him self.

Domitius Catalusius, Prince of Lesbos, loved his wife so well, that although
she grew leprous, he never forbad her his board or bed.

Hector, when he saw Troy burning, was not so much grieved for his Parents, his
brethren, nay, his self, as for Andromache his wife. Homer.

Antonius Pius, loved his wife Faustine so well, that when she died, he caused
her picture to be made, and to be set up before his face, in his bed chamber,
that he always might remember her.

M. Plancius, sailing with his wife into Asia, in the midst of his great glory,
for that his wife died, stabbed himself with his dagger, saying, two bodies
shall possess one grave.

Antimachus, a Poet, bewailed the death of his wife, in mournful Elegies.

Pericles being at Athence, was found kissing of his wife at Athence, and being
from Athence, he was found more sad to depart from his wife, then vvilling to
dye for his Country.

Orpheus loved his wife so well, that he went to hell and redeemed her from
thence, but through too much love, looking back, he lost her again. Ovid.

Alcestes a Q. of Thessalie, at what time K. Admetus should die, having by an
Oracle given an answer, that if any would die for the King, he should live,
which when all refused, his wife offered her self to save her husbands life.

Iulia Pompeius wife, seeing him come sore wounded from the field, supposing
that he was slain, being great with child travailed straight, and dyed.

Paulina, the wife of Seneca, when she had heard of the death of her husband,
enquiring the manner of it, she killed her self.

Ipsicratea, the wife of Mithridates, followed him like a Lacky in the wars,
unknown to him, desirous rather to bewitch him, then live a Queen in Pontus.

Aemilia, the wife of Affricanus, perceauing her husband to be in love with
one of her maids, and oftentimes to use the maid as her self, never hated
the maid, nor told her husband thereof, and when he was dead, she married her
wealthily in Rome.

Triara, when she knew by letters that her husband Vitellius, was environed of
his enemies, she rushed into the camp, and pressed to her husband, ready to
die with him.

Laodamia, loved her husband so well, that when she heard that Protesilaus was
slain, only desired that she might see his shadow, which when she saw, and
offering to embrace, dyed presently.

Valeria, a Roman Lady, said, that her husband dyed for others, but lived to
her for ever.

Sulpitia, being carefully restrained by her mother Iulia, from seeking her
husband Lentulus in Sicilia, whether he was banished, she went thither
apparailed like a Page.

Hipparchia, a very fair and rich woman, so much loved the Philosopher Crates,
who was hard favored and poor, that she married him against all her friends
minds.

The King of Persia, having taken prisoner the wife of Pandanns, and killed
him, would have married her, but she slew her self, uttering these words; GOD
forbid, that to be a Queen, I should ever wed him that has been the
murderer of my dear husband.

Fuluia, the wife of Anthony, not bearing his unkindness in leaving her sick,
and not bidding her farewell, dyed for sorrow. Appian.

Phaethusa, the wife of Pytheus, thought so earnestly upon her husbands
absence, that at his return, she had a beard grown upon her chinne. Hier.
Merc.

Melanthus said of Grogias, the most eloquent Orator, that he labored to
exhort men to concord, yet could he not quiet his wife, and therefore held it
great presumption to persuade others to that which he could not procure
himself, in his own private family.

Amongst the Romans, if any discention happened between the husband and the
wife, the Parents of both parties met in a temple consecrated to the Goddess
Viriplica, and there took notice of their griefs, and also reconciled them.

Ulysses, albeit Penelope, were both fair and chaste, would never trust her,
until the very extremity. Homer.

In Florence, even at this day, he that is Father of twelve children, male or
female, presently upon the birth of the twelueth, is free and exempt from all
tax, impost, loan, or Subsidy. Volateranus.

Adrian (of all the Emperors, the most learned in the Mathematiques and Greek
tongue) upon the confiscation of any man's goods attainted and convicted, hearing
that he had children, would restore the goods of the condemned Fathers, unto
them. Eutropius.

The Arabians, Grecians, and Italians, did usually keep their wives shut up
in their houses, almost as prisoners, and now likewise the Turks. Antonius Geff.

In Gascoine, the wives are in no subjection at all, but gad up and down at
their pleasures, like ancient Amazons. Gilb. Graap.

Isis, Queen of Aegipt, made a law, that upon the marriage day, the husband
should take a solemn oath betvveene his wives hands, that he should not
meddle with any household affairs, and the wife likewise between her husbands
hands, that she should never entermedle with any foreign affairs or
businesses. Diodorus.

The wives of Sparta, were reported in the femenine sex, to have had masculine
courages.

Theana, being demanded what married wife deserved commendation, answered,
She that medleth only with her rock and spindle, that loves only her
husbands bed, and keeps her tongue in quiet. Atheneus.

The Essenians have neither wife nor servants, nor the Dulopolitans, called
otherwise the Rascals and Slaves of Cities, professed open enemies to all
women-kind. Josephus.

Homer brings in Jupiter reproving and threatening his wife, when she is
rebellious, but never further.

Upon the Ascension day in Venice, the Duke accompanied with all his Nobles in
a fair vessel of pleasure made Gally-wise, goes in it a mile or two into the
Sea, and casts there in a ring of gold, thinking by this ceremony they so
marry the Sea unto them, that all the year after they may have safe passage
for their commodities.

Of Parents and Children. God has formed the mind to the perfect mold of truth
and virtue, carrying it far from vice, wherefore it behooves Parents to give
their children good education, which once taught, then is their voyage and
Navigations in this world happy, making them thankful to the occasions of
their great good, where otherwise neglected, they abhor the remembrance of
their Parents, when through their damnable liberty and evil examples, they
have been led away.
SOlon made a law, that those Parents in their old age, should not be relieved
of their children, which cared not how they practiced good manners, or profited
in letters.

Timarchides, being of wicked life, was not ashamed to have his Son of tender
years to be a viewer and witness of his wicked living. Cic.

Verres cared not how his Son spent his time, whether among harlots or honest
persons. Cic.

Scipio Affricanus (being eighteen years of age, his Father then Consul)
saved his life at Ticinum, and overcame him that wounded his Father. Stat.

Vespasian being besieged of the Barbarians in Britania, was delivered by his
Son Titus. Xiphil.

Lausus, the Son of Mezentius, defended his Father from Aeneas, and was
slain of him. Virg.

Antigonus, when he had obtained a great victory of his enemies, he tendered
all the honor at his Fathers feet. Rauisius.

Antigone led her blind Father Oedipus. Sophocles.

Cleobis and Byton, drew their mother in her Coach, to the temple of Apollo.
Cicero.

Leo, the younger, when he had reigned one year, rendered the crown again to
his Father. Zeno.

Aegeus, when he saw the ship that his Son rode into Crete, return with
black sails contrary to promise, supposing that he was slain, threw
himself from an high rock into the Sea. Ovid.

Aelius Tubero, had sixteen children of his own body, all of them married, and
dwelling in one house with their children, and living with him in all peace and
concord.

The arrogance of a child, was the cause that one of the Ephories published
the law of testaments, whereby it was permitted to every one from that time
forward, to appoint whom he would his heir.

Among the Romans, the child was not admitted to plead his Fathers will
after his death, by way of action, but only by way of request, using very
humble and reverent speech of his dead Father, and leaving the whole matter to
the discretion of the Judges. Patritius.

Antigonus, the Son of Demetrius, who was taken prisoner by Seleucus, when
his Father sent him word to give no credit to any letters he should send, for
the delivering up of certain towns, thereto constrained by Seleucus;
Antigonus contrariwise writ to Seleucus, that he would yield him up all, become
pledge for him, if he would restore his Father.

Apollonida, mother to King Eumenes, and to three other of his brethren,
accounted her self happy, because she saw her 3. younger sons as it were a
guard to their elder brother.

Cato with his own hand wrote a history, and gave it to his son, to the
end he might there see the acts of his ancestors, and learn the skill how to
govern the Commonwealth.

Bercilidus, a Governor in Sparta, sitting at meat, did forbid that the
younger sort should do him reverence, reproouing himself of barrennes,
because he had not begotten any children to do them the like honor when they
were old.

Cornelia accounted her children to be the chiefest treasure and riches that
she had. Val.

In France there was a Father and his son condemned to death for treason,
and judged to be executed (according to the custom of the Country) by standing
in a Caudron, in which they should be boiled to death; now it was winter, and
being both naked in the water, the son began to quake for cold, and when the
water was heated, to cry out with great impatience; his Father persisting
immovable in both, said, Thou son of a vile whore, can thou neither abide
heat nor cold?

Augustus commanded the Ladies his children, to learn all the offices and
qualities wherewith a woman might live and be maintained, and whereof she
ought to boast herself in such wise, that all the apparel which they wear,
they did spin and weaue; saying; that a rock became a Ladies girdle, asvvell as
a Lance becam a Knight, or a book a Priest. Sueto.

Annalis being condemned by the Triumuiri, fled to a tenant of his who had a
homely house, and was safe hid, until his son brough^ the pursuers to the
house, who killed him* Then the Triumuiri rewarded him with his Fathers goods,
and made him Chamberlain of the City, but one day being drunk and troubling
the soldiers, they which killed his father, murdered him. Appian.

Choranius, the unhappy Father of an unthrifty son, prayed the pursuers to
spare his life a while, till he might send to his son to speak to Anthony;
who laughed at him, and said his son had spoken, but to the contrary. Appian.

Quintus Ciceros brother and his son being taken, prayed the murderers to
kill him before his son, but his son requested the contrary; vvhereupon the
soldiers promised to grant both their desires, and taking them a sunder, by a
token killed them both at one instant. Appian.

Ignatius the Father and the son fighting together, dyed of one vvound, and
when their heads were stricken of, their bodies did yet embrace. Idem.

Aruntius could hardly persuade his son that would not fly without him, to
save himself; because he was but young, his mother sent him before to the
gates, and then returned to bury her husband being killed; and when she
shortly after heard that her son was dead upon the sea, she famished
herself. Plut.

Geta the son of Scoponius, made a fire in the open place of his house to
bury his Father that seemed to be dead, whom he had hid in an house in the
country, where the old man disguising himself, laid a parchment before his
eyes, and after the agreement was made, he took away the parchment, and
found his eyes out for want of use. Appian.

Oppius son, minding to take part with his old feeble father, bare him on
his back, till he was past the gates, and the rest of the way sometimes
leading him, and sometimes bearing him, he brought him safe to Sicelie: so did
Aeneas for Anchises his father. Idem.

Metellus the father and the son, the one Captain under Anthony, the other
under Caesar, the Father being prisoner, and being condemned, his son said
to Caesar, This has been thy enemy o Caesar, and I thy friend, him thou must
punish, and me reward, I desire thee to save my father for me, or let me die
for him, at whose request he was saved. Idem.

Crates Thebanus delivered a stock of money to his friends upon this condition,
that if it should happen his children to be fools, they should therewith be
maintained, but if they became learned and philosophers, then to distribute it
to the poor. Them. Mag.

Periander, one of the 7. Sages of Greece and a Tyrant, sent for his son
Licophorna, that with his own hands he might kill him, because he mourned for
the death of his mother, which when the Citizens of Corcyra knew, they put him
to death themselves, to deliver him from his Fathers tyranny. Vale. Maximus.

Priamus had by Hecuba fifty Sons and Daughters, Orodes king of Parthians
thirty, Artaxerxes a hundred and fifteen, Erothinus King of the Arabians,
seven hundred, in confidence of whom he invaded the confines of his enemies,
and with several inroads he wasted the Lands of Egypt and Syria. Petrarch.

Petrarch writes of a married woman, that had twelve several children by
twelve several men, one of them a year elder then the other, who ready to
die, told her husband of them all he was Father, but to the eldest; and
reckoning up the Fathers of the other, the youngest cried to her, good mother
give me a good Father; to whom she said, that a very rich man was his father,
whereupon the child was glad, saying; If he be rich, I have a good father.

Astapus and Amphorinus bare such love to their parents, that their City
being burned, they took them upon their shoulders, and carried them through
the midst of the fire.

A woman of Athence, her father called Cymon, being in prison where he was like
to be famished, craved so much leave of the Keeper that she might have access
to her Father, who^ with her milk she preserved long time from death.

Harpalice, her father being taken prisoner by the Getes, redeemed him with
more celerity then can be thought in a woman. Seruius.

It is written that three brethren striving who should enjoy their fathers
land, were content to be agreed by the King, swearing that they would stand
to that which he determined; the King commanded the dead body of the Father
to be taken up, saying; that he which shot nearest the heart, should be the
right successor; the eldest shot him in the throat, the second in the breast
near the heart, but the third, abhorring this damned resolution, said; I had
rather yield all to my brothers then be so degenerate. To whom for his virtue
and reverence to his father, the King adjudged the land.

Israel many years lamented the loss of one of his sons, for whom when he
was 120. years old, he went down with all his family into Egypt.

David greatly lamented the death of his rebellious son Absalon.

Orodes King of Persia, hearing that his son Pacorus was slain in the wars
against Ventidius, with extreme grief thereof became mad. Rauisius.

Auctolia the daughter of Sinon, and wife of Laertes, understanding a false
report of Ulysses death her son at Troy, dyed for sorrow. Idem.

Anius King of Thuscans, had a Daughter called Salia, whom when Oritheus had
stolen away, threvve himself violently into a River, called afterward by his
own name. Plutarch.

Lucius Gellius, when in a manner he knew that his son had beastly abused
himself with his stepmother, and attempted to bereave him of life, became
himself this wretches defender, and before the Senate acquitted him both of
fault and punishment. Val. Maximus.

Dioschorus put to death his virtuous and religious Daughter Barbara, for
embracing the Christian faith.

Ptolomeus Euergetes, being expulsed his kingdom for his cruelty, killed his
son in Cyprus whom he had by his sister Cleopatra, and sent her his head and
feet for a token. Liuius.

Apteras Saturnus, caused his own Father to be gelded, killed his own sons,
and held continual vvarres against his brethren. Berosus.

Deiotarus, having many sons, murthethered all save one, that he which
suruiued all the rest, might be mightier, and of greater power. Gellius.

Hippomenes an Athenian Prince, for that his daughter Lima was found in
adultery, caused her to be close shut up with a horse, giving her no
relief, but the horse almost famished, devoured his daughter. Laertius.

Oppianicus, contrary to the common nature of Parents, was content for money to
forsake his children. Cicero.

Domitius, detested his son Nero for no other cause, but that he had
begotten him upon Agrippina. Suetonius.

Medea being forsaken of Jason, murdered her own sons. Ovid.

Herod commanded his only child to be killed among the general massacre of
the innocents in Jury; which when Augustus heard, he said, That he had
rather be Herod's hog then his child. Josephus.

Prusius King of Bithinia, was murdered of his own son, when he had
committed the rule unto him.

P. Malleolus, for killing of his mother, was the first amongst the Romans that
was sowed in a sack and cast into the sea. Liuius.

Cham the youngest son of Noah, his Father being drunk and lying naked,
called his brethren to that unnatural sight; who going backwards, covered their
fathers secrets, for the which they were blessed, and the posterity of Cham
accursed. Gene. 6.

Absalon rising against his father David, expelled him his kingdom, and
afterward assailed by Ioab, fled and was hanged by his hair upon an Oak.

Helie the Prophet, winking at the faults of his children, though forewarned
of Samuel, died a violent death, and his sons both in one hour were slain
in battle by the Philistines, as a just revenge for their former
disobedience. Regum. 11.

Adramelach and Sarazar, murdered their Father Senacharib, for which they were
driven out of their kingdom, and ended their days in exile. 4. Reg.

Irene pulled out her son Constantines eyes, because he began to bear
himself over proudly in the Empire.

Eristhenes was famished of his mother, because he fought in battle with no
courage. Rauisius.

Damatria, when she heard that her son had not behaved himself in battle,
as the son of so worthy a mother should have done, at his return killed
him.

Orchanus caused his daughter to be buried alive, because Apollo had ravished
her. Ovid.

Tigranes killed one of his sons, because he would not take him up when he had
a fall at hunting, and for that he set the crown upon his head. Appian.

Machates the son of Mithridates, for fear of his father, killed himself.

Mithridates killed his son Siphares, to be revenged of the mother.

Gripus who was king after Seleucus, made his mother drink the poison which
she had prepared for him.

Medullina, whose body was abused by her drunken Father, knowing by his Ring
she took of from his finger that it was he, she killed him at the Altar.
Plut.

Of Sorrow. This vexation of mind, and sickness of the body, is a perturbation
altogether contrary to pleasure; from whence does spring repentance, sadness,
freating, lamentation, carefulnes, affliction, mourning, and desperation; this
is the last of the perturbations of the mind, being in number four.
A Certain Nun was mother to P. Lombardus master of the sentences, and
Gratianus, who when she saw them such notable men, said, she could not
repent, to whom her Confessor said; Only sorrow, because thou can not sorrow.
P. Mar.

The Jews thought Ecclesiastes to be Salomons repentance. Idem.

Origin repenting himself, and being sorry for that he did in his
adolescencie, said; I expounded the Prophet Abdias allegoricallie, whose
history I understood not.

Aeschines the Orator, being (as he was always) sick, did never complain of
the Spleen that did grieve him, and on the other part, he did much lament for
any sorrow that otherwise happened unto him. Plutarch.

Telemachus held this his greatest grief, that Jupiter had ended the race of
his Father in him, not giving him a brother. Homer.

King Xerxes, when he saw that Ochus lay in wait for his brethren to put the^
to death, died for grief thereof.

Plantius the Numidian, looking upon his dead wife, took such grief to his
heart, that casting himself upon the dead body, he rose no more, but was
stifled with sorrow.

Diodorus the Logitian, dyed for sorrovve, because he was not able to answer
the questions of Stilpo. Laertius.

M. Coriolanus being banished Rome, became enemy to her, but his mother Veturia
coming unto him, and vpbraiding him with his fault, he found his error, laid
down his arms, went out of the field, and dyed with grief of mind. Liuius.

Homer dyed with sudden sorrovve, because he could not answer a question
which a Fisherman propounded unto him. Plu.

The Roman Matrons bewailed the death of Brutus one whole year, as a chief
defender of their chastities. Eutrop.

Torquatus the younger, being banished from his Fathers house, for grief
thereof slevve himself.

There was great contention between Sophocles and Aeschilus about versifying,
in which (by the judgment of those that were present) Sophocles was pre^erred,
which Aeschilus took so grievously, that he fled forthwith into Sicilia,
where he lived obscu^ely, and in the end died miserably.

The like is written of Calchas a Soothsayer at his return from Troy, being
ouercom of Mopsus, one of his own profession. Homer.

Niceratus, for that Antimachus verses written in the praise of Lisander,
were by him more esteemed then his, (although by judgment of the learned
Niceratus were better) he was so grieved that he forsook his studies, but
Plato by counsel turned his mind, and of a dissolute, made him a diligent
studient in Poetry.

Themistocles mother, for very grief conceived, that her son in his youth
was given to all kind of wickedness, hanged her self.

P. Rutilius, when he heard that his Brother desiring to be made a Consul in
Rome, had taken the repulse, for very angush of mind, dyed.

By the laws of the twelve tables of Rome, all sorrovve and weeping at
funerals was forbidden.

Lepidus, by a long grief conceived of the misbehauiour of his wife, shortened
his own days.

Dioxippus before Alexander, only with a club challenged Corrhagus being all
armed, to enter combat with him; when ^ee had smitten Corrhagus spear out of
his hand, he closed with him, and laying fast hold upon his armor, he threw
him down, then set his foot upon his neck, and gored him through the body
with his svvord; for which act Alexander hated him, whereupon, Dioxippus took
inward thought, and gave such scope unto inward force of fantasy, that he
pyned and consumed away with grief of mind.

Timanthes, when he had finished the picture of Iphigenia in colors, set
forth Calchas to be sorrowful for the same, but Ulysses more sad; and to
make her Father Agamemnon seem most sorrowful, he painted him with his face
covered.

The Poets feign Prometheus to be tied upon the top of the Mountain Caucasus,
and an Eagle to be gnawing of his heart, whereby they signify no other thing,
but the great sadness of Prometheus, gotten by contemplating the stars and
Planets.

The poesy of the Pythagorians was, The heart should not be eaten.

Caesar never feared Anthony and Dolobella, or any other that was of a merry
countenance, but rather doubted sad and mellancholie persons, such as Brutus
and Cassius was.

Crassus was called Gelastos, for that he was once seen to laugh in his life.

Anaxagoras Clazomenius, was noted that he never was seen to laugh or smyle
from the day of his birth.

Aristoxenus did wonderfully bridle himself from laughter.

Heraclitus was at such defiance with mirth that he wept continually, and
Democritus always laughed. Laertius.

Bibu^us hearing of the death of both his children in one day, lamented their
loss that one day and no more.

Anaxagoras hearing tell that his son was dead, answered, It is no marvel,
for I begot a mortal body.

P. Varro remained so sorrowful in his heart to see himself overcome of his
enemies, and his wife suddenly dead, that all the time he after lived, he
neither combed his head, slept in bed, nor dined at the table. Liuius.

The Romans were so sorrowful for the death of Augustus Caesar, that they
wished he had never been borne, or being borne, never dyed* Eutropius.

Of Lying. This contrary to truth and nature, makes that seem very good,
which is evil, and causes the tongue to become a member of injustice, when it
utters more or less then is indeed; under this vice are contained Deceit,
Dissimulation, Cr^^t, Hypocrisy, Idolatry, and cousenage.
THrough a lie, Joseph was cast into prison, and Saint Chrysostom sent into
banishment.

The Egyptians ordained death to liars, so did the Scythians and Garamantes.

The Persians and Indians, deprived him of all honor and farther speech which
lied.

The Gymnosophists, and Chaldeans, barred liars all companies and dignities,
and condemned them to remain in perpetual darkness, without speaking.

The very worms did eat the tongue of the cousoner Nestorius, in his life
time. Nicephorus.

Popiel King of Poland, had ever this wish in his mouth, If it be not true, I
would the Rats might eat me; which came to pass, for he was so assailed by
the^ at a banquet, that neither his guards, nor fire, nor water, could defend
him from them. Munster.

Some write, that an Archbishop of Magunce died the like death.

The Emperor Traiane, surnamed the good Prince, took away from the son of
Ceba^us the kingdom of Dacia, which we term at this day Transiluania and
Valachia, only because he caught him in a lie, and ^old him that Rome could
not permit a liar to possess a kingdom.

After that one had read unto Alexander, the great History, out of
Aristobulus, wherein he had intermingled certain counterfaite praises, he ^^ong
the book into the River, saying, The writer deserved to have been cast in
himself.

In Almaine, a lie has been always extremely hated and shunned, as it were a
plague and bastards could never obtain the price of any occupation whatsoever,
nor take degree in any Art or Science. Zonarus.

The Emperors, Nero, Commodus, Maximilius, Julius, Valencius, have by lies
been brought to ruin.

Pope Alexander the sixth, never did what he said, and his Son Borgia never
said what he meant to do, pleasing themselves in counterfaiting and
dissembling, to deceive and falsify their faith. Guychardine.

When the Duke of Valentinois had caused certain Princes to be murdered
contrary to his oath, his Father the Pope told him, that he had played a right
Spaniards part, but they dyed most miserably, the one poisoned, the other
slain.

The Lacedaemonians banished C^hesiphon because he boasted that he could
discourse a whole day long of any theme, that was put unto him.

Artaxerxes, caused one of his Soldiers tongs, to be nailed to a post for
making a lie.

The Gabionites for lying lost their liberty.

The Cretans for lying, became odious to all the world.

Achilles did more abhor lying then death. Homer.

Paulus Iouius, being demanded in his Chronicle, why he fained many things
as false, and dissembled the true, which thereby might breed his History to be
suspected, answered, that he did it to please those from whom he received
pensions.

Ulysses speech always proceeded from his heart. Homer.

Pope Innocent the third, made fair weather with Otho the fourth, and
Frederick the second contending for the Empire, and nevertheless made a very
solemn and eloquent oration, of the agreement and unity, which ought to be
amongst Christian Princes; but a Citizen of Rome answered him, Holy Father,
your words seem to be of God, but your deeds thereto contrary surely
proceed from the devil. Guychardine.

Pyrrhus was enemy to the Romans, yet nevertheless did he give this praise
unto Fabritius, that a man might as soon turn him from the truth and honesty,
as the sun out of his course. Plut.

In Lacedemon, there was one that was known to be a notorious liar, who
notwithstanding he gave profitable advise, and necessary for the time, yet it
was clean rejected of the people. Plut.

Antiochus in hunting lost his way, and was constrained to retire to a poor
man's house of the Country, who not knowing him, told him all the faults he and
his favorites had committed, to who^ at his return, he said, that he never
understood the truth till that night, and ever after carried him self most
virtuously.

Marcus Aurelius was called Verissimus, for in him was never found lies, nor
truth ever failed.

Pharamond King of France, was called VVarmond, which signifies truth.

The Lacedaemonians condemned one that did open penance, wearing hairecloath
upon his skin, for that thereby they discovered his hypocrisy, in as much as
it was wouen with purpure.

Dionysius the Tyrant, being retired to Athence, after he was deprived of his
kingdom, bewailed the estate of Princes, but especially in that men never
spoke freely unto them, and the truth was ever hidden and concealed from them.
Plato.

Demosthenes called Phocion, the hatchet of his words, because he spoke truth
and to the matter.

The dissimulation of Metellus and Scipio, was so great, that Metellus fained
that Rome was happy that Scipio was borne therein, and yet was his mortal enemy
all the days of his life.

Frederick a Roman emperor, at what time the Senators were entering the
Senate, would say to them before you enter, Cast away two things, simulations,
and dissimulations.

Alexander, would consent to nothing but truth, and Phillip his Father to all
kind of falsehood.

By craft Haniball vanquished the Tarentines, and by craft the Romans
recovered it again.

Clodius, to bring his purpose to pass with Pompeia Caesar's wife, dissembled
himself to be a woman. Cicero.

Salmoneus, by lightening of a Torch, did counterfeit the thundering sownds and
lightning storms of heaven. Virgil.

Phryne the harlot, to know which was Praxiteles the Paynters best picture,
bad his man bring him word that his shop was on fire, I am undone, said he, if
my pictures of the Satyr and Cupid be burned. Pausanias.

Darius became King of Persia, by neighing of a Mare, having the day before
brought to that place a Stallion, for it was agreed among the Persians, that
whose Mare first neighed, he should be King. Herodotus.

Pelagia of Antioche, dissembled her self to be a man, because she would live
chaste.

Semyramis, knowing her Son to be too young to rule, disguised her self like
to a man, and governed the monarchy until her Son came to riper age. Justin.

Ulysses fained himself mad, to avoid the great expedition. Homer.

Marina, and Euphrosina, Grecian Virgins, were woorthily preferred before
Cleomilus and Clisthenes, for that they went in the apparraile of men, to live
in the wilderness to avoid lust, the others went in the habites of women, to
beguile women.

Achilles, was by his mother Thetis, sent to King Licomedes like a woman,
because he might not go to Troy, where thus disguised he g^t upon one of them
Pyrrhus Neoptolemus.

Sinon by dissembling got Troy for the Grecians; Conon the Athenian, deceived
the Persians in Cyprus, and Antigonus the Citizens of Corinth.

Pyrrhus deceived Cannius in his bargain of fish. Cic. of fic. lib.

An old Lacedemonian, who had colored his hairs, discovered his head in a
great assembly, and made a declaration of such matters, about which he came.
Archidamus the King, rose up and said, What truth can this fellow speak,
whose heart is stained with spots of hypocrisy and double dealing. Aelianus.

Eurydamas a wrastler, when his teeth were dashed out by his adversary, he
dissembled his pain, and swollowed down his teeth, blood and all, to the end,
that he which gave the blow, might not perceive the mischief.

Cleomenes, had a companion, whom he made pertaker of a purpose he had to
accomplish, to whom he swore that he would attempt nothing, but Archonides
should be at one end thereat, when he had gotten what he desired, he
murdered his companion, cut his head from his shoulders, and laid it in a
basin of honey: so when he put any device in adventure, he looked upon his head
in the basin, saying, I break not my promise, but I stand to my oath, for I
take counsel with Archonides head, according to my covenant. Aelianus.

Meton the Astronomer counterfaited himself mad, and set his own house on
fire, because he would not go with the Grecians their voyage into Sicilia.

Cato was so renowned for his truth, that when any man rehearsed a strange
thing, and hard to be believed, this proverb went of him, because he was
known throughout the whole course of his life, to be a lover of truth, This is
not credible although Cato himself should speak it.

Aristomenes, when he was dead and vnbowelled, his heart was hairy, which was a
sure sign of his craft and subtilty.

Brutus dissembled himself a fool, to the end that men should have no mistrust
of him, nor be privy to the greatness of his courage.

Ariston, being in love with Agetus wife, found this fraud to get her from her
husband, he promised Agetus to give him any one thing that he would choose, of
all that ever he had, praying him to do the like for him again; Ariston
agreed and swore it, Ariston discharged his promise out of hand, and forthwith
demanded Agetus wife, who because of his oath delivered her.

He that bare the office of the chief Judge in Aegipt, did wear an Image of
truth hanging at his breast, which picture was had in singular estimation of
the Druides.

One when truce was taken with the enemy for 30. days, overcame his land in
the night, because the truce was taken for days and not nights. Cicero.

Q. Fab. Labeo, being by the Roman Senate, appointed dayes-man between the
Nolanes and Neapolitanes, about the bownds of their land, did commune with
either of them a part, and being come to the place, persuaded them rather to
set back, then to encroach upon an other, which when either of the^ had don,
there was a parcel of ground left in the midst, then he caused their bownds to
be staked out, and the middle part he adjudged to the people of Rome. Idem lib.
offic.

Anniball, amongst the Carthagenians, and Q. Maximus of the Romans, had
marvelous cunning in cloaking, keeping, dissembling, making stales, and in
preventing the devises of the enemy. Cicero.

Amongst the Greeks, Themistocles the Athenian, and Jason the Phaereian,
excelled in this kind. Cicero.

A Syrian slave in Sicily, after a mad sort raging with a desire to make a
rebellion, pretended a religion of doing honor to the Goddess of Syria, and
called bondmen to liberty and arms, and that he might seem to do that by
the will of God, he held a nut in his mouth stuffed with Surphure and fire, the
which when he he spoke, did cast forth flames. P. Diaconus.

Twenty thousand of the Celtaebrians brought branches of Olyue like
petitioners, asking pardon, which coming nigh the Romans, gave a violent
onset on the^, Gracchus went from the camp of purpose, and made as though he
fled, and whilst they were about the spoil, he returned and killed many of
them, recovering Complega. Appian.

Ulysses was not so wily, but he was matched by Palmedes, and his dissembled
madness discovered.

Caesar, when he could not condemn one for any sufficient and probable crime,
he made him away by some secret means, and some were dispatched in his armies
by treachery and attempts, wrought against them by those of their own side:
this deceit was cruel. Diodorus.

The Achaians, a people of Greece, did altogether condemn policies and
stratagems in war, accounting of them as of subtilties, because they thought
that no victory was either of any renown or certainty, except they had in open
fight overcome their enemies, by an assigned battle. Polybius.

Marius, a rich Citizen of Rome, who by Augustus got all his wealth, always
said, that he would make him his only heir, which he vowed to the Emperor
the day before he dyed, after whose death was found, that in all his will he had
not made once mention of Augustus.

Of Slander. A wise man keeps close his ears, when he doubts of the
virtue and honesty of the person accused, making Reason their diligent Porter
and watch, which examineth and lets in the reports that be good, and
excludes those that arise from slander and detraction, whose Image was
excellently described in figures by Apelles.
EVstace Bishop of Antioche, a religious and devout man, seeking to suppress
the heresy of the Arrians, was by their false accusation and slanders
deprived from his Sea. Eusebius.

Aristophanes slaundered Socrates (a man so much beloved of the Gods) in a
Comedy, called, Nebulae, the clouds.

Leontius, after he had put Justinian to flight, caused two of his
tale-bearers to be trailed by the feet and burned.

Darius, made the accusers of Daniell to be devoured of Lions.

Aristobulus, through a false report, put to death his own brother, and
afterward dyed for grief.

Plato banished accusers, slanderers, and tale-bearers, out of his
commonwealth.

Scipio Africanus, being accused of many things, by the Tribunes of the people,
answered nothing to the crimes laid against him, but only said thus; In such a
day as this is sirs, I ouer-came both Carthage and Haniball, which the Senators
and people hearieg, were so far from condemning him, that they caused him in a
manner to triumph again.

Emilius Scaurus, being accused by Varius, made this answer, O ye Romans,
Varius affirms this crime laid against me to be true, and Scaurus denies,
whom will ye rather believe?

Medius, Captain of all the flatterers that followed, Alexander taught them
that they should not spare to nip boldly, and to byte with store of slanders,
for quoth he, although he that is bitten should be cured of the wound, yet
the scarre at the least will still remain.

By false accusations and slanders, Calisthenes, Parmenio, and Philotas, were
unjustly put to death by Alexander.

Phillip was told, that the Grecians spoke ill of him behind his back,
notwithstanding he did them much good, and therefore was counseled to chastise
them; What would they do then, said he, if we should do them any harm; but
they make me a better man, for I strive daily both in my words and deeds to
prove them liars.

He was likewise counseled to banish one who had slaundered him, or put to
death, but he would do none of both, saying, It was not sufficient cause to
condemn him, and it was better not to let him stir out of Macedonia, where
all men knew that he lied; but going among strangers not knowing him, they
would admit his slander for truth.

Nicholas Scot was beheaded, for railing upon Maximilian Sforza, Duke of
Millane.

Augustus pardoned Cinna, that would have murdered him, and made him Consul,
but Timagenes for that he railed upon him, he drane him out of his house,
deeming that of an enemy he might make a friend, but of a rayler a back-biter
and slaunderer, a man can make nothing else.

The Frenchmen called back-biters Mouches, flies, The Romans called the^
Delatores tale-bearers, the Greeks Acoustes, harkners, or spies.

Dionysius held tale-bearers in great estimation, but at the alteration of the
state, the Syracusans put them all to the sword.

Anthony put those tale-bearers to death, which could not prove their
accusation.

Critias reproved Archilochus, because he spoke not well of him self.

Eschines finding fault with certain of Demosthenes words and phrases, he
answered, Non in eo sitae sunt opes graeciae: The sum and substance of the
matter does not consist in that.

The Romans had a law called, Lex papia, which gave half the goods of the
accused to the accuser; but Nero brought it to a fourth part, and they were
ever after called Quarterers, because they had a quarter of the goods that were
so escheared.

Aesopus the Phrygian, that writ the fables, when he came to Delphos, was
wrongfully accused of envious persons, for stealing a piece of plate, which
they had craftily hid in some things about him, for the which, he was cast
down from a rock. Plut.

Lucius Crassus wone himself great praise, by a noble and glorious accusation.
Cicero.

An accusation brought Publius Su^pitius eloquence to light, when into
judgment he called the seditious and unprofitable Citizen C. Norbanus.

The Lidians had a law, that as they sent the condemned murderers to row in the
Galleys, so they confined those that were detracters and ill tongued men into a
secret place, far of from all company, the space of half a year. Plut.

Tiberius the Emperor, condemned a great talker and rayler of his tongue, and
commanded that he should not speak a word the space of a year.

Aristophanes, was accused by the Athenians 95. times, and ever acquitted.

Narsetes, that valiant General, by false and slanderous accusations, was by
Iustine the Emperor deprived of his charge. P. Diaconus.

Theodoricus, King of the Goaths, in his rage through a forged accusation,
executed Boethius and Symmachus, shortly after he was served at the table with
the head of a fish, which seemed to him to be the same of Symmachus looking a
squint upon him, with which conceit he fell sick and dyed. Olaus.

Thrasibulus King of the Jews, took such a conceit in that he had slain his
brother, without hearing his excuse, that he died; the like befell to
Aristobulus, for murdering his brother Antiochus, who vomited up his blood, in
the place where his brothers was spilt, and in remorse of conscience dyed.
Josephus.

They which accused Socrates, not being able any longer to abide the public
hate, strangled themselves.

Mary of Aragon, accused an Earl before the Emperor Otho her husband, saying,
that he would have defiled her, and he was beheaded, but the truth being
afterward discovered, she was publicly burned. Nicephorus vvriteth the like
of Constantine the great.

Leo the Emperor, upon a false accusation condemned Michaell to death, which
execution being a while deferred, the Emperor dyed, and Michaell was chosen in
his sted.

Mathias, the Son of Huniades, was charged of ill behauing himself toward
Ladislaus, King of Boheme and Hungary, and as he was ready to be condemned (his
eldest brother having been before executed upon envy and false information) the
said Ladislaus minding to marry Margaret, daughter to Charles the 7, dyed
suddenly, and Mathias was chosen King of Hungary. Loncerus.

Of Flattery. This poison of man's senses and understanding, has no other scope
in the world but deceit, self-love, and ouerweening of ones self, yeelneth
this large field, clean taking away right judgment, and is blind in regard of
what it loves; the feeders of this humor are more dangerous then Ravens, for
they do but devour the bodies of the dead, slatterers of the living.
PHillip, surnamed Gods gift, and Constantine, banished flatterers from their
courts. And at Athence they were put to death, as the very ruin and plague of
Princes.

Dion attributes the hatred which was conceived against Julius Caesar, and
his death, to flatterers.

Dyonisius of Syracuse, sent Philoxenus the Poet to the galowes with those that
were condemned to die, because heee would not flatter him.

The Thessalians, clean rased a City of the Melians, because it was named
flattery. Atheneus.

The Athenians put Tymagoras to death, because to insinuate with Darius, he
saluted after the Persian manner. Agrippa.

Alexander the great, and Alphonsus King of Arragon, having each of them
somewhat awry neck, the one of them by nature, the other by custom; the
flatterers and courtiers that attended them, held their necks on the one side,
to (...) their imperperfections.

Clisiphus was called the cou^terfait of King Phillip, because when the king
was merry, he was merry, and whatsoever the King took in hand, this flatterer
would maintain.

Aristippus could better please Dionisius with flattery, then Dion the
Syracusian could pleasure him with truth.

Curio the Parasite, might persuade Caesar to do any thing.

One subtle flattering Sino^, did that which ten years siege could not
effect, namely, the destruction of Troy. Virgil.

Dionisius sent unto Philoxenes the Poet, a Tragedy of his own making, that
he might read and correct it, which he returned all blotted and rased from
the beginning to the end, because he found it in no respect worthy to be
published, so far was he from flattering him.

Augustus so hated flattery, that he could not abide the kneeling of his
household servant.

Tiberius would not suffer his servant to call him Lord.

Alexander, when his Parasites persuaded him to think himself a God, said,
That by two things especially, he knew himself to be a man and no God, namely,
by sleep, and carnal motions. Plutarch.

In the hindermost part of Spain, when those of Civil had war with the
Gaditanes, it chanced that even in the midst of the time, those of Civil
vvanted money, and two Parasites offered themselves for two years to sustain
the vvarres with their own proper charges. Aurelius.

The Emperor Aurelius, never drank other then red wine, which Torquatus
perceiving, refrained from drinking of VVhitevvine, and planted all his Vines
with read Grapes; for which he made him Consul of Rome. Gueuara.

The Emperor Sigismond, struck one that praised him too much: saying that he
bitte him.

The flattering followers of Sylla, set up his image of gold on horseback in
the common palace at Rome, with this title, Cornelius Sylla, the happy
Captain; which name beginning of flattery, remained firm and stable. Appian.

Antigonus said unto a Poet who called him a God, (thereby noting his
flattery) that the Groom of his stool, knew there was no such matter.

Aristotle's auditors cou^terfeited his stamering, Alexanders followers, his
double chinne, and shrilnes of speech, and the scholars of Ennius his
drunkenness.

Flatterers, as the Italians say, travail between Lodi and Placentia, but
never come at Verona.

Aristippus suing to Dionisius for a friend of his, and being once denied,
fell down before his feet, for the which he was repro^ued, but he thus
excused it, saying; I am not in the fault, but Dionisius, who has ears on
his feet.

When the flatterers of Dionisius perceived that he held Plato in great
estimation, they then counterfaited the countenance and habit of
Philosophers, but after that by their means Plato was expelled, they returned
to their former wicked course of living. Plut.

Platoes scholars, for as much as their Master had a broad breast and high
shoulders, and was therefore named Plato, which signifies broad, they
stuffed their garments, and wore upon their shoulders great bolsters, to the
end they might seem to be of the like form that he was.

Carneades the Philosopher said, that the sons of noble men learned nothing
well but to ride; for whilst they learned letters, their Masters flattered
them, praising every word they spoke, and in vvrastling, their Teachers and
companions, submitting themselves, fell down at their feet, but the horse not
knovving who rides him, if he sit not surely, will cast him quickly.
Laertius.

Alexander said, that he loved better the idolatry of Hephestion, then the
sincerity of Clitus.

Phocion said to King Antipater, that he could not have him both for his
friend and flatterer.

One of Alexanders Leiuetenants, writ to him, that he had in his government a
boy of incomparable beauty, and that if it so lyked him, he would send him to
him; whom he thus answered; O cursed caitife, what have thou ever known in
me, that thou should thus dare to flatter me by such pleasures?

A wise Abbot, wrote to Charles the third, that above all things he should
take heed, that flattering Courtiers should not ravish from himself the
favor of his benefits, as they are whom they term sellers of smoke.

Of Learning. This is the true substance of felicity, and the efficient cause
of wisdom, without which, man's life is death; The which when the Egyptians
would signify, they set down the picture of dew dropping from the clouds.
COsroes king of the Persians, although a barbarian, was so learned, that he
held argument with the chiefest Philosophers of Greece. Agath.

Claudius the Emperor, writ 40. books of history, by the persuasion of Titus
Liuius, he had Homer at his fingers end. Volat.

Picus Mirandula, set up nine hundred questions at Rome. S. Tho. M.

Caesar disdained not to frequent the threshold of Ariston, neither did Pompey
think scorn to go oftentimes to the house of Cratippus. Plut.

Saint Augustine complained, that being a young man, he learned profitable
words, but yet in vain things, I heard (quoth he) Jupiter thundering, and
therewithal committing adultery. 2. Confess.

Antisthenes, after he had heard Socrates, took such great pleasure therein,
that albeit he was very learned, and had a great number of scholars, yet he
willed them to seek an other Master, because he purposed to learn himself.

Traiane the Emperor, found five hundred children at school, thereby to
banish ignorance.

Pope Caelestine the fifth, deposed himself, by reason of his ignorance.

Iulianus, to the end he might molest the Christians, forbid the^ the reading
of all good books.

Antimachus when he read to all his scholars called together, and saw that
all saving Plato, forsook him before he had ended his reading; said, I will
go forward, and read on, for Plato is to me as much as all the rest.

Aristotle was angry with his Master Aristotle, for that he made those books
which he writ to him so common. Curtius.

Phillip, when his son Alexander was borne, gave thanks to God, not so much
because he had a son, as that he was borne in the time of Aristotle, whom
he made his Schoolemaister.

Alexander carried always Homers Iliades about him, and laid them under his
pyllovve, naming it the preserver of warlike virtue.

Anaxagoras suffered his Lands to lie wast, and followed his study.

Crates forsook his patrimony of eight talents, that with the more liberty he
might follow Philosophy.

Athence and Sparta could never agree, for that the one was adicted to serve
Minerua, the other Mars.

Titus Vespasian often used to plead causes himself in Latin, and made
diverse poems and tragedies in Greek. Eutrop.

Lucius meeting with the Emperor Marcus Aurelius in the street, accompanied
but with one man after him, asked him whether he went? he answered, It
becomes even an old man to learn; therefore am I going to Sextus the
Philosopher, to the end I might learn those things which I know not.

The study of Ptolomy their King in the Mathematiques, made the Egyptians so
notable in those Arts.

Ptolomey knew more in Astronomy, then any man save Adam.

Ptolomey write a book called Almagest; an excellent work containing the
greatness of the earth, heaven, moon, and stars.

Plato being requested by his scholars to speak somewhat of good intendment
and memory; said, That he had no more learned, save as much as he that felt
himself like unto a vessel, that day and night, is all void and empty.

Arcesilas the Philosopher, would neither learn himself, nor suffer others
to learn.

The Hymn of Orpheus to Musaeus, is called his Testament and last doctrine,
whereunto he would have men to stick.

Amongst the Greeks and the Latins, never any was more learned the^ Marcus
Varro. Lactan.

The ancient Academies of Greece, were the nurseries of all Commonwealths,
and out of them (as from the Troyan horse) came forth most excellent Kings,
singular Captains and Governors. Grynaldus.

When Paulus Aemilius was to encounter with Perses, and that his Army was
sore dismayed at the ecclips of the Moon which then happened; Sulpitius
Gallus encouraged them by his learning, in that he assured the^ of victory, by
his knowledge in the Mathematical Sciences.

By the like knowledge Archimedes defended the City of Syracusa from the
fury of Marcellus.

Alexander the great, had in a manner as great a company of learned men in his
Army as vvarriours. Plutarch.

When Varro was condemned to die, Anthony pardoned him, saying; Vinat Varro,
vi^^doctissimus.

Lysander, in reward of a few verses, gave unto the Poet Antiochus, his hat
full of silver.

Alphonso, gave 500. Duccats to Pogio of Florence, for translating out of
Greek into Latin Xenophon his Cyropedia, albeit that it was translated before.

Julius Caesar made many and sumptuous Libraries, and gave M. Varro a
commission throughout the dominions of Rome, to provide works of the best
learned to furnish them. Appian.

Ptolomy, having set up a most sumptuous Library in Alexandria, furnished the
same with more then seven hundred thousand books. Vitruuius.

He likewise caused 72. Interpreters of the most learned and religious men of
Judea, to come and translate the holy Bible out of Hebrew into Greek.

Asronius the Philosopher, being demanded what it was that he knew, said, To
speak well, and being demanded again what he ^ad learned, he answered, To
speak well; and being asked the third time what he ^aught, he said, To
speak well. Sabel.

Aspasia was much read in Phylosophie, she ^aught Rhetorique, and was Pericles
teacher, and afterward his wife. Plutarch.

A Greek Ambassador and a Roman, were at words in the Senate of the
Rhodi^us, the Grecian said, Roman it is true, that you are aduenturous in
Arms, but for all that, ^nable in Sciences, for the women of Greece know more
in Letters, then the men of Rome in weapons. Upon these words grew the mortal
vvarres between Rome and Carthage, about the possession of Sicilie.

The Romans and the Grecians ready to defy one another, the Rhodians came in
the midst, and persuaded both that this injury should not be determined with
weapons, but argued with vvomens disputation. Afterward assembled at Rhodes
ten Grecians, and ten Roman women, all veri^ well learned, which in
their chaires, successively read certain Lessons, and aftertervvardes held
disputation one against the other. Eutropius.

The Greeks spoke very high things, not so profound, but with an excellent
style, they were very well pleased to hear the Romai^ women, and the Romans
astonished t^ hear the Greeks; Upon this occasion, the Rhodians crowned every
one of them vvit^ a crown of Laurel as vanquishers, and iud^ged that in grave
sentences the Grecians had the best, and in eloquent speech the Romans had the
victory. Idem.

The Roman women returned to Rome, and the Grecians to Greece, where they
were received with such triumph, as if they had won a battle; the Rhodians
for memory of these women (in place of disputations) set up twenty high
pyllers, in every one of the which were the names of the Women, which were so
sumptuous a building, that none in Rhodes was comparable unto it except the
Coloslus. Idem.

These pyllars stood still, until the time of Heliogabalus the Emperor, who
invented new vices, and destroyed ancient memories.

L. Sylla had a Daughter called Lelia Sabina, of all the Roman Ladies the
vvisest, she read openly in a chair both Greek and Latin; ^hee, when her
father after the wars of Mithridates, beheaded 3. thousand Romans which
came to salute him, (although by his word he had assured them safety) was
^ondemned by the Senate for the fact, but ^y the learned and eloquent oration
of (...) he was saved.

She writ diverse orations, which her father ^fterward learned by ^art, and as
he was ^uicke of spirit, so he always used to recite them in the Senate for
his purpose.

Aristippus had a daughter called Aretha, ^ho was so renowned in Greek and
Latin ^etters, that the common report was, that ^he soul of Socrates was
entered into Are^ha.

This Aretha writ forty books, had Audi^ors one hundred and ten Philosophers,
she ^ead natural and morrall philosophy in the ^choole of Athence, and died
at the age of 77. years.

Zenobia Queen of the Palmerians, writ an Epitome of the oriental history of
Alexander. Pollio.

Dama the daughter of Phythagoras, was famous for her learning.

Cornelia, the wife of Africanus, and mother to the Gra^chi, writ a volume of
eloquent Epistles. Cicero.

Polla the wife of ^uca^, helped her husband to finish his three books of the
wars in Pharsalia. Statius.

Sappho writ nine books of Leriques, besides, Epigrams, Elegies, and other
Poems, she flourished when Alcaeus and Stesichorus lived.

Of the ancient Thracians, there was no^ one endued with learning.

The Barbarians thought it a thing reproachful to have knowledge and
understanding.

The people of Asia, attaining cleerer light of learning, were so bold, that
they said Orpheus the excellent Musician wanted wisdom, because he was a
Thracian borne.

The Lacedaemonians were unlearned, for they regarded nothing but the exercises
of the body.

The Emperor Licinius and Valentianus, were such enemies to learning, that
they called learning the only poison of the world, and those that were learned,
the Asses of Cuma. Ignatius.

Albeit that Traian was one of the best Emperors that lived, yet he gave not
himself to learning for any commendation that Plutarch made thereof, but said,
The Gods have not made me to turn over the leaves of a book, but to deal
with martial affairs. Eutrop.

Agricola restrained his mind, set on fire with desire of learning, knowing
it to be a very hard thing for a man to hold a mean ^n wisdom. Tacitus.

Of Opinion. Among the Philosophers, some were Stoics, some Academicks, some
Peripatetickes, some Epicures; of Lawyers, some Cassians, some Sabians, some
Proculeians; among Physicians, some affect Gallen, some Hippocrates, some
Paracelsus; the Jews had their Esses, Saduces, and Pharisees; In the
Universities, some are Libertines, some Germans, some Alexandrians, some
Cilicians; in the Church, some Protestants, some Papists, some Puritans, etc.
VArro collected in his time, 288. opinions out of the books of Philosophers,
concerning the felicity of the soul.

Socrates was reproved of Plato, Plato of Aristotle, Aristotle of Alberius,
Lelius of Varro, Ennius of Horace, Seneca of Aulus Gellius, Tesato of Gallen,
Hermogaras of Cicero, Origin of Saint Hierome, Ruffinus of Donatus.

All the ancient Philosophers saving Plato, believed that Time is without
beginning. Proclus.

Ptolomey was of opinion, that the midst of the earth is under the
Equinoctial circle. Agrippa.

Berosus holds the Mountain of Armenia, upon which Noah's Arc rested, to be
the middle of the earth.

Some Divines say, that Jerusalem is the midst, because it is written, Deus
operatus est salutem in medio terrarum.

Zeno the Philosopher held opinion that all sins are equal.

Epicurus maintained, that pleasure was the chiefest felicity.

The Saduces and Zadukes, not the meanest Doctors among the Jews, held
opinion, that there were neither Angels, nor spyrits, nor souls immortal.
Tremelius.

Crates the Thebane, held that there was no soul in our bodies, but only a
motion governed by nature. Leucippus thought it a subtle air or an heat, and
so did Possidonius.

One reading the diversity of their opinions said, That clocks would sooner
agree then Philosophers.

The Switzer is of opinion, that too much study hurts the brain.

^^^^hago^as held opinion, that Earthquakes proceeded from none other cause,
then from the meeting together of dead bodies.

Epicurus Gargettius, was of this opinion, that he which was not contented with
a little, was insatiable, and never had enough.

Democritus, was of opinion, that there were worlds infinite and innumerable,
which made Alexander weep, that he was not lord of one among so many.

The Stoics were of opinion, that who soever received their doctrine, if in
the morning he were wicked, in the evening he should become a very good man.

Empedocles says, that the soul is in the blood; Plato in the brain, but
Beda writing upon Mark, says, that it is in the heart.

Heraclitus was of opinion, that all things were led by strife and friendship.

Thales Milesius, and Hesiodus, held that water was the beginning of all
things, saying, that it was the auntientest and might of the Elements,
because it ruled all the rest.

Zacharias, writing to Mithridates, was of opinion, that men's destinies are in
the virtues of herbs and stones.

Alexander the Peripatetike, holds that the hidden virtues of herbs and
stones proceed of the elements, and their qualities.

The Academicks with their Plato, attribute these virtues to the Ideas, the
shapers or formers of things.

Auicen, does refer these operations to the intelligencies, Hermes to the
stars, Albertus to the especial forms of things.

Democritus and Orpheus, were of opinion, that al things were full of the Gods,
meaning, that there is nothing of such excellent force, which being void of
Gods help, is content with his own nature.

Anaxagoras held opinion, that snow was black, because the water it is
congealed of is black. Cicero Acad.

Plato was of opinion, that community in a commonwealth was best. Pythagoras
held the contrary.

Demosthenes, would have two names banished the commonwealth, to the end as he
thought the people might be best governed, that is, Lords and Subjects,
Masters and Servants. Laertius.

Scipio Africanus, was of opinion, that he did all things rather by the
counsel of the Gods then of men, which he maintained all his life. Appian.

In Prince Demylas time, there fell a stone from heaven, which made Anaxagoras
of opinion, that heaven was made of stone, and that but for the great compass
of the building, it would sodainlay fall. Silenus.

Chilo of Lacedemon maintained, that man by reason might comprehend the
foreknowledge of things to come, by the might and power of his manhood.

Cyrus was of opinion, that no man was fit for an Empire, except he did excel
those over whom he bare rule. Xenophon.

Alcibiades was of opinion, that those men live safest, who do govern their
commonwealth, without altering one whit their present customs and laws,
albeit they be not altogether so good. Thucidides.

Of Perigrination. In this most commendable action, two things are to be
pr^posed, the profit, and pleasure of travail, the la^er, we are too greedy of
by nature; the first which belongs to the mind, is bounded with prudence and
good carriage, which if it be neglected, the other two are unprofitable.
Jacob having gotten wisdom by travail, is said i^ Genesis, to have had the
sight of God, because to the active life he had also joined the contemplative.

Plato, after the death of his Master Socrates, made a voyage into Egypt, and
then into Italy, to hear and confer with the best learned of those
Countries, and to learn that which he knew not before.

Orpheus, to seek the mysteries of the Aegiptians, travailed as far as
Memphis, visiting all the Cities of the river Nilus. Argonaut.

Pythagoras, visited the Aegiptians, Arabians, and Chaldeans, and went also
into Jury, and dwelt a long time at Mount Carmell. Strabo.

Saba, came from Aethiopia, the farthest part of the world, to hear Salomons
wisdom.

Cornelia, a noble woman of Rome, travailed to Palestina, to hear S. Jerome
^each the Christians.

Thalestris, Queen of the Amazons, came from Scythia unto Hircania, with three
hundred thousand women, to lie ^ith Alexander 30. days, to have a child by him.

Gueuara, Chronocler to Charles the first, writes, that from foreign
Countries, men commonly bring news to prattle of, and strange customs to
practice; and that few come out of Italy, that are not absolute and dissolute.

Lycurgus, by his laws, commanded the Lacedaemonians not to go out of their
own Country, nor to converse with strangers, saying, That although by their
traffic with them they might be enriched, yet on the other side, they would
grow poor, in regard of their own virtues.

Democritus Abderita, travailed into many Lands and Countries, being 80. years
old, only for the study of Philosophy, he ventured into Chaldea, and entered
into Babylon, at last, he came amongst the Magitians and Gymnosophists of
India. Olaus.

The Scythians travail only in the Coasts of their own Country; but
Anacharsis furnished with wisdom and knowledge, aduentered further a greater
way, for he came into Graecia, and was highly esteemed of Solon.

Osyris, King of Aegipt, travailed the greatest part of the world, that he
might have written upon his toombe, Here lies Osyris King of Aegipt, the
eldest son of Saturn, that left no part of the world unsearched. Diodorus.

Cheremon, a Stoicke Philosopher, by the star that appeared at Christ's
death, judging the same to be ominous to the Gods he worshipped, travailed into
Jury with certain Astrologers, to seek the true God.

Fabius the Consul, in 70. years which he lived, departed not once from his
village of Regio, to go to Messana, which was but two miles off by water.

Apollonius, travailed over the three parts of the world, to see and confer
with all the skillful men of his age, and being returned with wonderful
knowledge, he distributed his riches amongst his kindsfolkes and the poor, and
lived ever after in contemplation. Philostratus.

The same having travailed Asia, Africa, and Europa, said, that of two things
he meruailed most in all the world; the first was, that he always saw the
proud man command the humble, the quarrailous the quiet, the tyrant the just,
the coward the hardy, the ignorant the skillful, and the greatest thieves hang
the innocent.

P. Seruilius, was the first Roman that made any voyage to Taurus, from
whence when he returned, he triumphed and merited the name to be called
Isauricus.

Anaxagoras, travailed from Greece into Aegipt, unto Persia, and Chaldea, and
to diverse other Countries for knowledge sake.

Ulysses, in his pilgrimage was wise, learning Physic of Aeolus, of Circes
Magic, and Astronomy of Calipso.

Philosophers, when they were young, studied, when they came to be men, they
travailed, and when they were old, they returned home and writ.

The Persians, if any of their Country did imitate the behavior of strangers,
and so trouble common orders, he should therefore dye.

Lycurgus carried the whole body of Homers Poetry into Greece, out of Ionia, in
his voyage and perigrination.

Appollonius, in his travails found a table of fine gold, called, The table
of the Sun, wherein all the world was portraied.

Not ever to have seen Asia is praise worthy, but to have lived temperatly in
Asia, is highly to be commended. Cicero.

Anacharsis was put to death, for that by his travails he had learned strange
fashions and conditions, which he sought to ground in his own Country.
Herodotus.

The Hebrews called their Adversaries Allophilos, that is, of a strange
Cuntry. Amb.

Fools in old time travailed to see Choraebus tomb.

The Lacedaemonians were so great enemies to novelties in their commonwealth,
that they neither permitted strangers to enter, or their people to wander into
strange Countries, doubting to be entangled with new fashions and customs.

Certain studious persons of the Gauls and Spaniardes, went from their native
Countries, with tedious iourneyes toward Rome, personally to behold the
Orator and Historiographer, Titus Liuius. Philostratus.

The Athenians put their Ambassadors whom they sent into Arcadia to death,
because they went not that way which was commanded, but a contrary.

Apollonius Thyaneus, who had travailed the greatest part of the world, being
asked of a Priest at Ephesus, what thing he wondered at in all this world,
answered, I let thee know Priest of Diana, that I have been through France,
England, Spain, Germany, through the Laces and Lydians, Hebrews, and Greeks,
Parths, and Medes, Phrygians, and Corinthians, Persians, and above all, in the
great Realm of India, for that alone is more worth then all the Realms
together.

Alexander, at what time he had overcome Darius, in a place called Arbellis,
demaun^ed of his Noblemen the safest way into Ae^ipt, but none could tell; a
certain Mer^hant, who had been a great trauailer, promised in three days
journey, to bring him safe into Aegipt, which Alexander at the first not
believing, in the end found true. Lucianus.

Of Gods and Goddesses. The Auntients divided their feigned Deities into three
powers, of heaven, earth, and water, the first were the disposers and directors
of men's actions, some ruled the ayrie Regions, others reigned in hell, and
punished offenders, and some were Gods of the mountains, some of shepherds,
some of husbandry, and some of woods; the last sort were Gods of the Sea, some
of floods, others of rivers, and some of springs and fountains.
Saturn, was the son of King Caelius and Vesta, brother to Titan, who at the
persuasion of his mother, and Ops and Ceres, his sisters (much mislyking that
one so rude as Titan, should ascend to the succession of Caelius crown) gave
the kingdom to Saturn his younger brother, under this covenant
notwithstanding, that he should slay al^ his male children, to the end the
issue of Titan might after Saturnes death, repossesse the kingdom.

Saturnes wife and sister Ops, brought forth a son, which he caused to be
slain, after this, she was delivered of a daughter and a son, Jupiter, and
Juno, who desirous to save the life of his son, gave him to her mother Vesta,
and presented only the daughter to Saturn.

After this, contrary to the knowledge of Saturn, she brought forth an other
son, called Neptune, and at another birth Pluto and Glauca, but she only
showed the daughter.

Titan understanding that Saturn had broken promise with him, with the forces
of the Titanois his children, invaded Saturn, imprisoned him and his wife Ops,
which Jupiter having knowledge of, being a valiant Prince, and aided with the
Coribantes, amongst who^ he was trained, overcame Titan, and delivered his
Parents.

Of this war, came the fable of the wars of the Giants.

Saturn forwarned by the Oracle, to take ^eede of Jupiter his son, for that
he had ^^tention to kill him, and expulse him his ^ingdome, devised to destroy
him; who vn^erstanding his co^spiracies, came with a great ^rmy and vanquished
his Father.

Saturn fled into Italy, and there taught the people to plant and sow, and
manure their earth, in recompense whereof (having lived before with roots and
wild fruits) they honored him as a God.

Jupiter married his sister Juno, and conquered many Countries, not so much by
power as policy, and for his wisdom, ordayning of laws, invention of arts,
profitable for man's life, he was worshipped as a God, to whom those Princes he
overcame, erected temples thereto enjoined by him, for the better establishment
of his divine honor.

The brethren of Jupiter, Neptunus and Pluto, summoned him to partition of his
patrimony, whereunto he agreed, and dividing the kingdom by lot, the west
part fell to Pluto; the Isles and banks of the Sea happened to the portion of
Neptune, and to Iupite^ all the confines of the East.

Of this partition sprung the fiction of the Poets, calling Neptune, the God of
the Seas, and Pluto God infernal, or dis pater, for that the west or falling
of the sun, is more dark and cloudy, and more base and low then the East.

Here grew also the first fiction that Jupiter chased his Father into hell,
for that Italy where Saturn was retired, stands west, in respect of Candia,
and is more dark.

The Poets feigned, that the firmament or heaven, fell to the part of Jupiter,
the rather for that he remained for the most part since that partition in the
mount Olympus in Thesalia, which the Greeks called heaven.

Juno, the daughter of Saturn, was the sister and wife of Jupiter, borne at
Argos, some write at Samos, the Goddess of marriage, and therefore called
Pronuba, likewise Lucina for childbirth, the Queen of riches and honor, to
whom the Pecocke is consecrated.

Vulcanus, was the God of fire, and son of Juno, whom Jupiter for his
deformity cast from heaven into Lemnos, where he was honored.

Mars, was feigned to be the God of war, and Iunoes son without the company
of man, he was also worshipped in Lemnos.

Apollo, the God of wisdom, Music, Physic, Poetry, and Shooting, was
borne of Jupiter and Latona, and brother to Diana, he ^s called in heaven Sol,
in earth Liber pater, i^ ^ell Apollo; he was worshipped at Delphos, and
renowned for his Oracles.

Venus, wife of Vulcan, is feigned to be borne of the froth of the Sea, the
Goddess of love, beauty, and all sensual delights, she was adored in Cyprus.

Cupid, the son of Venus, was painted naked, winged, blind, in his hand a
bow, and at his back a Quiver of arrows, his companions are Drunkenness,
Sloth, Luxury, Strife, Hate, and War; he was worshipped for the God of Love.

Mercury, was the Son of Jupiter, and Maia, the God of eloquence and
merchandise, and the messenger of the Gods, holding a Caduceus in his hand.

Dionysius, otherwise called Bacchus, for that he showed the Indeans the use
of Grapes, was honored for a God.

Ceres, first taught men how to plough, sovve, reap, and grind their Corn,
and therefore they held her a Goddess. Pliny.

Diana, for her chaste life, was honored for a Goddess, she continually
exerc^^sed her self in hunting wild beasts, in hea^uen she is called Luna, in
earth Diana, in he^ Proserpina.

Aeolus, was feigned by the Poets, to be the God of the winds, because the
clouds an^ mists rising about the 7. Aeolian Islands, (...) whom he was King,
did always porten^ great store of winds.

Pallas, was the Goddess of wisdom, an^ all good Arts and Sciences, borne of
Iupite^^ brain without a mother.

Nemesis, the daughter of Oceanus and Nox, called also Adrastea, was the
Goddess of revenge.

Berecynthia, Rhea, Tellus, Vesta, or Cybile, was the mother of the Gods.

Pierides the nine Muses, daughters of Jupiter and Mnemosyne, dwelled in
Helicon, and were called the Goddess of Poetry and Music.

Momus, was the carping God, who never did any thing himself, but curiously
beheld the doings of other, to carpe thereat.

Priapus, the son of Bacchus, and Venus, the God of Gardens.

Pomoma, the Goddess of fruit, Flora of flowers, and Feronia of the woods.

Charites, were the Graces, in number three, ^glaia, Thalia, Euphrosyne,
supposed to be ^he daughters of Jupiter and Venus.

Penates and Lares, were household Gods, but ^ares for the harth and fire,
called by the ^ames of good and evil Angels, also the ^reseruers of Towns
and Cities.

Genius, or Daimon, the Panyms, thought to ^e a good or evil Angel, appointed
to each man to guide and defend, or to punish them.

Fortune, is feigned to dispose and change the good and evil haps of men, the
daughter of Oceanus, or as Orpheus, of the blood, as a power not to be
resisted; she is painted blind, and drawn in a Coach with blind Horses,
vainly honored for a Goddess.

Pan, was the God of sheepheards, of whom Duri^ Samius writes, that he was
the son of Penelope; whose wooers being so long delayed, they all abused her,
and got upon her, Pan.

Pales was the Goddess of sheepheards.

Faunus, son to Picus, and father of Latinus, was the Father of all the
rural Gods, his Son Sterculius invented the manuring, and co^passing of
grounds, and therefore was deified.

Syluanus, the God of vvoods, loved Cyparissus, who was turned by Apollo into a
tree of his own name, in remembrance of (...) Syluanus would always bear a
braunch^ Cypres.

Ianus, a King of Italy, was a wise and pro^^^dent Prince, and therefore they
pictured hi^ with two faces, he was called the God of ^^^terance, whose temple
gates in time of wan^ was always open, and in peace shut up.

Terminus, was God of the bounds, or seue^rall marks.

Libitina, was a Goddess, in whose templ^ were sold all things pertaining to
funerals.

Oceanus, was the great God of the Sea, So^ to Caelum, and Vesta the Father of
all the Rivers.

Tethis, was Goddess of the Sea, wife of Oceanus, and mother to all the Sea
Nymphs.

Triton, was the son and trumpeter of Neptune, begotten by him of Amphitrite.
Ovid.

Glaucus, a fisher, perceauing the fishes which he had taken, by tasting of an
herb on the bank, to leap into the Sea again, tasted thereof him self, and
by the virtue thereof, was forced to leap into the Sea, whence he was called
one of the Sea Gods. Idem.

Nereus, was likewise a God, and Nereides the Faieries of the Sea, borne of
Oceanus and Tethis.

Proteus a God of the Sea, was sometimes like a flame of fire, sometimes like a
Bull, some times like a Serpent; he fed Neptunes fishes called Phocae.

Castor and Pollux, the twins of Laeda, begotten by Jupiter in the form of a
Swanne; when they came to age, scoured the sea of Pirates, and therefore were
counted the gods of the sea. For the infernal goods, look in the chapter of
hell.

The Assyrians worshipped Belus, the Egiptians Apys, the Chaldeans Assure, the
Babylonians the devouring Dragon, the Pharaons the statue of gold, and the
Palestines Beelzebub.

The Romans chiefly honored Jupiter, the Affricans Mars, the Corinthians
Apollo, the Arabians Astaroth, the Aeginians the Sun, those of Achaia the
Moon, the Sidonians Belphegor, and the Ammonites Balim.

The people of India honored Bacchus, the Lacedaemonians Ogyges, the Macedonians
Mercury, the Ephesians the Goddess Diana, the Greeks, the goddess Juno, the
Armenians Liber, the Troyans Vesta, the Latins Februa, the Tarentines Ceres,
the Rhodians Ianus. Apollonius.

Vaginatus was worshipped that their ch^dren might not cry; Ruminus was the
God of sucking babes; Stellinus of their first going; Adeon their guide when
they went well.

Cunius was adored for the safety of their children in Cradles.

When the Emperor Seuerus vvarred against the Gauls, his wife Iulia was
delivered of a daughter, whose sister Mesa a Persian, sent unto the Empress a
Cradle for her child, made all of Unicorns horn and fine gold, round about
which was artificially painted the image of the God Cunius.

Mentalis was their God of wit, Fessoria of trauailers and pylgrims, Pelonia
had the charge to conquer their enemies, Rubigo to keep their Vines from
worms, and the Corn from Locusts.

Muta was their God whom they prayed unto, to the end that their enemies
might not speak evil of them.

Genoria was a goddess among the Grecians which chased away sloth; and
Stimulia they fained to be a goddess which hastened them about their
b^sinesse, her Image was set up over the gate of the Senate house.

Vallonia was the goodesse of their valleys. Segetia of their seeds. Tutillina
of their fields. Ruana of their Reapers.

Forculus was the god of Goldsmithes, Portulus was the God of their gates,
Cardea of their doors.

Psora was the goddess of dishonest women; in Rome were 40. streets of
common women, in the middst of which was their Temple.

Theatrica kept their Theaters, in which might well stand above 20. thousand,
and as many underneath; her Temple was in the market of Cornelia, which
Domitian destroyed, because in his presence one of the Stages broke, and killed
many men. Pulio.

Cloacina was goddess of the stool, and of those that were troubled with the
wind Colic. Quies of their rest, whose Temple Numa Pompilius built without
the City; noting thereby, that man in this world, could never have pleasure or
rest.

The gods of Troy more envied the gods of Greece, then the Princes of Greece
did the princes of Troy. Vulcan and Pallas were their enemies, Apollo and Venus
their friends.

The Philosopher Bruxellis being ready to dye, told the Romans that where in
times past they had but 5. Gods, namely, Jupiter, Mars, Ianus, Berecynthia, and
Vesta; he let for every one of them a private God, to 28000. households, 28000.
gods. Aurel.

The Egiptians, although they were the first that excelled in the knowledge of
celestial and natural things, (in so much as Egypt was called the mother of
Arts,) yet they above all others, superstitiously worshipped Leeks and Onions.
Macrobius.

The Heathen honored thirty thousand Gods, as Hesiodus vvriteth, and adored
three hundred Jupiters, as Marcus Varro witnesses.

M. Cato worshipped his grounds, desiring them to bring forth in abundance,
and to keep his Cattle safe.

Diagoras burning an Image of Hercules, said; Thou must now do me service in
this thirteen encounter, as well as thou have done to Euristheus in the other
twelve.

The Assirians worshipped as many Gods as they had towns, and the Grecians as
many as they had fancies.

Melissus an ancient King of Creet, did first of all others sacrifice to the
Gods.

Vr Chaldaeorum, the fire of the Chaldeans, called also Orimasda, that is, holy
fire, was the first occasion of Idolatry; this fire, kings caused to be
usually carried before them upon an horse.

There arose a great war betvveene the Alleynes and the Armenians, the
occasion thereof was, for that as they came to the feast of Olympus, they fell
in contention whether of their Gods were the better, by reason of which
war, their Commonwealth and people were brought into great misery; which the
Emperor Adrianus perceiving, sent Julius Seuerus utterly to overthrow those
that would not be ruled by his sentence, whom he thus pacified, willing that
the Alleynes should take for their Gods, the Armenians Gods, and the Armenians,
the Gods of the Alleynes. Pulio de dissol. reg.

Of Antiquities. The knowledge of Antiquities, and first invention of things,
was so much in request among the Ancients, that Pliny, Marcus Varro, and
Macrobius, (historiographers no less grave then true) were in great
controversy, for proouing what things were most ancient.
THere were seven which first gave laws to the world, Moses to the
Hebrews, Solon to the Athenians, Lycurgus to the Lacedaemonians, Numa Pompilius
to the Romans, Asclepeius to the Rhodians, Minos to the Cretans, and Phoroneus
to the Egyptians. Diod. Siculus.

All Counselors and Lawyers of Rome, did call the laws that were most just
Forum, in memory of Phoroneus.

The true and most ancient metals, be not of gold, but iron; much time
passed in the Empire of Rome wherein the Romans had no money, but of brass or
iron; and the first coin that was made to be melted in Rome of gold, was in
the time of Scipio Affricanus.

Corynthus, the son of Orestes, trained by his Father to scour the Sea, and
commit Islands to spoil, reedifyed the Fortress of Sisiphus a notorious Pyrat,
and called it Corinthus by his own name; so that this city was first built by
tyrants, governed by Tyrants, and destroyed by tyrants.

Rome was builded by Romulus, Jerusalem by Salem, Alexandria of Alexander,
Antioche of Antiochus, Constantinople (before Bizantium) of Constantinus, and
Numantia in Spain, of Numa Pompilius.

In the City of Numantia was but one crafts man, and he a Smith, others they
would not consent should live among the^, saying; That all such things every
man ought to have in his own house, and not to seek them in the Commonwealth.

In the beginning of the world, they writ in ashes, next in barks of trees,
then in leaves of Laurel, afterward in sheets of lead, and at last they came
to write in paper. Strabo.

In stones they did write with iron, in leaves with pensils, in ashes with
fingers, in rindes with knives, in parchment with canes, and in paper with
pens. Idem.

The Incke that our forefathers did write withal, was first of a Fish called
Zibia, after that, they made it of foot, afterward of vermilian, after that,
of Cardinellio, in the end, they invented it of Gum, Galls, Coperas, and
wine. Gueuara.

They which descended of Lycurgus in Lacedemonia, of Cato in Vtica, of
Agesilaus in Lycaonia, and of Tusides in Galatia, were not only privileged in
their provinces, but for their ancient noblesse honored of al nations.

It was a law in Rome, that all those that descended of the lineage of the
Tarquines, Escaurians, Catilines, Fabatians and Bithinians, had no offices in
the Commonwealth, although they descended of an ancient stock, because their
ancestors were in their lives very dishonest, and in their government very
offensive. Patritius.

Christ himself vvoulde not descend of the Tribe of Benjamin, which was the
least, but of the Tribe of Judah, which was the greater and the better.

The Romans had the law Prosapia, the law of linages, by which it was
ordained, that when contention did arise in the Senate for the Consulship, that
those which descended of the stem of the Syluians, of the Torquatians, and of
the Fabritians, should obtain chief place before all others, for that these
three linages in Rome were most ancient, and did descend of most valiant
Romans.

Colonies first began at the diverse vvay-partings of Noah's posterity, Sem,
Cham, and Iaphet.

Of Gomer, one of the sons of Iaphet, came the Gomorites, whom the Greeks
call Galates and Gauls, of them came the people that spoiled Delphos, and were
called Gallo-Greekes; of them likewise come the Germans. Melancthon.

From Tuball, who was their first King, ^ame the Spaniards. Berosus.

The Egyptians boast themselves to be the first men in the world, as
Geographers re^ort.

Mosoch was the father of the Muscouites, and Madai of the Medes, whose Empire
was very great in the higher Asia; they destroyed ^he Chaldean Monarchy.
Josephus.

Magog was father of the Scythians, but at this time the right Scithians are
the Slauonians, Muschouites, and Tartarians, who vaunt of their descent from
Iaphet. Melancthon.

The Thracians are descended of Thyras, and of Iauan the Greeks, who gave name
to the Ionians. Josephus.

These were the seven sons of Iaphet the youngest son of Noah.

When Joseph was sold by his brethren to the Egiptians, the Merchants of
Israel carried Myrrh, Balm, and Spicerie, out of Gilaad to sell in Egypt,
which may testify the antiquity of merchandise.

Poets in antiquity go before Philosophers. Cicero.

Damascus is a famous City in Syria, and supposed to be the first that ever
was inhabited.

There were five antiquities in the vvor^ generally accepted, the first was
the Com^mon-wealth, the second, Letters, the third* Laws, the fourth, Barbers,
the fyft, Dial^ and Clocks. Marcus Varro.

The beginning of Venice was pitiful* poor, and almost in despair, it was
builded when Attyla troubled Italy, the first Duke was Paulus Anazalus, Anno
Dom. 706. two hundred and fifty two years after the foundation. Sleidan.

Rome was the chief city of all Italy, Carthage was the principal of
Afric, Numantia of Spain, Argentine of Germany, Babylon of Chaldea, Thebes
of Egypt, Athence of Greece, Tyra of Phenice, Cesaria of Cappadocia, Bizantium
now Constantinople of Thrace, and Jerusalem of Palestine. Strabo.

Thales the Philosopher being demanded what God was, answered; Of all
antiquities the most ancient; for all the ancients past never saw him take
beginning, nor any that shall come after, shall ever see him have ending.
Laertius.

The Germans were called Cymbrians, and are now thought to be Danes.

The Phrygians were proved more ancient then the Egyptians, by the education
^f 2. children of both nations every way like ^ourished, by the commandment of
Psam^etichus, who desirous to know it, willed that no man coming to them
should speak ^o them, but after two years, the Phrygian ^pake Beccos, which
in their language signi^yeth bread, by which he perceived them to be the
auncientest. Herodotus.

The name of County, was first given to the Governors of Provinces, in the
reigns of the Emperors Honorius and Arcadius. P. Diaconus.

Longinus, in the time of Justinius, called himself the supreme Governor of
Italy, and he appointed unto every City a Ruler, whom he termed Dukes, from
whence it is supposed that dignity took the first name. Orosius.

In the time of Heraclius began the doctrine of Mahomet, and was first
embraced of the Arabians. Paulus Diaconus.

When Constantinus vvarred against the Sarazines, Calinicus devised vvild
fire, with which (by hurling it amongst the^) he burned their ships, and drove
them from Constantinople.

King Pippin ordained the first parliament in France.

Sem, the eldest son of Noah, was the first that did search out the
Sciences, and b^^fore the Deluge ingraued the^ in pillars, th^^ his posterity
might learn them.

Pythagoras was the first that called himse^^ a Philosopher.

Socrates was the first that brought philosophy from study to practice.

Caine was the first homicide, and Lamec^ did second him.

Lamech first divided one rib into two, and brought in Polygamie.

Stephen was the first Martyr in the primative Church, called Protomartyr.

The first that died in the world, was Abel, the first City was builded by
Enoch in the fields of Edom, and the first that sailed was Noah.

The first Duke was Moses, he was likewise the first Prophet, and Zacharias the
last.

The original of prophecy was first in Adam, who said, This is bone of my
bone.

Four things were first made in one time, the Heaven imperial, Angels nature,
the matter of the four Elements, and Time.

Tuball first found out music, by the striking of hammers.

The Prophet Esdras, first reduced the He^rewes traditions into writings.

The Chananites were the first that were ^gnorant of God, their original and
Prince Cham was accursed of his Father. Lactan^ius.

People being dispersed, and like unto beasts ^andering in the field, were
first by Cecrops and after by Theseus, brought to inhabit a City which was
called Cecropia, and since named Athence.

The first in this world that gave commandment to be proclaimed, that all the
heavy ^oaden should come unto him and he would disburden them, and all the
weary, and he would refresh them, was Christ; this was, when in the moulde of
love he did melt the law of fear. Gueuara.

The inuenters of a Commonwealth, were the Ants, which live, travail, and
make provision together. Plato.

Chivalry and Learning, had their first residence in Athence, and from thence
went to Rome.

Astronomy was first found in Chaldea.

The greeting of Paul, Grace and Peace, was never heard of before the
preaching of the Gospel. Ambrose.

Cletus after him did write, Salutem et Apostolicam benedictionem.

Orpheus gave names unto the Gods, and was the first blaser of their petigrees.

Pythagoras observed that the morning star and the evening star be both
one, and that the Zodiac roundeth the world like a gyrdle.

Thales noted the North-starre, Solon that the Moon fynisheth her course in
30. days, and Archimedes gathering the observations of many years thereof,
was the first that invented the Sphere.

Pherecides the Assyrian, was the first that writ any history in prose. Some
hold that Ca^mus was the first.

Capaneus, at the besieging of Thebes, invented the scaling with Ladders, and
was killed with a stone from the wall.

The Phenicians were the first that found out the use of Letters. Lucanus.

Nemrod first required of men homage and service, and Darius was the first that
appointed tribute.

Chrysippus corrupted the grave sect of Philosophers with crabbed questions.

Zoroastres King of Bactria, was the inuenter of the Art of Negromancie.

Lucilius was the first that wrote Satyrs, and Sappho the first Poem of
love. Pau^anias.

The Athenians devised the imposition of synes, penalties and forfeytures.
Aelianus.

Ericthonius was the first that joined horses together for service in drawing;
but in Italy Oxen were first prepared to the use of husbandry; whereupon the
Grecians called Countrymen the Oxen of Italy.

Triptolemus was the first that invented the plough.

Clisthenes first devised banishment, and happened himself to partake the
smart of his invented punishment. The like is written of Perillus, for
inuenting Phalaris Bull.

Caesar, when we was Dictator, first brought the Bull to be baited.

The dial of the sun was found by Anaximenes, and the experience thereof
showed in Lacedemonia, and brought to Rome by Papyrius; the Dial of Water by
Scipio Nascica, and the hours by Thales Milesius.

The Athenians invented wrestling, and active exercises.

Themistocles made a law, that one ordinary day through the year, there should
be Cock-fyghting in Theaters.

When the Tarentines were besieged by the Romans, and well nie famished, the
R^gineans fasting every tenth day victualed the Tarentines; wherefore, when the
force of the Romans failed and the Tarentines re^ouered strength, they
invented a festival day in remembrance of their former miseries, and called it
leiunicus.

The Aeginests first coined money, whereupon it was called answerable to their
name, The Aeginean coin. Aelianus.

Laius was the first that ever burned in the filthy lust of boys, and by
reason therefore of this monstrous perturbation, he stole away Chrysippus the
son of Pelops. Some write that Orpheus was the first that fell into this
sin.

Farron was the first Lawmakers of all the west parts of Europe, who had a
son called Druis, from whom came the Druides, and Wise Men of France.

Pastoral Poems had their head from those Sheepheards which lamented the loss
of Daphnes eyesight; Stesichorus was the first indighter of these Poesies and
Ditties.

Hortensius the Orator, was the first that ever appointed the Peacocke in
course of service at feasts.

From the Arcadians came the best and first Masters of defense and VVrastlers.
Lelius Strabo.

The Thessalians were the first fighters upon horseback, and the Affricans by
Sea.

The Corinthians invented Galleys and great ships. Thucidides.

All torments of war, which we call Engines, were first invented by Kings or
Generals in war, or if by other, they were by them made much better.
Vitrunius.

Charles the great, created the first Marquess, who was called Leopold of
Austria, surnamed the Worthy, when he had driven the Hungarians out of
Germany, to them he assigned the frontiers of Countries, to defend against
incursions and invasions of the enemies.

The disport of hawking, was found out in Thracia, where men and hawks as it
were by a confederacy, took birds together, in this wise, the men sprang the
birds out of the bushes, and the hawks soaring over them, beat them down, so
that the men might easily take them, then did they equally divide the pray to
the hawks, who being well served, of custom repaired to such places, where being
aloft, they perceived men to be assembled to that purpose. Plinius.

Centauri, were the first that tamed horses riding, and men seeing them,
supposed it t^ be one body, and therefore an hundred horsemen of Thessalia, were
called Centauri of Centum and aura, as it were an hundred wind VVaggers.

Thales Milesius, who flourished in Athence in the time of Achab King of Judah,
was the first that defined the soul, affirming it to be a nature always
moving it self.

The very account of the year was uncertain and confused in Europe, until
the time of Julius Caesar. Censorius.

Pythagoras, Eudoxus, and Euclides, were the Authors of the most notablest
grounds of Arithmetique and Geometry.

Ninus, was the first King, of whom any Historiographers have written. Plinius.

The first that used to have backe-byters, spies, and tale-bearers, was Darius
the younger; next him Dionysius the tyrant, who intermedled them among the
Burgezes, that by that he might know what they said of him

The first ship that was ever set a floate, was upon the red Sea. Pliny.

The Tyrians were the first that excelled in Navigations. Strab.

Before the Persian wars, there was no common baker in Rome. Plinius.

The first cherries that came into Rome, were brought by Lucullus.

When the Gauls came into Italy, there were no wines at all in Gallia.

The Greek histories began at the Empire of the Persians. Apuleius.

The paper of Aegipt, was invented in Alexanders time.

Iustine, Origin, and Clement, were the first writers amongst the Christians.

The Antiochians, were first called Christians, by the preaching, of those that
dispersed them selves at the stoning of Stephen. Gracianus.

Promethuis, first taught Grammar amongst the Grecians. Cornelius Ag.

Crates Mallot^s, brought it to Rome, which Palemon studied, and called it an
Ar^.

The first inuentour of the partition of ages, was Sybilla Cumana.

Pyrrhus, King of the Epyrotes, was the first that invented Currers and Posts,
he being at Tarentum, in one day understood from Rome, in two out of France,
in three out of Germany, and in four out of Asia.

Dido, builded Carthage threescore and twelve years before the building of the
City of Rome, then Aeneas never saw Dido, for Aeneas was before, and died 3.
hundred year ere Carthage was built.

Numa, was the first that caused the penny to be coined for his people, and
called it Nummus.

Lazarus, whom Christ raised from death, was the first Bishop of Cyprus, he
dyed his second death at the age of 78.

The Portingalls, were the first finders of the new world.

The first Emperor that took in hand to persecute the Christians, was Nero,
picking a quarrel against them, for setting Rome on fire, when he was guilty
of it himself.

Romulus, was the first King of Rome, Julius Caesar the first Emperor.

C. Agrippa, desirous to know the original of a Monks hood, sought many
books, and neither in the old testament, nor amongst the Prophets and
Patriarchs, was it to be found, then he looked into the new Testament,
amongst the Saints and Apostles, but there was no mention of any such thing, by
chance coming into a Paynters shop, he saw the temptation of Christ by the
devil lively painted, and a hood upon his head, then was he glad that he had
found that in pictures, which he could not in books, that the devil was the
first inuentour of the Moonkes ^oods. Cor. Agrippa.

Poets, first professed natural Philosophy, of the which Prometheus, Linus,
Orpheus, and Homer, were the inuentors.

The Lacedaemonians, found the helmet, spear, and sword; the Scithians, the use
of bows and arrows.

Simonides, invented the Art of memory, which was perfected by Metrodorus
Scepticus. Cor. Agrippa.

Aristeus, King of Arcadia, first found the use of h^ney.

Victories and tryumphs, were first ordained by Dionysius.

Gorgias Leontinus, was the first among the Greeks for his eloquence, that had
his picture set up at Delphos, in the temple of Apollo.

Ulysses, was the first, after that Troy was ouercom, that used to kill birds,
which pastime he devised, that it might cause those gallants, whose fathers at
the siege of Troy were slain, to forget their deaths, with this new found
pleasure. Cor. Agrippa.

The Cyclopians, were the first workers of Iron works.

The Athenians taught first to plant trees and Vineyards.

The Phrigians, first made Chariots and Wagon.

The first that invented to cut off thieves ears, and strangle them upon
Gibbets, were the Goths, who notwithstanding in other respects were barbarous;
yet used they severe justice to malefactors. Gueuara.

Varro, a great searcher of antiquities, writes, that all the Handicrafts were
invented within the space of a thousand years, reckoned back from his time.

Tiberius, brought this custom of speaking to the Prince by writing, and of
his answer by the same, to the end that nothing should escape his mouth, that
was not well considered of before.

Dionysius, was the first in Sicily, that used to eat twice a day, of whom
Plato said, That he was a monster of nature.

The Lydians first invented the Art of dycing, and playing diverse kinds of
games upon the tables.

Dircaeus, made Captain over the people of Sparta, invented the trumpet, and
taught all the Lacedaemonians to sound the same, which was such a terror unto
their enemies the Messenians, that at the first sound thereof they fled, and the
Lacedaemonians got the victory.

Pyrrhus, first taught his Soldiers to dance in armor, called Pyrrhyca
Saltatio. Plinius.

Jones, so called of Iaon the son of Iape^us, are the first Greeks.

Seruius Tullius, the King of Rome, first invented mustering of men, which
before his time, was not known through the whole world. Eutropius.

S. Jews, the 9. of that name, was the first King that raised a task in
France. Guychardine.

Prometheus, first invented statues and Images, some say Pigmalion, whose
Image was metamorphized into a woman. Ovid.

Thales, was the first Philosopher. Lactantius.

Pope Sergius, the second, was the first that changed his name, who before was
called Swines mouth.

Otho, the first, made the first oath to the Bishop of Rome.

In the time of Henry the black, Emperor of Germany, when Clement the second
was Pope, the dignity of Cardinals first beg^n. Anno Domini one thousand and
fifty.

Pope Hildebrand, did first forbid the German Priests to marry.

In the year of Christ, one thousand, one hundred, and forty, when the studies
of the Law flourished every where, and the best learned embraced the^ (as it
happens most commonly in a new thing) the Monks perceauing that holy
Scripture began to be despised for studying therein, they also began a study of
Theology, and ordained School disputations in divine matters, as the Lawyers
did in civil, and this was the original of Divinity Schools.

Frederick the second, Emperor of Germany, was the first, that wanting silver,
caused to make coin of leather, that he might have wherewith to pay his men
of war, but when he had gotten silver, he paid them lawful money, and that
liberally.

Of Prophecies, Visions, etc. Sundry Philosophers by speculatiue Astrology,
have foretold many things, that should fall out, following the rules and signs
which have been accustomed to proceed, and when experience answers to the
cause; otherwise they are not able to foretell ought without lying, and ayding
them selves with Art, long experience, and revelation of the devil, to whom
they have wholly abandoned themselves.
ROmulus, set his Image in the Palace at Rome, and said, it should not fall,
until a maid bare a child. Chrysostom.

The same day that Julius Caesar died, in the I Will of the land of Capua, was
found by Querrions of the Country, a rich tomb of stone, in it a little tablet
of gold, with these words engraven, When ever it shall fall this tomb to be
opened, the same day the conqueror of the world shall be murdered in the
Capitol. Vincen.

An hundred days before Caesar was slain, the first letter of his name by
figure an hundred, was by fire from heaven strooken away, his statue standing
in the market place, and upon the top written Caesar. Vincentius.

Sybilla prophesied, that the Pope should be overcome with linen rags.

The hundred Senators of Rome one night dreamed all one dream.

Virgill made a head to speak, of which he demanded what he should do in a
certain purpose, the head answered, If he kept well his head, he should
come again all whole, but that day the sun shined hotly, and smote him on
the head, and chased his brain, whereof be^^ dyed.

There appeared three Suns in the firmament, toward the East part of the
world, the which by little and little were brought into one body; a great sign
it was that Asia, Africa, Europe, should be brought to one monarchy.

Tanaquill, the wife of Tarquinius Priscus, when she saw the flames playing
about Seruius Tullius head, she affirmed thereby that he should be King in
Rome; this divination is called Pyromancie. Liuius.

The rain of stones in Picen, at the second wars of Carthage, did foreshew
the slaughter and murder that Hanniball should do in Italy. Idem.

Abraham, a Jew, prophesied, that in the year of our Lord 1464. the Jewish
religion should get the upper hand, the which was never more oppressed then at
that time.

The Jews were so adicted to observe these augurations, that they would not
go unto war at any time, without some conjectures had by birds or beasts.
Josephus.

Simonides, in pity buried a dead corpse, which no man would do (as he was to
pass over the Seas) the night before he should ^^ile, in the morning the same
man which Simonides had buried, appeared unto him, warning him that day not to
go to Sea, being ready to go, he remembered his dream, and told his fellows
thereof, but they regarded him not, and left him behind them, where in sight of
Simonides, they and their ship was lost. Patritius.

Mydas, King of Phrygia, being troubled and vexed with certain dreams, grew
to be desperate, and dyed voluntarily, by drinking the blood of a Bull.

Aristodemus, King of the Messenians, hearing dogs howl like wolves, and
understanding by his South-sayers, that it was an evil sign, slew himself.

The picture of Fortune, at Tusculane, appeared unto Galba, lamenting that he
had offered and consecrated the money which she had given him a little before,
to Venus, and therefore with bitter words she threatened to take it from him
again, for shortly after he was murdered by the Soldiers of Otho.

There appeared to Hercules two maidens, diversely apparailed of diverse nature,
the one plain and simple, the other gorgiously decked; Virtue, and Pleasure.
Cicero.

Triton, appeared unto Caesar, standing in a maze at the River Rubrico, in
Italy, who taking a trumpet from one of his Soldiers, leapt into the River,
whom Caesar and all his army followed. Suetonius.

Tacitus, when it was told him that his Fathers grave opened of it self, knew
well that he should shortly die, and made himself ready for it. Vopiscus.

There appeared to one Pertinax, three days before he was slain by a thrust,
a certain shadow in one of his fish ponds, with a naked sword, threatening to
kill him. Capitolinus.

An Horseman appeared to Machabeus, shaking his spear, to signify the famous
victory he should obtain.

Alexander dreamed, that Hercules reached his hand to him out of a wall,
promising him to help him in his wars.

Caesar dreamed, that he lay with his mother, which the South-sayers
interpreting, the earth to be his mother, said, That he should be conqueror
of the world.

Mydas, being an Infant in his cradle, Ants were seen to carry grains and
victuals to feed him, which the South-sayers signified, that he should be
the wealthiest man in the world,

Socrates dreamed, that he held fast in his hand a young Swan, which fled from
him away, and mounted the skies, whose sweet voice as a wonderful harmony,
replenished the heavens; this was Plato his Scholar.

Brutus, fighting against Augustus, and Antonius, saw two Eagles fighting
together, the one coming from Caesar's tent, the other from his own, when his
Eagle was vanquished, he knew he should be overcome. Plut.

Cicero, understood that his death was at hand, when a Raven held him fast by
the hemme of the gown, making a noise, until the Soldiers of M. Antonius,
Herennius, and Popilius, had beheaded him. Plut.

Julian, dreamed according to the opinion of Pythagoras and Plato, that by the
transmigration of souls from one body into another, the soul of Alexander was
crept into his body, or that he was Alexander himself in an other body.
Eusebius.

The Princes of Greece were certified by a Dragon, that climed a tree, where he
killed a she Sparrow, and eight young ones, that they should hold wars with the
Trojans 9. years, and in the 10. should overcome it. Homer.

Alexander, by a vision was warned to take heed of Antipater, who poisoned him.

When Caesar was murdered, an Ox yoked for the plough spoke, That not only
Co^^ should want, but men also should perris^ and therefore was urged in vain
to labor* Liuius.

When Nero began his Empire, trees, pastures, and meddowes, changed places one
with another. Tacitus.

Before the destruction of Jerusalem by Ve^spasian, a star appeared in manner
of a sword in the sky, Chariots were seen running up and down in the
firmament, and men in harnes fighting in the clouds. Josephus.

A South-sayer forwarned Anthony of Augustus familiarity, saying, What do you
so near this young man? separate your self from him, your fame is greater
then his, you command more then he, you have greater experience, but your
familier spirit fears his, and your fortune which of it self is great,
flattereth his, and if you sequester not your self from him, she will leave
you, and go to him.

South-saying was first practiced in Hetruria, where a husbandman ploughing in
the field Tarqumen, a certain man sprung up from the ground named Tages, in
face much like a young child, but in wisdom far surmounting any Philosopher,
he taught all the Land of Hetruria. Cic. de divine.

Thermute, the daughter of Pharao, who brought up Moses, one day gave him into
her Fathers arms to play with all, and for the love he bear to her, he put
his Diadem upon Moses, which he presently took off, casting ^t upon the
ground, the Astrologers that cast his nativity, said, O King, this is the
child whom God has given us to kill, for undoubtedly ^e will be the overthrow
of our kingdom. Josephus.

Anaxagoras said, that a great stone should fall from the sun the second
year after the 67. Olympiade, in Egos, a River in Thracia, which came so to
pass. Plinius.

Romulus, after the sight of twelve Ravens, as Liuie says, or rather because
the lightning had pierced his body, from the left to the right side (as
Dionysius writes) was by divination chosen King, which was the respect, that
by law it was provided, that no man should take upon him to be made King
without divination.

Homer, makes two gates of dreams, one of horn, which pertains to true
dreams, and the other of Iuory, to false; the greatest part pass through the
gates of Iuory, and not through that of horn.

M. Cicero, dreamed that he saw one in his dream, whom waking he had never
seen, and as soon as he met him, he knew him.

Anaxarchus, in sharp and cold weather foreknowing that Alexander would pitch
hi^ pauilion, and incampe in a place where wa^ no wood, laid up all his
vtensills and implements in store for a dear year; he caused drudges and
slaves to carry vvood by the load for his own provision; when Alexander came
to that place, they found such want of wood, that they were compelled to burn
their tables; in this lack, one told the King that Anaxarchus had sufficient,
to who^ Alexander came and refreshed himself with him, rewarding him
abundantly.

Thales Milesius, a Philosopher, being vpbrayded that his wisdom could not
make him rich, foresaw by study that there would be great scarcity of oil,
which in the time of plenty he bought up, and when the want came, by his store,
he became exceeding rich. Laertius.

When C. Marius, was a child, seven young Eagles fell into his lap, which the
Augurs did show, that he should seven times have the greatest honor in Rome,
and he was seven times Consul. Appian.

Sylla, after he had resigned his Dictatorship, being reviled of one, and
patiently en^uring it, said either by natural reason or a ^iuination of
things to come; This young ^an will be the let, that another man having ^uch
authority, will not so soon give it over; ^vhich thing happened in Caesar.
Appian.

An ancient Soothsayer of Tuscane (when ^greement was made between the
Trium^irats) prophesied that the old kings should ^eturne, and every man be in
bondage but himself alone; and presently he shut his mouth, and stopped his
own breath till he dyed. Appian.

Seleucus, going to Babylon, stumbled on a stone, and the stone being removed
an Anchor was seen: and vvheras the Soothsayers that were with him, said it
was a sign of delay, Ptolomeus Lagus that went with him, said, an Anchor was a
token of safety, and not of delay; vvhereupon, Seleucus ever after used an
Anchor in his signet.

Alexander returned from India to Babylon, and sailing in the ^ends, a sudden
vvind did blow of his diadem into a place of reeds, in which stood the
sepulcher of an ancient King; which was held to be a token of his death.

Of Majesty. The fountain of all excellent manners (...) Majesty, being the
whole proportion and figu^^ of noble estate, and properly a beauty or
comeliness in the countenance, language and gesture^ which does cast upon the
beholders and bearers a fearful reverence.
THere was in the Emperor Augustus ^ native majesty, for from his eyes issued
rays or beams which pierced the eyes o^ the beholders. Sueto.

The Frenchman that came to kill Marius when he saw his countenance, ran from
him* crying, that he had no power to kill him. App*

When Ulysses ship and men had suffere^^ shipwreck, and he hardly escaped,
being ca^^ all naked upon the coast of the Pheacaes the Kings daughter sent
him a mantle, who coming to the King, presented such a won^derful majesty in
his looks and speech, tha^ Alcinous wished Ulysses would take his daughter
Nausicaa to wife. Homer.

The people wondering at his majesty, honored him with sundry presents, and at
they^ own charges conveyed him to Ithaca.

Scipio being in his manor place called Linternum, diverse notorious thieves
and Py^ats came only to see his person, of whose ^ame they had heard so large
reports; but he not knowing this their intent, armed himself to make defense,
which the Captain perceiving, dispatched his followers, and lay^ng down his
weapons, said, That they came not as enemies, but wondering at his virtue and
valor; whereupon Scipio entertained the^.

Calphurnius Crassus, conspiring with others the death of Nerua, he knowing
thereof, placed them next to him at a public show, and not fearing danger
(being strengthened with a great mind) gave them swords ready drawn, and asked
them whether they were sharp enough, who taking the swords in their hands,
had no power to hurt him.

At the beginning, when the multitude of people were oppressed by them that
abounded in possessions and riches, they espying some one which excelled in
virtue and fortitude, repaired to him* who ministing equity, when he had
defended the poor from injury, retained together the greater persons with the
inferior, in an equal and indifferent order, wherefore they called that man a
king, which is to say a Ruler.

Belus the son of Nemrod, was the fir^^ King in the world.

The ancient Egiptians called their king^ Epiphanes, and had this custom,
that they should enter the Temple barefooted; and because one of them came to
the Church otherwise, he was deposed, and that name o^ dignity ceased.

They likewise called their Kings Pharaones; the Bithinians Ptolomaei; the
Latins Murani; the Parthians Arsacides; the Albanes Syluij; the Sicilians
Tyrants; the Argiues Kings.

Nabuchad-nezzar intiteled himself King of Kings, Alexander king of the world,
Demetrius conqueror of Cities, Mithridates restorer of the world, Attyla the
vvhyp of Nations, Tamberlaine the scourge of God, Dyonisius the host of men,
Cyrus the last of the Gods. Henry the eight, king of England, defender of the
faith, Charles King of France the most christian king, and Alphonso King of
Spain, the Catholic king.

This Alphonso, did first begin to make Bishops houses joining to the Cathedral
Churches, to the end, that neither cold in VVinter, nor heat in Summer, might
hinder their residencie.

In the Country of the Sydonians, there was Dynastia, which was called a
lineage of Kings that endured two hundred and twenty five years, because all
those Kings were of a good and virtuous conversation.

The authority of Kings has ever been accounted a thing divine; for Homer and
Isocrates write, that he who governs alone, represents a divine majesty.

In Egypt, of Philosophers they did choose their Priests, and of Priests their
Kings, with whom it was a law inviolable, that the King which had been wicked
in his life, should not be buried after his death.

In the I Will Tabrobana, kings are chosen by election, and not by blood. Solinus.

Syllas dictatorship, was called a negative ordained kingdom. Appian.

The old Roman Kings did wear no crowns, but held scepters in their
hands, of the which Tarquinius was the last, for that his son ravished
Lucrecia the wife of Collatinus. Justinius.

Plato following the fiction of Homer, did write that kings children were
composed of a precious mass, and to be separated from the common sort.

Homer named kings Diogenes, that is, the generation of Jupiter, and
Diotrophes, nourished by Jupiter, and Aristes, which Plato interprets to be
the familiars of Jupiter, and his disciples in politic sciences.

The Kings of Persia in their privy Chambers dispatched their greater matters
themselves, and left those of less consequence to their Princes.

It was a custom amongst the auncien^ kings, to put questions one to another
to try the ability of their wits, and certain praise^ and rewards were
appointed to them that excelled. Plutarch.

Solomon sent riddles and problemes to king Hiram, whom it cost very much
because he could not assoile them, until at length, he found a young man of
Tyrus, called Aba^mon, who deciphered unto him the mos^ part of them. Dion.

The Kings of Persia showed themselves more subject to laws then their lords.
Zona^*

The Kings of Lacedemonia did monthly swear to guide themselves according to
the Laws; and the Ephori took an oath in the behalf of the people to see it
executed.

Antiochus told his son Demetrius, that their kingdom was a noble slavery.

There was four Kings and Princes, which ^ad but one eye a piece, Philip,
Alexanders ^ather, Antigonus king of Macedonia, Ha^iball of Carthage, and
Sertorius a Romain. The first lost his eye at Methon, the second, ^t Perinthia,
the third, upon the Alps, the ^ourth in Pontus. Plutarch.

Alphonsus was the first king of Lusitania, the son of Henry Loraine, and
Tiretia, the ^ase daughter of Alphonsus king of Castile, ^n one battle he
overcame 5. princes of the Sarazines, and therefore in his shield bare 5.
several coats of honor. Cor. Agrippa.

Pharamond, surnamed VVarmond, was the first King of France; who came out of
Germany, he bare in his shield three black Toades.

Of Monarchies. A Monarchy, most significatly represents the divine
regiment, wherein absolute sovereignty consists in one only Prince, who
commands all, and is not to be commanded of any.
THE latter Romans had a Duarchie, which is comprehended under the
government Oligarchie; their Empire was divided into two parts, the one
Emperor of the East, the other of the West. Eutrop.

Aristocratie, is the rule or power of the best and most virtuous men, approved
for good life and wisdom, directing their thoughts to no other end then a
general profit.

Oligarchie, is when a fevv noble or rich men govern the Commonwealth,
rejecting the poor and baser sort.

Timocratie, is the power of mean or indifferent wealth, governing by some
laws taken from Oligarchie and Democratie, which are two extremes.

Democratie, is where free men, being the greater number, are Lords of the
estate.

There was also a mixed or compounded estate of all these.

Under the Monarchiall government, lived the Scithians, Ethiopians, Iulians,
Assirians, Medes, Egiptians, Bactrians, Armenians, Macedonians, Jews, and
Romans; at this day, Englishmen, Frenchmen, Spaniards, Polonians, Danes,
Muschouits, Turks, Tartars, Abissines, Moors, Agiamesques, Zagathians,
Cathaians.

Under Aristocratie were the Lacedaemonians, which estate was an excellent
pattern of government, this established Lycurgus five hundred years.

Under Oligarchie were the ancient governments in Sicilia, amongst which, that
of the Leontines was translated into the tyranny of Pannecus, that of Geta into
the tyranny of Leander, and that of Rheginu^ into the tyranny of Anaxilas, and
so of others. Aristotle.

Under Aristocratie is the government of Venice. Under Democratie, Athence.
Plato.

Ptolomey King of Egypt, as he feasted one day seven Ambassadors of the best
and most flourishing Commonwealths in his time, he desired them that they
would instruct him in the best points necessary for the preservation of an
estate. Who thus began.

The Roman Ambassador.
We have the Temples in great respect and reverence, we are very obedient to
our Governors, and we punish wicked men and evil livers severely.

The Carthagenian.
In the Commonwealth of Carthage, the nobles never cease fighting, nor the
common people and artificers laboring, nor the Philosophers teaching.

The Sicilian.
In our Commonwealth, justice is exactly kept, merchandise exercised with
truth, and all men account themselves equal.

The Rhodian.
At Rhodes, old men are honest, young men shamefast, and women solitary, and
of few words.

The Athenian.
Our rich men are not suffered to be divided into factions, nor poor men to be
idle, nor the Governors to be ignorant.

The Lacedemonian.
In Sparta, envy reigns not, for all are equal, nor covetousness, for all
goods are common, nor sloth, for all labor.

The Sicyonian.
Voyages are not permitted, that they should bring home new fashions at their
return, Physicians are not suffered, least they should kill the sound, nor
Orators to take upon them the defense of causes and suits. Buda.



The Lacedaemonians are highly praised for having continued seven hundred
years without any alteration of their government. Grimaldus.

The Venetians have constantly lived in one form of government by the space of
a thousand years, and more. Idem.

The first Monarch was Ninus, King of the Assyrians, who was deprived of his
kingdom by his wife Semiramis, when she had obtained of him the government
for 7. days, who impatient at her dealing, dashed out his his own brains;
after he had gotten the Monarchy, his poesy was Rapitur.

Semyramis the mother of young Ninus, seeing him unfit to rule, governed the
Empire 42. years, but burning in unnatural lust toward her son, she was
therefore slain by him.

Sardanapalus the last Assyrian Monarch, was deposed by Arbactus, who
translated the monarchy to the Medes.

The second Monarch was Cyrus; whom Thomiris Qu. of Scythia overcame; his
motto was Stabilitur.

Alexander the great, overcame Darius, Monarch of Persia, and brought the
government to the Grecians; his word was Tandem. It is supposed that he was
poisoned at Babylon.

Augustus Caesar was the fourth Monarch, (in whose time our Savior Christ
was borne) his word was Finitur.

The Assyrian Monarchy continued one thousand three hundred six years, the
Medes and the Persians five hundred and 40. the Grecians 154. and the Romans
above eight hundred.

The Roman Monarchy began fort^ and seven years before Christ was borne.

The Romans first brought this name Emperor into the world, which they
invented, not for their Princes, but for their Captains and Generals in
war; and after that Caesar had overcome Pompey, the Romans requested him
that he would take unto him the title Emperor; and he was the first in all
the world.

All I. Caesar's successors in memory of him, are called Augusti, Caesares, and
Imperatores.

Julius Caesar the first Roman Emperor, was murdered in the Capitol.

Octauius Augustus his nephew, succeeded him, who for his worthy demeanor, was
canonized for a God, he reigned 56. years. In his time Christ was borne.

Claudius Tiberius, son to Liuia Augustus his wife by her first husband,
was a coward, cruel, covetous, and lecherous, he deceased in Campania the
23. year of his reign, to the great joy of the Romans.

Caligula, son to Germanicus, for his cruelty and beastly life, was slain in
his Palace, when he had reigned 3. years and 10. months.

Claudius, Son to Drusus, was a good Emperor, yet poisoned by Nero, and after
his ^eath canonized, he reigned 13. years and ^ine months.

Nero, son in law to Claudius, who adop^ed him to be his successor, was a
most wicked Emperor, and a great persecuter of Christians, he killed himself
when he had reigned fourteen years,

Galba was somewhat severe and covetous, he reigned but seven months, and was
slain through treason, by Otho; his throat was cut in the market place at
Rome.

Otho invaded the Empire, and at the same time he slew Galba, Vitellius was
chosen Emp. by the Germans who ouercam him in battle, he killed himself,
reigning 95. days.

Vitellius was an excessive glutton, and cruel, he striued in his doings and
course of life to be like Nero, he was slain by the Captains of Vespasian,
and thrown into Tiber, when he had reigned eight months, and one day.

Vespasian was a Prince endued with most excellent virtues, and very gentle,
he dyed of a ^lixe when he had reigned 9. years.

Titus his son succeeded him, who for his clemency was called the love of
mankind, he was a stout warrior, eloquent, learned, and liberal, he builded
the Theater in Rome for plays, he died when he had reigned, 2. years, 8.
months, 20. days, and was canonized.

Domitian was the second Emperor that persecuted the Christians, a proud and
cruel Prince, he was slain by his own servant, the fifteen year of his
reign.

Nerua was a man in his private life sober, yet stout and valourous, he
demeaned himself uprightly, and deceased when he had reigned one year, 4.
months, 8. days.

Traianus a Spanyard, was the third Emperor that persecuted the Christians, he
was an affable and sober Prince, and pitiful, he died of the flixe in the 19.
year and 6. month of his reign.

Adrianus gave himself wholy to peace, which much aduantaged the
Commonwealth, he was expert in the knowledge of Astronomy; he persecuted the
Christians a while, and reigned 20. years 10. months.

Antonius Fuluius was a good Prince, liberal, courteous, just, he was for his
gentleness surnamed Pius, and died of a Fever, when he had reigned 23. years.

Marcus Aurelius was very learned, he governed the Empire jointly with his
brother Antoninus, at what time Rome began to be ruled by two Emperors at
once, M. Aurelius died of the Apoplexy, reigning eleven years, then Antoninus
governed alone, being a sober and grave Prince and learned, he sold all his
substance rather then he would charge his subjects with exactions, and dyed
when he had reigned 18. years.

Antonius Comodus defamed himself by his wicked life, and died suddenly,
reigning twelve years, 8. months.

Pertinax was very old when he was chosen, and having reigned but 80. days,
he was slain in an vproare which sell among the guard, by the means of Julian.

Didicus Iulianus bought the Empire with money, he was a noble man, expert in
the laws, he was ouercom by Seuerus, and slain in his palace, reigning 7.
months.

Seuerus the only Emperor created forth of Affrique, he was very covetous, and
by nature cruel, he subdued Britain, deceased at York, reigning 18. years.

Antoninus killed his brother Geta in his mothers presence, he founded the
Baths at Rome, and was much given to lust, he espoused his mother in law, Iuba,
and was slain of Macrinus when he had reigned 6. years.

Opilius Macrinus and Diadumenus his son succeeded, and were both slain in a
sedition, reigning but one year, 2. months.

Heliogabalus was a most dissolute and wicked Emperor, the base son of
Antoninus, he with his mother Semiamira, were drawn with all spite through
the City of Rome, their bodies were torn in pieces, and cast into Tiber; he
reigned six years.

Alexander Seuerus, being but 17. years old, was chosen Emperor, he was a
very virtuous Prince, and the first Emperor that favored the Christians; he
was slain in France, in a tumult that arose among the soldiers by the
means of Maximinus, in the thirteen year of his reign.

Maximinus was first a Sheephearde in Thracia, and afterward became a
soldier, he was the first that aspired to the Empire by means of
soldiers only; he was slain by Pupienus at Aquileia, when he had reigned
three years.

Three at once bare the name of Augustus, Pupienus, Balbinus, and Gordianus;
the the first two, so soon as they came to Rome, were slain in the palace,
and Gordianus reigned alone; he was come of a noble progeny, and when he had
reigned six years he was slain by the treason of Phillip, who succeeded him.

Philip was the first Emperor that pro^essed the Christian says, he was
slain by Decius, when he had reigned 5. years.

Decius made an act, that all that worshipped Christ should be slain, both he
and his ^onne were slain in Barbary, after they had ^aigned 2. years, some
write he was swallowed up in an earthquake.

Virius Gallus, and Volusianus his son, ^aigned together, then Emilianus
attempted new conspiracies in Moesia, and when they both went to subdue him,
they were slain at ^teramna, not reigning full out two years, ^hey persecuted
the Christians.

Aemilianus, as he was descended of base stock, so was the time of his Empire
obscure and without fame, when he had reigned 3, months he was slain.

Valerianus reigned 6. years, he was discomfited and taken prisoner by Sapores
King of Persia, who when he would take his horse, he made Valerianus lie on the
ground, that he might tred on him while he got on horsback, he was slain at
Millaine, and ruled 6. years.

Galienus was learned, but given to great excess and dronkennes, he was slain
likewise at Millaine, having reigned with his Father 6. years, and 9. after
him.

Flauius Claudius, a virtuous Prince, sober, and a maintayner of justice,
within two yer^ after he began his reign sickned and dyed* he overcame the
Goths, the Germans, and restored Aegipt to the Empire.

Quintilius, semblable as virtuous as hi^ brother, by the assent of the Senate,
was made Augustus, and was slain within 17. days after he began his reign.

Aurelianus was borne in Denmark, a stout man in war, but cruel, he was slain
through the treason of his own servants, when he had reigned 5. years 6.
months; he was the first that wore a crown imperial, and robes of gold and
pearl, which before were strange to the Romans.

Tacitus, a man of exceeding good conditions, dyed within 6. months after his
entrance.

Florianus, reigned 2. months and 20. days, he dyed by incision of his own
veins, and did nothing worthy of memory.

Probus, a man well expert in warfare, a stout and just man, was slain in an
vproare, which grew among the Soldiers, when he had reigned 6. years 3.
months.

Carus, made his sons Carasius, and Numirianus, Emperor with him, Numirianus
was virtuous, and Carasius as wicked as Nero, they reigned 2. years, Carus was
slain with lightning, and Numerianus by treason, and Carasius by his own
company.

Dioclesian, was of ripe wisdom, and garnished with many virtues, yet a great
persecutour of the Christians. Maximinianus was associated to him in the
Empire, the first reigned 20. years, they both left the Empire, and lived
privately, Dioclesian slew himself, for fear of Licinius, and Constantinus
Maximinianus was slain of Constantius, his brother in law.

Constantius, and Galerius, surnamed Armenius, for that he sometimes kept
beasts, reigned 4. yers with great praise, Co^stantius died in England, and
Galerius killed himself.

Constantinus, as some write, was the first Emperor that professed the name of
Christ, he bulded Constantinople, in that place which was called Bizantium, he
was a virtuous and godly Prince, he reigned 30. years.

Three Emperors and Caesar's, reigned at once, Constantinus in France, Spain,
and Germany; Constantius in the East, Constans in Italy. The first was slain
when he had reigned 3. years, the second was killed by Magnentius when he had
reigned 13 years and Constans died when he had ruled 39.

Iulianus the Apostata, reigned 3. years, he was a great persecutor of the
Christians, wh^ he was deadly wounded and lay upon the ground, he threw his
blood to heauen-ward saying, Vicisti Gallilaee.

Iouinianus was a very good Prince, and fauorer of the Gospel, he instituted
that tithe^ should be paid; he died suddenly when he had reigned 7, months.

Valentianus and Valens, reigned fourteen years, they were both Christians,
Valens was slain by the Goths, and Valentianus dyed by an extreme bleeding.

Gratianus reigned six years, he was a true maintainer of religion, and
learned, he made Theodosius partner with him, and was slain in France, by
his Governor Maximus.

Theodosius, reigned after him eleauen years, he was a Spaniard, and a godly
and virtuous Prince, restoring the peace to the Church, whose death Saint
Ambrose bewailed, and writ thus of him, That he was more careful for the
estate of the Church, tha^ to prevent his own dangers.

Arcadius reigned with his brother Honorius, the one in the East 15 years, the
other in the West 29 years, and dyed.

Theodosius the 2, son of Arcadius, ruled ^t Constantinople 42. years, he
was a most virtuous Prince, and chose Valentinian as ^hen a child to reign
with him, he dyed of ^he pestilence.

Valentinianus was slain by a Soldier, hired of one Maximus to that end, for
that he had forced his wife; he reigned five and twenty years.

Martianus, after he had governed the Empire 7 years, was poisoned at
Constantinople, by the treasons of Ardibure, and Aspar his Father, being a
virtuous and just Prince.

Leo the first, ruled 17 years, he overcame Aspar, whilst he governed in the
East, there reigned with lawful and unlawful tytles in Italy six or seven
Emperors; he dyed at Constantinople.

Leo, the Nephew of this Leo deceased, was obeyed as Emperor, but he yielded
it to his Father Zeno, crowning him with his own hands, and shortly after
dyed, who ruled like a tyrant, and died when he had governed the Empire 18
years.

Anastasius reigned 27. years, and was slain with a thunderbolt that fell
from heaven.

Justinius the first, ruled 11. years, and dying, adopted for Caesar his Nephew
Justinian.

Justinian, was a wise and just Prince, most happy in two Captains,
Belizarius, and Narses; when he was old he elected in the Empire his Nephew
Iustine, and dyed in the 39. year of his Empire.

Justinius the 2, reigned 11. years, and dyed of the gowte, but a little before
he created Caesar, a Captain called Tiberius.

Tiberius the 2, was a virtuous, just, and merciful Prince, he reigned 7.
years, and nominated Mauritius his son in law successor.

Mauritius was slain by Phocas, with his wife, sons, and daughters; this
punishment histories do note, was for not redeeming the Christians, which
being taken captives, were in thraldom with an infidel Prince.

Phocas governed 7. years, and was slain by Priscus, one of his Captains;
his legs, arms, head, and priuities, were cut off, he made the Bishop of
Rome supreme head above all other Bishops, which Gregory the first
discommended in Phocas: he took the Cross of Christ from Jerusalem.

Heraclius brought again the Cross to Jerusalem, he governed 30. years, in
his time began the kingdom of Mahomet, Anno Domini. 644.

Constantinus his son, was poisoned by his stepmother Martina, the first
year of his reign, to make her son Heraclionas Emperor, who reigned 2.
years; the Senate having knowledge of their treacherous dealings, cut off the
nose of Heraclionas, Martinaes tongue, and the Patriarchs, sending them all 3.
into banishment.

Constans, the son of Constantius, was strangled in a bath at Syracusa, when
he had reigned 27. years.

Constantinus Barbatus, made peace in the Empire of the East, and in the
Church, and died when he had governed 17. years.

Iustinianus the 2, ruled 10. years before he was banished, and being restored
6. years more, many troubles befell him, for two flatterers by whom he was
ruled, the one Theodosius a Monk, whom his Subjects called General, the other
Stephen his Chaplain, who determined all matters concerning religion. Leontius
the Patriarch helping him, was made Emperor, and cut off Iustinianus nose.
Apsimarus expulsed him, and governed 7. years.

Justinian, before mentioned, returned from Exile, aided by the Bulgarians, and
cut off the heads of Leontius and Apsimarus, and pulled out the eyes of
Callinicus the Patriarch; in the end his Soldiers killed him and his son
Tiberius, when they had taken them from a Sanctuary.

Philippus Bardanes ruled 2 years, he pulled down Images in Churches, but
Artemius his Secretary, caused his eyes to be pulled out.

Artemius, otherwise called Anastatius, held his Empire 1 year and 3 months,
he was deposed by Theodosius, who put himself into a monastry, when he had
reigned 1 year, fearing to be invaded of Leo; but Artemius gathering an host
out of Bulgaria, went about to recover the Empire, but he was betrayed to Leo,
who killed him.

Leo, surnamed Iconomachus, that is, an assaulter of Images, reigned 26 years,
he made an edict, that all Images in Churches should be pulled down.

Constantinus Copronymus, so called, because at his baptism he defiled the
Fount, was a great destroyer of Images, he dyed in in the 35 of his Empire.

Leo the 4, his son governed 5. years, and was crowned of the Patriarch in
his life time.

Irene, with her young Son Constantine, ^uled the Empire 10 years, after he
being 20 years of age, took the government a^one, which she envying, when he
had reigned 7. years, caused his eyes to be pulled out, of which grief he
died; she reigned after him 3 years, and then the government of Italy was
committed to Carolus Magnus, by a general consent.

Nicephorus possessed the Empire of the East, and made peace with Charles the
great, he was slain of the Bulgarians the ninth year of his reign, he made
his son Stauratius Emperor, who the third month after he governed, was
deposed by Michaell Curopalates, and put into a monastry.

Michaell Curopalates, married Procopia, the sister of Stauratius, and made a
league with Charles, and after he had reigned 2 years, became a Monk.

Since Julius Caesar was murdered in the Senate, unto Charles the great, there
are found above thirty Emperors that were slain, and four that killed
themselves. Sleidan.

Of the Empire of Germany.
THE Empire of Germany, began in the year of our Lord, eight hundred and one,
whose first Emperor of the West, was Carolus Magnus, so surnamed for his
noble acts, whose Grandfather was Carolus Martellus, his Father Pipinus of
France, his Mother Birrha, daughter to Heraclius Emperor of Constantinople;
he was excellently learned in the Greek and Latin tongue, he dyed at
Aquisgrane, when he had reigned 14. years.

Lodouicus Pius, his son, was so called of a religious superstition, not
having the perfect knowledge of God, but as religion went in those days, for
he increased the worshipping of Idols and Images; he was far inferior to his
Father, both in wisdom and virtue; he caused his brothers son Barnardus,
King of Italy, his eyes to be pulled out; he made his son Lotharius Emperor
with him, who with his brother Pipinus deposed him, but afterward restored, he
dyed at Magunze, and reigned 27. years.

Lotharius the first, vexed by the civil wars of his brethren, was forced to
make a Tetrarchia, dividing his Empire into 4. parts, that ^e himself should
e^ioy Italy with the Empire, and a part of Germany, which lies between ^hene,
and Moselletta, Lodouicus, should ^ule Germany, Charles, France, and Pipi^us
Aquitania; he made his son Lodoui^us pertaker with him in the Empire, and
^hortly after deposing himself, went into a monastry called Brumia, and there
died, ha^ing reigned 15. years.

Lodouicus the 2, excelled in learning, god^ines, humanity, liberality, and
profound wit, he dyed at Millaine in Italy, when he had reigned 19. years.

Carolus Caluus, the son of Lodouicus Pius, succeeded him, for that he had no
heir male, when he fled from Charlemaine, and Carolus Crassus, the son of
Lodouicus, Germanicus to Mantua, he was there as some write poisoned, by his
Physician Sidechias a Jew; he was covetous, proud, ambitious, and
vainglorious, he reigned in the Empire 2. years.

Lodouicus the third, surnamed the Stammerer, contrary to the will of the
Nobles of Rome, was made Emperor, by Pope John the eight, he governed two
years, and dyed in the wars against Bernardus, in the marches of Italy.

Carolus Crassus, expelled the Sarazins o^ of Italy, afterward through his
misfortun^ in war, and evil leagues with his enemies, he came into hatred
with his Subjects; sickness also bringing him low, he was not of right mind, and
therefore left his kingdom to Arnolphus, the Son of Charlemaine; he was
brought to great misery, and not having sufficient whereby to live, dyed at
Sweuia, in the 7 year of his reign.

Arnolphus, a covetous Prince, reigned 12 years, and dyed of Lyce; after him
the majesty of the Empire, came to the Germains, which continued with the
Frenchmen for the space of 100 years.

Lodouicus, the son of Arnolphus, governed six years, to whom also
Conradus Duke of Austria joined, and reigned seven years; Henry, the son of
Otho Duke of Saxony, succeed him, and ruled eighteen years, by their ambition
many tumults arose, for the space of 60 years, from Arnolphus death to Otho
the first.

The Italians created Berengarius Emperor, who at Verona overcame Arnolphus,
and put out his eyes, he governed four years.

Berengarius the second, succeeded him, who was driven out of the Country by
Ro^olphus King of Burgundy, this Rodolph ^aigned three years, and was expulsed
his ^ingdome by Hugo a Duke, he governed ^enne years, leaving behind him
Lothari^s his Son, who ruled two years, after whom Berengarius the third,
with his Son Adelbertus, governed eleven years, who ^sing themselves with
all tyranny, were by Otho driven out of Italy.

Otho the first, the Son of Henry the first, deposed Pope John the
thirteenth, he was a Prince endued with singular virtue, he dyed when he
had ruled thirty years.

Otho the second, restored Nicephorus Emperor of Constantinople (being put
^ut of his kingdom) into it again, and married Theoponia his sister. Henry
Duke of Bauiers, rebelled against him, but he was by force of arms brought
to obedience; he fought with the Greeks and Sarazens, and being ouer-throwne
he fled, and was taken by Mariners, who not knowing him, for that he spoke
the Greek language, redeemed himself for a small price, and returned to
Rome, soon after he dyed when he had ruled 11. years, some write he was
poisoned by the Italians.

Otho the third, put Crescentius to death and put out the eyes of Pope John the
10 who deposed Gregory the fifth, whom he had made Pope; and for that there was
great dissension, for the succession of the Empire with the assent of Gregory
ordained, that 7. Princes of Germany should choose the Emperor, 3.
ecclesiastical, and 4. secular.

The Archbishop of Mentz, Colein, and Trier, to these were joined the Prince of
Boheme, (for as then Bohemia had no King) the Cou^ty Palatine of the Rhene, the
Duke of Saxony, and the Marquess of Bradenborough, but amongst these the
Elector Boheme is appointed an Vmpeere, to break off all dissension in
election, if any rise.

This institution of Otho is far more profitable, then was the ordayning of
the Areopagites amongst the Athenians, or the Statutes of the Ephories, to the
Lacedaemonians; these Electors were appointed the yer^ of Christ, 1002.

Otho, was poisoned by the wife of Crescentius, whom he put to death, when he
had reigned 19. years; his wifes nam^ was Mary, daughter to the King of
Aragon, a woman given to all beastlines and intemperanc^ ^f life.

Henry the 2. surnamed the haulting, D. of ^auier, succeeded him, he was the
first Em^eror chosen by the Electors, and reigned 22. ^eares; he was wholly
given to religion and godly life, he brought the Hungarians to the Christian
faith, and gave his sister to Stephen their King in marriage, and dyed at
Bam^rige.

Conradus the Frenchman, after an Inter^egnum for 3. years, was chosen
Emperor, ^orne of the daughter of Otho the first, he ^ad fortunate wars against
the Pannonians, ^e subdued Burgundy, and dyed in the 15. year of his reign.

Henry the 3. called the Black, the son of Conradus was elected, in his time
3. vsur^ing Popes, Gregory 6, Syluestes 3, and Benedict 9, were by him deposed,
and a 4. ^nstalled, who was the Bishop of Bambrige, called Clement the 2. he
dyed when he had ^aigned 17. years.

Henry the fourth, his son, was cursed by Pope Hildebrand, and by his
treasons overthrown, he being very young, his mother governed; the Pope made
Rodolphus Emperor, and sent him a crown, whereon was written; Petra dedit
Petro, Petrus diadema R^^dolpho, but this usurper was ouercom by He^^ry, and
his hand cut off in the battle, the which when he saw ready to die, he said;
Lo (...) Lords ye Bishops, this is the hand where-wit^ I promised my Lord
Henry faith and loyalty judge ye then how well you have advised me.

The Pope set the son also against the Father, who besieged him at Mentz,
but by means of the Princes he departed thence; the Father died when he had
ruled 50 years, his body lay unburied 5 years, by reason of the Popes curse.

Henry the fifth, his Son withstoode the tyranny of Pope Paschalis, and took
his crown from him, he governed the Empire 20 years and dyed.

Lotharius the 2. Duke of Saxony, reigned 13 years, against whom Conradus made
war; in his time the civil law gathered together by Justinian, and neglected
through the tumults of war, was called again to light; he dyed of a Fever.

Conradus, the third Duke of Bauaria, and Nephew to Henry the fourth, had great
wars with the Sarazins in Asia, assisted by Richard surnamed Cordelion, and
Jews the French King; he died without all glory and renown, ^n the fifteen
year of his Empire.

Frederick the first, called Oenobarbus, or ^ith the red beard, was a Prince
endued ^ith very good qualities of mind and bo^ie, he overthrew Millaine to
the ground, and ^hased Pope Alexander out of Rome, and ^laced Octauius in his
seat; but when he ^ooke his journey into Syria, in the passage ^uer a river,
he was drowned, when he had ^aigned thirty and seven years; he made ^he
Prince of Bohemia king, for his faithful^esse to him at Millaine.

Henry the 6. the son of F. Barbarossa, ^ubdued the realm of Apulia, he
took Na^les, and spoiled it. He made his son Frederick (being a child)
Emperor with him ^y consent of the Electors, whose wardshyp, ^e dying,
committed to his brother Philip, he ruled 8. years.

Philip the son of F. Barbarossa, was chosen Emperor for young Frederick,
and reigned ten years, against whom Innocentius the third, erected Otho a
Saxon, but Philip overcame him, and was murdered of Otho Prince of Brunsinia
in his Chamber; this was called Otho the fourth, who was excomunicated by the
Pope, and was murdered in the 4. year of his reign.

Frederick the second, son of Henry the sixth, succeeded him, and reigned 27.
years* and yet before he dyed, was deprived five years of the Empire, by
Innocentius; he was a virtuous and learned Prince; in his time the faction
arose between the Guelphes and the Gibelines, the one with the Emperor, the
other with the Pope.

Conradus the fourth, the son of Frederick, was overcome by the Lantgraue, who
when he perceived himself destituted of the German Princes aid, went to his
hereditarie kingdom of Naples, and there dyed, when he had reigned 4. years.

William County of Holland was chosen Emperor after him, a Prince of noble
and virtuous actions, he was slain by the Frizelanders in the second year of
his reign.

When he was dead, there was an Interregnu^ for 17. years, by reason of the
Pope; Some chose Alphonsus King of Spain Emperor for his wisdom and
virtues, which he refused, the other part of the Electors, elected Richard the
King of Englands brother, and brought him to Basil, but he was not accepted
of the Empire.

Rodolphus the County of Haspurge was elected, and ruled 18. years, he
killed O^hocarus King of Bohemia, and burned one that said he was Frederick the
second, he did (...) a manner set up the decayed Empire, ere ^e died.

Adolphus, County of Nason, succeeded ^im, but the Princes annoyed with his bad
^^fe and ambition, chose in his place Albertus ^he first, of whom Adolphus in
a battaill ^as slain, having reigned 8. years.

Albertus the first, son of Rodulphus, went ^vith a great power against the
King of France, but in passing over the river Rhene, ^e was killed of John his
brothers son, after he had ruled ten years.

Henry the seventh, Cou^ty of Lusenbruge, ^aigned 32. years, and was
poisoned by a Dominick Friar in the sacrament; he made his son John King of
Bohemia, by marry^ng the Kings Daughter; whose son was Charles the 4. king
of Bohemia.

Lodouicus, Duke of Bauier was chosen Emperor by the Bishop of Mentz and
Trier, the King of Bohemia and the Marquess of Bradenbrough, and against him
was erected Frederick, Duke of Austria, by the Bishop of Coleine, the Count
Palatine, and Duke of Saxony, vvhereupon, neither of them would give place in
the Empire, but rather for the space of eight years they made war one against
the other, in the end, Lodouicus overcame and killed Frederick, and was sole
Emperor, reigning thirty and two years; he dyed, and was a Prince endued
with all virtuous qualities.

Gunther, Earl of Swartzenburge, was named Emperor, yet not with consent of
all the Electors, and shortly after, he was suddaily poisoned at Franckford.

Charles the fourth, son to Prince John, the son of Henry the seventh,
enjoyed the Empire, to the honor of this election, were invited Edward the
third, King of England, Frederick Earl provincial of Misen, but they refused
it. He was a learned Prince, and erected the University of Prage, and reigned
32. years.

Venceslaus succeeded his Father Charles, and governed 22. years, he through
slothfulness, let the Empire fall to ruin, he was deposed by his brother
Sigismund.

Rupertus, or Robertus County Palatine of Rhene, having possessed the empire,
after his wars against Galatius (who was the first Duke of Millaine, so
created by Venceslaus, as Sleidan reports) gave himself to peace and
religion, and died, reigning 9. years.

Sigismundus the son of Charles the 4. was a most noble, virtuous, and
learned Prince, much condemning the Germans ^or that they hated the Latin
tongue, he ^ooke away the ambitious contention of ^hree Bishops of Rome, and
drove them from ^heyr seats, he died, reigning 27. years.

Albert the second, Duke of Austria, married the only daughter of Sigismund,
who ^hereby was King of Bohemia and Hungaria, and was the successor of
Sigismund; in his time the most excellent and necessary Art of Printing was
invented, by the which, the knowledge of God was renewed; he subdued ^he
Normaines, and the people of Svveuia; he dyed of the bloody flixe, reigning but
2. years.

Frederick the third, Duke of Austria, governed the state for the space of 53.
years, with so great wisdom, that it flourished in ^ll prosperity and
quietness, he died the 79. year of his age.

Maximilian, the son of the Emperor Frederick and Leonora, daughter to the
king of Lusitania, reigned 32. years, he married Mary, the daughter of Charles
Duke of Burgundy, by whom he had the Dukedom, and Matthew the King of
Pannonia being dead, he obtained the kingdom; this was a Prince noble,
valorous, and a patron of all learning, nor thought he it dishonor (having
taken King Henry the 8. his pay) to serve against France, under his conquering
colors.

Charles the 5. son of Philip, who was Archduke of Austria, and the son
of Maximilian and Mary, succeeded; of this Philip came Carolus and Ferdinandus,
whose mother was Ioane, Queen of Castile; he had also four daughters,
Leonora, married to the King of Lusitania, Isabell to the King of France, Mary
to the king of Denmark, and Katherine to the king of Hungaria.

Charles the fifth, was crowned at Aquisgrane with the silver crown; for it
is an ancient custom, that all Emperors should be crowned with 3. diverse
crowns, which were of gold, silver, and iron.

At Rome and Bononie, they were crowned with the crown of gold, for the
Empire o^ Rome, with the silver at Aquisgrane for the Empire of Germany, and at
Menza with the iron crown for Lombardie.

Charles Duke of Burbon, with the Emperors host, besieged Rome, and sacked it,
constrayning Pope Leo to fly to his Castle An^elo, but the Duke was
unfortunately slain ^n the assault, with an harguebuze.

He was elected Emperor at 19. years of ^ge, Fraunces the French king was his
com^etitor, he conquered Millaine, and overcame ^he Frenchmen and Switzers, in
which wars Fraunces there king was taken prisoner, he ^ooke the kingdom of
Tunis from Aeno^arbus, Lieuetenant of the Turk, and conquered by assault the
town of Afric.

When he had reigned 37. years, he resigned to his son Philip all the
estate and ^ignories, and his Empire to his brother Ferdinando King of the
Romans; this done, he went into a Monastery of the Monks of the order of
Saint Hierome, and therein dyed.

Ferdinand the brother of Charles, son of Philip Archduke of Austria, and
Ioane, Qu. of Castile, blessed by God in many prosperous victories, and in a
small power (in comparison of the forces of Solomon) was made a Conqueror over
the Turk, Anno 1529. he was a Prince of great clemency, a lover of learning,
studying to preserve peace in Europe among Christian Princes, he dyed when he
had reigned six years and four months.

Maximilian the son of Ferdinand, was chosen Emperor, 1564. He made
prosperous expeditions against the Turks, and died when he had reigned 11.
years.

Rodolphus his son succeeded him, who governs the Empire at this day.

The majesty of the Roman Monarchy, flourished especially in the house of
Haspurge, and has lineally brought forth ten Emperors.

The Roman Empire has surmounted all others that have been or shall be, it is
now much dismembered; in Asia it has nothing, being as now possessed of the
Turks, and Tartarians, all Affricke almost is lost.

Portingall, Spain, England, France, Poland, Denmark, Hungaria, Slauonia, and
all Greece, are cut from the Empire, with the Countries there abouts, and the
Isles of Sicilia, Sardinia, Corsica, and Sauoy.

Italy, which has always been the first, and most ancient patrimony of the
Romain Empire, scarce acknowledges the Emperor, Spain holds Calabria, Puel,
Campania, and the Kingdom of Naples, etc, as by succession of their ancestors.

The old and ancient seat of the Empire, the Popes possess, and a great
deal more; being now so far from acknowledging an Emperor, that they have
made the Emperor and Governors beholding to them.

The Venetians hold not only freedoms, but Provinces, and are the freest
people of the world, as it were separated from the Roman Empire.

All that appertains now to the Empire, is enclosed within the confines of
Germany, out of whose limits there is nothing.

This Roman Monarchy, is and shall be the last, which although it has
greatly decayed, yet shall part thereof continue to the worlds end, wherein
shall remain the name and majesty of an Emperor.

These four Monarchies were prophesied of long since by the Prophet Daniell,
under the figure of a great Image, whose head was made of gold, breast of
silver, belly of copper, legs of iron, and feet of earth, and iron,
mistically described.

The head of Gold, signifies the Monarchy of the Assyrians, the breast of
Silver, the Persians, the belly of Brass, the kingdom of the Greeks; the
legs of Iron, the Romans, the feet of iron and earth, the modern estate
of the Monarchy, being much weaker then it was wont to be.

Daniell dreamed that he saw 4. beasts come out of the Ocean, the first a
Lion, the second a Bear, the third a Leopard, and as touching the fourth, he
said it was terrible to behold.

The first of these, figured the kingdom of Assyria, the second, the kingdom
of Persia, the third, the Empire of the Greeks, and the fourth, the Roman
Monarchy; the ten horns are his members or parts, as Siria, Egypt, Asia,
Grecia, Afric, England, Spain, France, Italy, Germany; for the Roman
Monarchy possessed all these Nations.

Between these ten horns, sprang up a little horn, which plucked away three
of the other ten; by which is meant the Mahometicall or Turkish Empire, the
which engendered of small beginning in the Eastern Roman Monarchy, has
now pulled out three horns thereof, Egypt, Asia, and Greece,

This little horn has eyes, which are presumptious against Christ and
Christendom, sparckling forth dreadful blasphemies against the name of GOD.

Of the Turkish Empire.
IN the year of our Lord, 630. and in the 15. year of Heraclius Emperor of
Rome, arose the dreadful change of al mankind, by reason of the doctrine of
Mahomet which then began; this did the Arabians first embrace, who never
obeyed kingdoms or laws lawfully appointed.

Mahomet himself, was borne of base parentage in Arabia, in the year of our
Lord, 591. (in the reign of Mauritius, Emperor of the Romans) his father was
an Arabian, and his mother a Jew, who being brought up with a rich Merchant,
after his masters death married his mistress; and for that he was greatly
desirous to rise in honor and estimation, by the counsel of Sergius an
ancient Monck, and an Arrian, he coined a new religion, derived out of sundry
Sects, mingled with some part of the Jews, some part of the Christians, and
some of the Arrians.

The Prophet Ezechiell and S. John, call the Turks Gog and Magog, Gog
signifies a Tent, and Magog the people without the Tents; for the Tartarians
usually dvvell in Tents, and the Turks are Tartaries, who came out of
Tartarie into Asia, when the Sarazens warred against the Persians, by their
King Hormisda desired in aid. Mahomet is interpreted rage or indignation, and
Turk signifies a soldier, or a vvrastler, and in the Tartarian tongue, one
that is accursed, or a vagabond.

Methodius calls this people red Jews, either because they were cruel and
thirsting after blood, or else, for that Mahomet was borne of Edom in Arabia,
and Edom signifies read; Besides, the same Author vvriteth, that Gog and
Magog were closed in beyond the hill Caucasus, and that a subtle Fox should
make them a passage, which Fox is Mahomet.

When the Sarazens served under Heraclius, against the persians, being denied
their pay, they fled from him, and in their return homewards, they spoiled
many villages and towns about Damascus in Syria; then understanding Mahomet to
be of great power, by reason of his wealth, and the opinion which was held
of his religion; they made choice of him for their Governor, and by the
consent of the Sarazens, Arabians, and a great part of the Egyptians, they so
proclaimed him.

The beginning of his kingdom, was in ^523. years after Christ, who making
his ^eate in Syria, vvrote the Alcoran, a book of all the laws, ceremonies,
and traditions of his religion, with a number of idle tales, and feigned
miracles; he was poisoned by Albunor one of his own disciples, to the in^ent
he might see if his master Mahomet vvoulde rise again the third day after
his death, according to his prophecy; but his body was torn in pieces of
dogs, he reigned ten years.

Ebebuzer or Amiras, that is, a Prince or successor, his son in law,
succeeded him, he took Damascus, making that his princely seat, and after 2.
years siedge spoiled Gaza and Jerusalem, reigning 3. years.

Ahumar succeeded, he subdued all Syria and Egypt, conquering Persia, and
having added Cilicia, Cappadocia, Mesopotamia, and the I Will of Cyprus unto his
conquests, he made Babylon the seat of his Empire; who^ the Sarazens called
the Calipha of Babylon; which signifies the chief Prince of empire and
religion; he reigned 12. years.

Muhauiar took Caesaria and Palestine, overcame Horimasda the son of
Cosroes, he made them keep Mahomets laws, which the Persians observe at this
day; after this the Sarazens possessed Africa, and went forward into Asia,
where they flourished 200* years.

The Turks, as long as the Empire of the Sarazens flourished in Asia, they did
most firmly stick unto them, but after that they began to decrease by their
civil dissension, they encroched upon them and their territories, and by
little and little, wrought themselves at length wholly into the government of
the Empire.

In the year of our Lord, one thousand and fifty one, they elected Zadoc to
be their King, he laid the first foundation of the Turkish empire in Asia.

After 5. discents of them, in the year one thousand, four hundred and eight,
when Godfrey of Bullaine, with other Christan Princes, made their holy
expedition into Palestine, the Christians in Armenia perceiving that the Turks
were divided, and that they had murdered their last Emperor Belch^aior,
suddenly assailed them, and drove them out of Persia, enforcing them to keep
in the lesser Asia.

In the year of our Lord, one thousand three hundred, Ottoman restored their
Empire, by his rare wit, and fortune in martial affairs, he gave names to the
Emperors, and first appointed their king; he conquered Bithinia, and
Cappadocia, and took many places lying upon Mare ponticum, and ruled 28.
years.

Orchanes his son, sacked Prusia, and made ^t the head of his kingdom, he
was slain by ^he Tartarians.

Amurath his son, was the first that came out of Asia into Europe, he took
Callipo^is, Cherronesus, Abydus, Philippolis, Adrianapolis, Seruia, and
Bulgaria, but entering into the upper part of Misia, he was slain in the 23.
year of his Empire.

Baiazeth his brother subdued all Greece, but being overcome by Tamberlaine,
he dyed without renown.

Callepin his son succeeded, he overcame the Emperor Sigismund, and
beginning to spoil the borders of Constantinople, dyed in the flower of his
age, reigning but six years.

Mahomet, after him subdued the greatest part of Slauonia, and Macedonia, and
came as far as the Ionian sea, he removed his seat out of Bythinia to
Adrianopolis, where he dyed.

Amurath the second succeeded him, who won Epirus, Aetolia, Achaia, Beolia,
Attica, and Thessalonica.

Mahomet the second, destroyed Athence, and won Constantinople, Anno 1452. he
brought under his subjection, the Empire Trapezuntiu^, Corinth, the Islands of
Lemnos, Euboiae, Mitilene, and Capha, a City of the Genowaies, he reigned 32.
years.

Baiazeth the second, took from the Venetians Naupactus, Methonia, and
Dirohaim, he spoiled all Dalmatia, and in the end was poisoned.

Zelimus his son, won Archair, and slew the Sultan of Egypt, he brought
Alexandria, Damascus, and all Egypt under his Empire.

Solomon his only son, conquered Belgrad, took Buda, the Kings City in
Hungaria, spoiled Strigonium, and all Hungaria. To him the I Will of Rhods was
yielded, he overthrew the five Churches; when the City Iula was taken, he
besieged Zigethum, and was slain in the assault.

This City his son Zelimus spoiled, in the year 1566. under 12. Emperors,
they subdued unto themselves, by Turkish tyranny, in two hundred threescore
years a great the Persians observe at this day, after this the Sarazens
possessed Africa, and went forward into Asia, where they flourished 200.
years.

Of the Bishops, Archbishops, Patriarchs, and Popes of Rome.
THE year of Peter's coming to Rome, the time of his residency in the Sea, and
his death there, has been so uncertainly reported by Platina, Orosius,
Fasciculus temporum, Eusebius, Vspergensis, Sabellicus, and Nauclerus, for the
first, by S. Hierome, Beda, Fasciculus temporum, Vspergensis, and Platina, for
the second, by Nicephorus, Dionysius, Hierome, Isodorus, Eusebius, and Abdi^s,
for the third, that diverse godly and learned men have been induced to think,
and some constantly to write (as Vlricus Velenus, and Thomas Balaeus, with one
other) that Peter was never at Rome; howbeit, many wise, re^erend, and truly
learned fathers of our church, are of opinion, that he was at Rome, but no
Bishop thereof, and martired under Claudius Nero.

Linus, a Thuscane born, reported to be the successor of Peter, was a man of
pure and godly life, who for preaching the Gospel, suffered martyrdom under
Saturninus the Consul, in the reign of Vespasian, Emperor of Rome.

Anacletus the first, borne at Athence, wa^ of an excellent and fervent spirit,
and of great learning, he planted the Church of God wi^^ daily labor, in whose
defense and belief h^ was put to death by Domitian, which he constantly
endured.

Clement the first, a Roman, for his preaching and good deeds, was a long
time banished by the Emperor, to hew Marble stones, and in the end was cast
into the Sea, with an Anchour about his neck.

Euaristus the first, a Grecian borne, in the time of persecution ceased not to
increase the Church by his diligent preaching, till he was martired under
Traian. An. Dom. 100.

Alexander the first, a Roman, painefully travailed both to preach and
baptize, he suffered great torments till he died under Aurelianus president to
the Emperor. Anno Domini, 121.

Sixtus the first, a Roman, diligently preached the Gospel, and with many
good works and godly deeds beautified the Church, he was vigilant and careful
for his flock, and died for it. Anno, 129.

Telesphorus the first, a Grecian, was a worthy man for learning and godly
life, he bare witness of Christ most faithfully and con^tantly, both by his
words and death, under the Emperor Antoninus. An. 140.

Higinus the first, an Athenian, of a Christian Philosopher, was made a Bishop,
who discharging the duty of a good Pastor, was put to death anno 144. He wrote
in a Cave where he did hide himself in time of persecution, an Epistle
touching God, and the incarnation of the son of God.

Pius, borne in Aquilia, did many godly deeds in the Church, under Antonius
Ve^us, and in the end watered the Church of Christ with his blood in
martyrdom. 159.

Anicetus a Syrian, a faithful and diligent Pastor of the Church of Rome, was
martyred anno 169.

Sother, borne in Campania, like a valiant Soldier of Jesus Christ, served
under his spiritual banner, in the time of the Emperor Commodus, he confirmed
the doctrine which he had preached, with his blood in martyrdom. 177.

Eleutherius, a Grecian, (notwithstanding the storms of persecution were
somewhat calmed in his time, because many of the Roman nobility believed on
Christ) yet he was beheaded 191. in his time, also man^ godly vvriters writ
learned books agayn^^ diverse heresies and heretics, which infected the
Church.

Victor, borne in Africa, was the first, tha^ when the storm of persecution
was calmed usurped authority upon strangers; In the former Bishops, says
Vincentius, the spyri^^ abounded, but in these that follow, the temptation of
flesh and blood prevailed. He exempted his brethren of Asia from the Communion,
because in keeping Easter day, they followed not the use of the church of Rome,
for which Policrates and Iraeneus Bishops of Ephesus, and Lions reproved him;
as then the church was rent in twain by his obstinacy, he died. 203

Zepherinus, a Roman borne, was a man more addicted to the service of God,
then to the care of any worldly affairs, where before the wine in celebrating
the Communion, was ministered in a cup of wood, he first did alter that, and in
sted thereof, brought in Cups or Chalices of glass; in his time were the
Artemonites a sect of vain Philosophical Divines, who as our late Schoolmen,
did corrupt the Scripturs, with Plato, Aristotle, and Theophrastus, turning all
into curious and subtle questions.

Origin taught the holy Scripture at Alex^ndria, in Zepherinus time, but his
books ^ere refused, because he brought in vnprofi^able disputations and
allegories.

Calixtus the first, borne at Rauenna, when ^ersecution began to wax hot
again, was ^pprehended by the commandment of A^^xander Seuerus, and after
that, he was bea^en with cudgels and imprisoned, his body ^as cast out of a
window, and drowned in a ^eepe pit. 226.

Vrbanus the first, a Roman, in the time of Heliogabalus, with his sincerity
of life, and ex^ellency in learning, drew many on all sides ^o the Gospel; he
was often times banished ^he City for the Christian faith, but being ^ecretly
brought in again by the faithful, he ^as martired by Seuerus. 233.

Pontianus, a Roman, in the afore-sayde Emperors reign, when the people
ran ^n multitudes to hear him preach the word, ^y the Princes commandment,
being set ^n by the idolatrous Priests, he was carried from Rome, to the I Will
Sardinia, where he ^as put to death. 239.

Antherosa Grecian, preached constantly and stoutly, under the tirany of
Maximius the Emperor, he first ordained that all the acts of Martyrs should be
recorded, least the remembrance of them should be lost with their life's; he
dyed a Martyr. 243.

Fabian, a Roman, as he was returning home out of the field, and with his
Countr^ men present, to elect a new Bishop, there was a Pidgeon seen standing
on his head, and suddenly he was created Pastor of the Church, which he looked
not for, as Eusebius writes; he suffered martyrdom under Decius, 150. Some
write that he baptized Philippus the first, Emperor, and that he was the
first that acknowledged the Christian faith.

Cornelius, a Roman, was Bishop in the time of Decius, the seventh
persecutour of Rome, under whom he was martyred; he condemned the heresy of
Nouatius.

Lucius, a Roman, driven into Exile by Gallus Hostilianus, the persecutors of
Christianity, was comforted of S. Cyprian by letters; he after his death
returned to Rome, and was put to death by Valerianus commandment. 255.

Stephen, a Roman borne, succeeded him, who in the reign of Galienus, after
he had converted many of the Gentiles to the faith of Christ, was beheaded. 257.

Sixtus, the second, a Grecian, of a Philoso^her, became a Disciple of Christ,
and with many thousands of Martyrs was slain in the ^ersecution of Decius and
Valerius. 267. ^. Lawrance loved this Bishop even to the ^eath, of the which
the one was slain with ^he sword, the other broyled to death upon ^ Gridiron.

In his time anno 260, one Paul terrified with the persecution, got him into
the Wilderness and solitary places, and so became the first Eremite; for that
time, as Eusebius says, many Christians for fear of death denied their faith;
upon this, Monks had their beginning, as Hierome writes, in the life of this
Paul the Eremite.

Dionysius, a Grecian, as appears by the Church of Antioche, 273. did
convince of error Paulus Samosatenus, notwithstanding he could not be there
himself, by reason of his age; he converted to Christianity the daughter of
the Emperor Decius, and Triphonia her mother, with 46. thousand more, and at
the length was martyred with them and many other, at Salarie gate. 277.

Felix, a Roman, being a good man, and of upright conversation, preached the
Gospel, when Aurelianus did persecute the church, under whom he sufferd
martirdom.

Eutichianus, a Thuscane, wholly given to godliness, saved many by his preaching
the Gospel; he buried with his own hands 342. Martirs, and appointed afterward
an order for burying of them, he in the end was a martyr himself. 283.

Caius borne in Dalmatia, and near in blood to Dioclesian the Emperor, was a
most worthy president in the church of God, he made the difference of Clergy
amongst the^ by degrees, so that from one degree to another, they should arise
to the estate of a Bishop; in time of the persecution, he with his brother
Gabinius hid themselves in a Cave, from whence being taken, they were both
slain with the sword.

Marcellinus, a Romain, being terrified with the persecutors tirany under
D^oclesian and Maximinia^, he offered unto the Idols a grain of Frankensence;
but after this deed repenting, reproved Dioclesian to his face, and offering
himself willingly to death for the truth of Christ; he prevailed, receiving
the crown of martyrdom. 303.

Marcellus, a Romain, endeavored to remove Maximianus from persecuting the
Saints, but his heart being hardened, commanded him to be ^eaten with cudgels,
and to be driven out of the City; whereupon he went to the house of Lucina a
widow, and there he kept the congregation secretly, which Maximilianus hearing,
made a stable for Cattle of the same house, and committed the keeping of it to
Marcellus; after this he governed the churches by his epistles, and being thus
daily tormented with stink and noisomnes, he gave up the ghost. 308.

Eusebius, a Grecian, governed the Church in the great storm of persecution
under Maxentius, until he died by martyrdom, as Massaeus writes. 309.

Melchiades, for preaching the truth suffered death, under Maximinianus
Galerius the Emperor. 314.

Syluester the first, for fear of the persecution of Maximinianus, lived
solitarily in the hill Soracte, but it pleased god to lay his hand upon the
persecutor, forcing him to revoke his dedly decrees against the Christians, who
died a miserable death, and in his torments acknowledged Christ Jesus,
repenting his bloody persecuting, the cause of this his woeful end. Siluester
returned to Rome, and was the first romain Bishop that escaped martirdom; he
died a confessor 234. He condemned the heresy of Arrius in the counsel of
Nice.

Constantine, for the love and zeal that he bear to the Church, with other
Christian Princes, did endue the Pastors thereof with many large benefits,
riches, and possessions, who living in wealth and ease, began to advance
themselves in dignity above their former estate, putting rich miters upon
their heads, and taking upon them the name of Archbishops.

At the first, in the Church, devotion bred wealth, but the daughter choked
the mother, and engendered the monster Ambition, who also like the cursed Impe
of the bastard her mother, did at the end devour her Grandmother Religion.

Marcus, a Roman, commanded that the people and the Clergy, should on
Sondayes, after the Gospel were read, sing the Nicean Creed, he builded
Churches, and gave many gifts unto them, and dyed a Confessor. 335.

Julius, the first, a Roman, as Platina writes, appointed certain notaries,
to write the actts of other men, the which office is yet about the Pope; he
caused also Churchyards to be made, and died a Confessor. 351.

Liberius, a Roman, (as Hierome witnesses) for ambition, became an Arrian,
forsook the true faith, and subscribed to Arrius ^rticles, and dyed a
Confessor. 366.

Faelix the second, a Roman, was preferred by the Arrians, who deposed
Liberius, and advanced him, because they hoped he agreed with them in opinion;
but in the second year he was deprived of his seat, and Liberius restored, and
in the year of our Lord 359. he with other spyrituall persons, was slain in a
tumult.

Damasus, a Spaniard, allowed Hieromes translation of the Bible (whose notary
he had been in his youth) he writ the life's and deeds of the Bishops of Rome,
and dyed a Confessor. 384.

Siricius, a Roman, was the first that admitted Monks into orders, for
pretense of single life, who before were never reckoned to be as Clarks, he
mingled the Antiphones with the Psalms, and dyed a Confessor. 399.

Anastasius, a Romayne, appointed that whilst the Gospel was reading, the
people should stand; he dyed a Confessor. 404.

Innocentius, borne in Albania, would have the Sea of Rome to be judged of
none, and died a Confessor. 416.

Sozimus, a Grecian, suppressed the Nouatian heretics in Rome, and dyed a
Confessor. 420.

Boni^acius, a Roman, decreed that Saints euenings should be kept, and dyed a
confessor. 426.

Caelestinus, borne in Campania, sent Germanus into England, Paladius into
Scotland, and Patricke with a certain Segetian into Ireland, to root out the
Pelagian heresy, he dyed a confessor. 435.

Sixtus the third, a Romain, called, the enricher of Churches, appointed a
yearly feast day, in honor of Peter's chains, to be kept at midsommer, and
dyed a confessor. 440.

Leo the first, a Thuscane, decreed that men should worship the Images of the
dead, and allowed the sacrifice of the Mass, he dyed a confessor. 462.

Hilarious, borne in Sardinia, made a law, that every Minister should be put
from his calling, which married either a widow or divorced woman, and not a
maid; he dyed a confessor. 469.

Simplicius, a Tiburtinian, showed that the Church of Rome, was the chief
Church of all, and commanded that none of the Clergy should acknowledge, that
he held any ecclesiastical benefice of a lay man; he dyed a confessor. 484.

Felix the third, a Romain, decreed that the Clergy being accused of any
matter, should have days granted to return their answer, and dyed a
confessor. 494.

Gelasius, an Affrican, burned the books of the Manichees, he made Himnes,
Prefaces, Collects, and Prayers; he severed the Apocrypha from canonical
Scripture, he dyed a confessor. 497.

Anastasius the second, a Roman, communicated with the Eutichians and
Nestorians, he excommunicated the Emperor, and in the year of our lord 499. on
the stool of his easement his bowels issued out of his belly, he died a
confessor, as Volaterranus writes.

Symmachus, a Sardinian, was chosen Bishop, not without great dissension among
the Clergy; Vspergensis says, that at his election, one Laurence was set up
against him, wher-vpon many slaughters both of the people and Clergy were made
in Rome, during the space of three years, but Symmachus prevailed, and dyed a
martyr. 514.

Hormisda, borne in Campania, excommunicated Anastatius the Emperor, because he
said that it was an office due unto the Emperor to command, and not to be at a
Bishops commandment, he died a confessor. 523.

Justinius the Emperor, as Isodorus writes made Hormisda of an Archbishop,
Patriarch of Rome; from the time of Sylueste^ the Roman Prelates were
Archbishops, for the space of 200. years, that is, from the year 320. until
the year 520. at what time they were first made Patriarchs by the Empero^
Justinius.

John the first, a Tuscane; being the worthiest man of all this latter
company, gave a testimony of his pure life, by suffering patiently undeserved
death, at the commandment of Theodoricus King of Italy. 627.

Faelix the fourth, borne in Samia, excommunicated the Patriarch of
Constantinople, misdeemed of heresy, he commanded, that they which lay a
dying, should be anointed with oil, and dyed a Confessor. 530.

Boniface the second, a Roman, severed the Clergy from the Laity, by making
the Quier in the Church, he dyed a Confessor. 532.

John the second, a Roman, called Mercury for his eloquence, or the
Ambassador of Jupiter; died a Confessor. 534.

Agapetus the first, a Roman, was sent by Theodorus King of the Goths, as
his Ambassador, to pacify Iustinianus the Empe^our, for the cruel murder of
Amalasimitha, ^ noble Queen, and an excellent learned woman, whose worthy
virtues the same Emperor reverenced highly, which he obtained, and ordained
procession, dying a Con^essour. 535.

Syluerius, borne in Campania, by the provocation of Vigilius a Deacon, who did
accuse him, that he would betray Rome to the Goths, for the which he was
banished into Pontus, by Theodora the Empress, and Antonina the wife of
Bellizarius, he dyed in his exile being a Confessor. 527.

Vigilius a Roman, the crafty accuser of Syluerius, was by these women
advanced to the Sea, but not keeping promise with the Empress in some matters,
she caused him to be brought to Constantinople and beaten, and banished, he
appointed that service should be said, the Priest standing with his face into
the East, he dyed a Confessor in Cilicia. 554.

Pelagius, a Roman, to please Totylus king of the Goths, made a public
decree, that it was needful to have the authority of the Prince, and consent
of the people in creation of Bishopps, he dyed a Confessor. 566.

About this time Totyla King of the Gothe^ besieged Rome, which being miserably
op^pressed with extreme famine, was compel^led to yield it himself to the
savage people, vn^der which it continued 10. years. Vspergen^

John the third, a Roman, contrary to (...) predecessor, decreed that none
ought to b^ called chief Priest, or universal Bishop, (...) dyed at Rome 577.
In his time the Armenians became Christians.

Benedictus the first, a Roman, was Bishop when the Lombards spoiled Italy,
he dyed for grief, to see so many miseries in the City of Rome. 582.

Pelagius the second, while the City was besieged, contrary to custom was
made Bishop, without the Emperors commandment, and to pacify him, sent one
Gregory a Monk to Constantinople, he died. 590.

Gregory the great, a Roman, of a Monk and a Deacon, was made Bishop, he was
the best of all the chief Roman Patriarks, for good life and doctrine; he
turned his parents houses into monastries, and dedicated the first of them to
Saint Andrew the Apostle, he appointed chaunters for the day and night, he
solemnized the feast of the purification of our blessed Lady with wax candles
(whereof (...) is called Candlemas day, he builded six Monasteries of his own
cost in Sicilia, and ^edicated Agathais Church, he was the first that gave
pardons upon certain days, to ^uch as came to Church.

He gave stipends to three thousand maids, ^ee allowed by decree the first 5.
Counsels, and that the last will and tastament of every man should be
ratified, he sent Augustine a Moncke to reclaim the English Saxons to ^he
church of Rome, he removed the right of the Archbishopricke from London, and
^ranslated it to Canterbury.

In his time, John, Patriarch of Constantinople, by the consent of Mauritius,
would needs be called the universal Bishop, but Gregory would not agree to
it.

He, (though otherwise learned and god^y) burdened the Church and the religion
of God, with more ceremonies then had the Jews; he writ Homilies, and
expounded the most part of the Bible, and professed himself in his writings
Seruus seruorum Dei, servant to Gods servant, showing thereby, how far
he was from ambition; this title his successors continue.

He first commanded Priests to single life, but when he saw the
inconveniences that came thereby, with sorrow and repentance he revoked that.
Caron.

Sabirianus a Thuscane, for the hate he ba^^ to his predecessor, after that he
had published certain slanders against him, commanded that his books should
be burned, thy^ was the last of the Roman Patriarchs, be dyed, an. 606.

Boniface the third, obtained the supremacy of Phocas, an. 607. who murdered
his Lord and Master Mauritius, his wife and children; since which time, they
never ceased to augment their dignity and power. In his decrees he writ, We
will and command, he died, not enjoying his rule one year.

Boniface the fourth, obtained of Phocas the Emperor, that the Church of Rome
called Pantheon, which the heathen had dedicated to their gods, should be
translated to the service of Christ, and called Alhallowes Church.

Theodatus, devised a newfound alliance between the Godfather and the
God-daughter, and between the God-mother, and the god-sonne, calling it
spiritual consanguinitie, and therefore commanded that they should not marry
together; he dyed in the third year of his popedom.

Boniface the 5. appointed holy places and sanctuaries for thieves, murderers,
and lewd persons, he sat in the sea 5. years.

Honorius, borne in Campania, is commended for his diligence and care in
building of Churches, in his time Mahomet began to spread his religion in
Turkey. He died, continuing in his Popedom eleven years.

Zepherinus the 2, was confirmed pope, in the name of Heraclius the Emperor, by
Isacius his Lieuetenant in Italy, who brake into the Church treasury, and took
away the riches thereof; at this time the Zarazens wone from the Romans diverse
kingdoms, by reason of Mahomets power. Zepherinus dyed ann. 636.

John the 4. died, ruling scarce 2. years.

Theodorus the first, a Grecian, builded many Churches in Rome, and golden
shrines for Saints, he forbid that marriage made after a single vow should be
broken, he deprived Pyrrhus bishop of Constantinople for heresy, and dyed,
646.

Martin the 1. commanded Priests to shave their heads, he deposed Paul,
Patriarch of Constantinople, who being bound in chains, was brought to
Constantinople by the Emperor Co^stantinus, where he died miserably; this Pope
dyed, an. 656.

Eugenius the first, was much commended for the government of his life, he
first decreed that Bishops should have prisons for the punishment of their
Priests. 662.

Vitellianus was an excellent Musician, and brought singing and Organs into the
church, he died 669.

Theodatus the second, a Roman, of a Monk was made Pope, he died, 675.

Donus the first, beautified Saint Peter's Church with pillars, and made subject
to Rome, the Church of Rauenna, Theodotus the Archbishop thereof agreeing
thereto, which Church was called Alliocephalis, he dyed, an. 679.

Agatho the first, commanded the Popes decrees should be esteemed for as
canonical and authentical as the vvritings of the Apostles, he died of the
pestilence, an. 684.

Leo the second, was a very learned Monk, and skillful in music, he died in
the end of his tenth month. 685.

Benedictus the second, was the first that took upon him to be called Christ's
Vicar upon earth, he lived in the seat 10. months.

John the fifth, took consecration of three Bishops, Hostia, Portua, and
Veliterne, which custom he appointed to be kept of his successors, he dyed,
687.

Conon a Thracian, being established, fell sick and dyed, 689.

Sergius the first, an Assyrian borne, he added Agnus dei to the Mass, he
died, 701.

John the 6. a German, in the time of famine and war, nourished a great
number of poor men with relief, (being indeed the worthiest of al Popes for
such almsdeeds) and redeemed diverse prisoners and captives from bondage, he
was only elected Pope, because of Sergius adultery, and not confirmed, Sergius
being afterward restored again, he therefore is not reckoned among the Popes.

John the seventh a Grecian, beautified the Churches, and dyed, 707.

Sozimus the second, was so sore sick of the Gowte, that he dyed in 20. days;
Naucletus writes that he was poisoned by Dioscorus, who contended with him.

Constantine the first, was the first that ever offered his Sovereign his
foot to kiss, he cursed the Emperor Philippus, and all his coin, and
moved Anastasius to depose him, and put out his eyes. When Kimredus and Offa,
two Kings of the English Saxons for their pleasures came a voyage to Rome,
being there, this pope made them forsake their kingdoms, and become Monks, he
dyed, ann. 715.

Gregory the second, moved the subjects of the Emperor Leo to rebellion,
because their Images were taken away, he caused Spain, Luguria, and Italy, to
revolt from him, and in the end, he excommunicated and deposed him; thus the
Empire of the East, lost their title in Italy. Gregory died, 731.

Gregory the 3. writ to Boniface an Englishman, that the priests ought to have
shaven crowns, to pray for the dead, and to offer sacrifice for them; he dyed,
742.

Zacharias was the first that gave golden Coapes decked with pearls and
stones to Churches, he commanded that Gossips in no wise should marry
together, he was the first that attempted to release subjects of their
allegiance; for Pipinus, son of the bastard Charles Martell, obtained of this
pope, that he would depose Childericus from the crown of France, and give it
him and his heirs. He forced him to become a Monk, he changed Lachis king of
Lombardie, Carolorianus and others, from their royal estate, and made them
become Monks, he dyed, ^vhen he had reigned 10. years, an. 752.

One Stephen a Deacon was chosen to ^ucceed him, who died of the falling
sickness.

Stephen the second, craved of Pipin to re^enge his quarrel against
Aristulphus king of Lombardie, for demanding subsidy of him and his prelates,
which he did, and de^iuered the dominion of Rauenna unto him, with all the
Towns thereof, even to the gulf of Venice.

He was the first pope that was carried a ^roade upon men's shoulders, which
his successors use at this day; he dyed, 757.

Paul the first, the brother of Stephen, restored the Images which Constantine
had abrogated, but Constantine defied his curses, and withstood Images to his
death, this pope dyed, 767.

After this, Charles the great began to reign, who builded 24. Manasteries.

Constantine the second a lay man, by strong hand was made pope, by means of
his brother Desiderius, king of Lombardy, and Totho duke of Nepetia, but
because he had not taken ecclesiastical orders, one Philip was chosen, but
being weak in power, he was forced to depose himself. Constantine ruled in
the sea one year pontifically; in the end, a counsel of Italian and French
Bishops deposed him, and put him into an Abbey, as a perpetual prison, having
before put out his eyes, ann. 708. Whose brother, under pretense of praying,
coming to Rome, rewarded the Pope with the like punishment.

Stephen the third, disanulled all that Constantine had done, he brought to
his subjection the Church of Millaine, which ever before had been free. He
went once (that he might be called a follower of Christ) barefooted in
Procession, and dyed an. 772.

Hadrian the first, by the aid of Charles the Emperor, delivered the sea of
Rome from the perrill of all other Princes; he was the first that with his
leaden Bull, did honor their decrees, dispensations, and privileges.

Lodouicus Pius, the son of Carolus Magnus, confirmed his Father gift, adding
to the Popes possessions Venice, and sundry other lands; he made Hadrian Prince
of Rome and Italy, and ratified the Popes Empire; this Pope dyed, ann. 799.

Leo the third, obtained of Charles the Emperor, that the Romans by an oath
might become subject to his government, which the Emperor granted;
whereupon, the Pope was so hated, that as he was going on Procession, diverse
fell upon him, and beat him from his horse, and stripping him out of his
pontifical roabes, vvhypped him with ^odds.

He made Charles Emperor upon condition, that he should swear perpetual
homage and fealty to the Church of Rome. This Leo dyed, ann. 816.

Stephen the fourth, considering that the prerogative which was given to
Charles and his successors, might be a brideling to the sea of Rome, said;
that it was lawful for them to choose Popes without the Emperors authority,
but not to consecrate him without the presence either of him, or his
Ambassadors, he died, ruling but 8. months.

Paschal a Monck was chosen with the consent of the Emperor, and Lodouicus
Pius yielded up to him all his authority in the election of the Popes; this
Pope dyed, anno. 824.

Eugenius the second, by his courteous behavior and eloquence, got the Popedom
from Zizimus, who had it granted him, he reigned 4. years, and as some write,
his eyes were pulled out by the Romans, others, by the Priests that hated him.

Valentine the first, being a Decon, was made pope, he was a man of very
quick wit, able to persuade, and diswade; some write that there was in him such
excellent hope, that he would have reigned in better order then the rest; he
dyed the fourth day of his reign, and as it is supposed, he was poisoned by
some of the clergy.

Gregory the fourth, refused to take the popedom before he were confirmed by
the Emperor Jews and that he had restored them their right again; by his
means he drove the Moors out of Italy, he procured tenths to be given to
churches, and visited solemn erection of Sepulchers, he dyed, ann. 843.

Sergius the second, was the first pope that renounced his christian name given
in Baptism, and changed it, being called before, Swines snowt, and decreed
that popes should change their names.

Leo the fourth, at Hostia gate overcame the Sarazens when they had made a road
into Italy; he first began (contrary to the counsel at Aquisgrane) to deck
the popes Cross with precious stones, and commanded it to be carried before
him, he died, 854.

In his time, Ethelwoldus, being first a Monk of single life, having a
dispensation from the pope, left his calling, and became King of England,
making it tributary to the ^ea of Rome.

John the 8. borne at Mentz, being a woman was made Pope, her name was
altered, and she was called John English; she sat in the pontifical seat at
Rome, 2. years and 6. months, her name at the first was Gilberta; who to
enjoy the company of a Monk who^ she loved, travailed with him in man's
apparel to Athence, where she profited in all the Sciences; then she came to
Rome, still disguised, where for her learning she was much admired, and so made
pope; but as some write, she was got with child by a Cardinal, and going on
procession to Lateran church, she was by the way delivered of a child, and
dyed of the travail in the same place.

Benedict the 3. being first tried upon the Posphirie stool, was made Pope,
and dyed 859.

Nicholas the first, put down John, Archbishop of Rauenna, for mayntayning
the ancient liberty of his bishopric, and brought that church into perpetual
bondage; he decreed that christian Magistrates should have no authority over a
Prelate; Because, said he, the Pope is called God; he first bound the Clergy
to single life; and dyed, 867.

Hadrian the second, was by the people and the Clergy made Pope before the
Emperors Ambassadors came; before this Pope dyed, in the year 873. it rained
blood 3. days at Brixia, and all the kingdom of France was miserably
troubled with Locusts. Alphredus king of England took his crown of the Pope,
and was anointed, which never any King of England did before, for which he
was called the Popes adopted son.

John the 9. was excellently learned both in Greek and Latin, he crowned 3.
Emperors, Carolus Caluus, Carolus Balbus, and Carolus Crassus; he drove the
Sarazens out of Italy and Sicilie, and died, 883.

At this time the Empire was translated from the Frenchmen to the Germans, by
Carolus Crassus.

Martin the second, a Frenchman, the son of a coniuring priest, by craft and
ill Arts got the Popedom, at his election the Emperors authority was not
looked for, nor demanded to his admission, he reigned about a year and
certain months, and died, an. 884.

Hadrian the third, made a decree that the Emperors authority should no more
take ^lace in creating of popes, but that the voice of the Clergy and people of
Rome should ^hoose them. He died suddenly. 888.

Stephen the 5, decreed that all the Canons of the Church of Rome, ought of
necessity ^o be kept, and died, 892.

Formosus the first, being bishop of Portua, was chosen Pope, he reigned 6.
years, his body and bones was taken up by Sergius the 3. the 9. pope after him,
and thrown into the river Tiber; after him, within 9. years there were eleven
popes.

Boniface the 6. lived as pope but 25. days, as Anselmus writes, to be
remembered for nothing, but his quiet election, and happy in nothing, but in
reigning so short a time.

Stephen the sixth, disanulled Formosus decrees, and cancelled his acts, he
caused his carcass to be taken up, and put all the pontifical rokes upon it,
and plucked them off again, and then put lay men's apparel upon him, and cut
off the two fingers of his right hand, with which he used to hold the
Sacrament, and throwing them into Tiber, he commanded to bury his body again,
but not among spiritual but lay men's bodies, he died after he had reigned one
year only.

Romanus the first, allowed the decrees of Formosus, and abrogated Stephens,
he ruled but 3. months, and dyed, 898.

Theodorus the 2. was an vpholder and maintained of Formosus quarrel, and dyed
the 20. day of his Popeship. 899.

John the 10. sommoned a convocation of 74. Bishops at Rauenna, and restored
all the decrees of Formosus, openly co^demning the acts of Stephen, he died,
901.

Benedict the 4. did nothing worthy of report, and dyed ann. 904.

Leo the first, being new made Pope, was violently cast into prison by one
Christopher, who sought to make himself Pope, being his priest and Chapline.
He reigned but 40. days, and died through conceit of his ingratitude, upon
whom he had heaped so many benefits. 904.

Christopher the 1. was thrust out by one Sergius in the 7. month of his
reign, and as Platina says, compelled to be a Monk, but afterward, he was
pulled out of the Monastery by the same Sergius, and cast into prison, where
he dyed.

Sergius the 3. when he was but a Deacon attempted the popedom, and was
chosen with Formosus, but being weak, fled into France, and espying his
opportunity, by the aid of Charles Simplex, K. of France, and Adelbert,
Marquess of Thuscia, he returned secretly to Rome, and deposed Christopher
his revenge upon Formosus. Read before in Formosus reign. he died 913.

Anastasius the 3. did nothing good nor evil in his time, when he was Pope the
body of Formosus was found by certain Fishers in the river Tiber, and so
taken up and buried in S. Peter's Palace. Anastasius died, 915

Laudo the first, his life as Platina says, was so obscure, that some do not
reckon him among the Popes, especially Vincentius. He begot Pope John the 11.
in detestable adultery. Petrus Premonstratensis.

John the eleueth was made Pope, by the means of Theodola a Curtezane, for
the love she bare to him, he overcame the Sarazens that wasted Calabria,
Apulia, and Italy. He was smothered by Guido Marquess of Thusca his
soldiers, which Guido, married the daughter of Theodora, that she might
advance her base son by Sergius the third, who upon this Popes death, was
elected, but for that the agreement of the people and the Clergy was not
certain, he was deposed the same day.

Leo the sixth, established peace in Italy, and after he had reigned 7. months,
he was poisoned by Marozia.

Stephen the seventh, lived in peace two years, and as Crantius writes, he
was poisoned.

John the 12. reigned 5. years, while his mother Marozia ruled as well the
estate temporal, as spiritual in Rome.

Leo the 7. lived quietly, and did nothing worthy of remembrance, he dyed,
Anno, 941.

Stephen the 8. a German borne, was greatly vexed with civil seditions
amongst the Romans, he died, anno. 944.

Martin the third, repaired the Churches, and was very beneficial to the
poor, and diligent in reforming of outward manners, he dyed, ann. 947.

Agapetus the second, caused Otho the first to wage war against Berengarius
a Marquess of Italy, promising him therefore the kingdom of the Romans, as
Sabellicus writes, he died, an. 954.

John the 13. was of so loose and intemperately life, that the Emperor, by the
consent of the Prelates, deposed him, and set up Leo the 8. but when the
Emperor was gone, those harlots that were John's companions, promised the
Nobles of Rome the treasures of the Church to depose Leo, and place John
again, which they did.

He decreed, that the Emperor should ever be crowned at Rome by the Pope; but
as he was solacing himself without Rome a certain night, with the wife of
one (that scorned to be called a well contented man, id est, a Cuckold;) he was
killed forthwith in the 10. year of his Popedom; Of him came the proverb, as
merry as Pope John.

Leo the 8. who fled to the Emperor, when he was deposed, after the death of
John was restored again; he gave to Otho authority absolute to elect the pope,
as once Charles the great did, after a year and 3. months, he died.

John the 14. was quietly chosen, he allured the kingdom of Poland to accept
him as supreme head of all Churches; in this time they began to give proper
names to bells, and he called the great bell of Leteran, after his own name,
and dyed anno 973.

Benedictus the 6. was imprisoned in Castle Angelo, by Cynthius, a man of great
power, and there he was strangled, or as some say poisoned; in his time
began the name of Cardinals to be used, as Carrion reports.

Donus the second, governed indifferently, deserving neither great praise nor
dispraise for a year and six months; he dyed anno 975.

Benedictus the fifth, was deposed by Otho, that he might restore Leo; he dyed
in exile, anno 964.

Boniface the seventh, doubting his safety at Rome, fled to Constantinople,
and in his absence, the Romans made one John the 15. Pope, but at his
return, he took John, thrust out his eyes, put him in prison, and pined him
to death, but shortly after he dyed of the falling sickness, and after his death
his body was dispightfully used.

John the 15. was Pope eight months, in the absence of Boniface.

John the 16, as soon as he was Pope, began to bear deadly hatred against the
Clergy, and they likewise abhorred him, because he neglected the dignity of the
Roman sea, and bestowed the riches upon his kindred and harlots, which fault
Platina and Stella say, has continued among the Clergy unto our time; he dyed
the eight year of his reign.

John the 17. was very well learned, and published diverse books, he was
likewise expert in warlike affairs; in his time Crescentius the Consul, went
about to make himself King of Rome, wherefore he departed into Hetruria; but
Crescentius fearing that he went for the Emperor, sent for him to return,
which he did, and was received with all humility by Crescentius, who falling
down before him, kissed his feet, and craved pardon; This John dyed anno 995.

Gregory the fifth, being the Emperors Cosen, was by his authority made Pope,
who^ Crescentius the Consul with the people deposed, and established John the
18. Bishop of of Placentia. Gregory complained to the Emperor, who overcame
Crescentius and killed him, and caused John's eyes to be put out, whereof he
dyed; Gregory dyed the 3. year of his Popedom.

John the 18. was very learned and rich, but proud and covetous, which was his
overthrow; he dyed as before.

Syluester the second, a Frenchman, addicted wholly to deuilish arts, be took
himself to the Author thereof both body and soul, who told him that he should
not dye, until he said Mass in Jerusalem, wherefore he persuaded himself, of
long life, as minding not to come there; but saying Mass in the Palace of the
holy Cross, which was called Jerusalem, in a terrible shiuering and quaking,
he dyed miserably anno 1003.

John the 19. by those means that Syluester used, came to be Pope, who after
he had reigned five months, was poisoned by his own friends.

John the 20. likewise by Magic got to be Pope, and was altogether given to
idleness, (as Platina says) he dyed in the 4. year o^ his reign.

Sergius the fourth, was a pleasant, merry, and familiar companion; in his time
was great pestilence and famine in Italy, and in Loraine a fountain turned
into blood; he dyed anno 1012.

Benedictus, the eight, by the Magical charms of his Nephew Theophilactus,
who was Syluesters Scholar, obtained the Popedom, and was therein defended by
Henry Bauarius, because he had bestowed on him the crown imperial, but after
his death, the Cardinals deposed him, and set up another, but he with money
compounded, and was restored again; he dyed anno 1025.

John the 21. brother of the former Benedict, being a lay man, was made Pope by
the coniuring of Theophilactus, he so continued 11. years.

Benedict the ninth, who before was Theophilact, as he advanced his uncles by
his Magic Arts, so now he brought to pass by them to succeed in their
dignities; he after the death of Conradus, sought to disinherite his son
Henry the 3. of the Empire, and to plant in his sted Peter King of Hungary, to
whom he sent the crown of the Empire, with this verse, Petra dedit Romam
Petro, tibi Papa coronam.

Henry overcame Peter, and took him prisoner, and set forward to Rome, which
the Pope hearing of, sold his Popeship to John Gratian, after called Gregory
the 6. in the mean time the Romans deposed Benedict, and placed in his sted
John Bishop of Saba.

Syluester the third, King of Saba, enjoyed the room but 49. days, and was by
the Emperor driven out, and constrained to return to his Bishopric.

Gregory the 6, learned the Magical Sciences of Syluester the 2. in the
seventh year of the Emperor Henry the third, Benedict, Syluester, and
Gregory, made themselves 3. several seats in Rome, to whom John Gra^ian came,
and persuaded them every one to take a piece of money and give over their
titles, which they did.

For this cause, the Romans created him Pope, called Clement the second;
which the Emperor hearing of, came to Rome, and condemned the three former
Popes, and allowed of Gratianus.

He was poisoned the ninth month after his creation.

Damasus the second, obtained the Sea by force, without the Emperors
commandment, but the 30. day after he was poisoned.

Leo the 9, Bishop of Toledo, was betrayed to the Normaines, by Hildebrand and
Theophilact, who hardly escaping their rage, at his return at Rome was
poisoned by Brazutus, the fifth year of his Popedom.

Victor the second, a German, when he had reigned two years, was likewise
poisoned of Brazutus.

Stephen the ninth, the Duke of Lorains brother, caused the Church of Rome
(which for 200. years had defied the suprenacy of Rome) to become subject unto
it; he in a counsel at Florence, commanded many things against Dualities,
Pluralities, and Totquots, but he was poisoned by Brazutus, at Hildebrands
request.

Benedict the tenth, was made Pope contrary to the oath, which the Clergy made
to Hildebrand, who deposing Benedict, set up Gerhard Bishop of Florence, naming
him Nicholas the second. Benedict lived an outlaw after he had been Pope 9.
months.

Nicholas the second, was by the means of Hildebrand poisoned of Brazutus; he
first ordained that Cardinals should choose the Pope, he condemned Berengarius,
and compelled him to revoke what he taught of the sacrament.

Alexander the second, was made Pope by Hildebrands means, against the
Emperors mind, against whom the Lombards set up by the Emperors consent, one
Cadolus who came to Rome, but with his great army was put to flight; the
Emperor sent the Archbishop of Coleine with his authority to debate the
matter, but Hildebrand withstoode it; in the end the Pope of his own voluntary
said openly, that he would no longer continue in the Sea, without the
Emperors good will.

Hildebrand upon this, with a troop of armed Soldiers took the Pope, and
beat him, because he had so protested; and casting him into prison, allowed him
but 5. shillings a day, retaining all the rest of the revenues to himself.
Alexander in this misery dyed, and the same hour Hildebrand was installed
Pope by his Soldiers, without consent o^ the people or Clergy.

Gregory the 7. first called Hildebrand (as his companion Brazutus and Beuno
writes) poisoned six or seven popes before he came to the place, he
excommunicated the Emperor Henry the 4. without lawful accusation, canonical
citation, or judicial order, and caused his peers to revolt from him, giving
his crown to Rodolphus.

The Emperor with his wife and his son in the depth of vvinter, waited 3.
days and three nights at the popes gates, fasting from morning to night,
humbly suing for pardon upon his knees, but the pope would neither pardon nor
absolve him, but upon hard conditions; all which the Emperor promised to
perform by his hand and seal, yet was no^ restored.

This pope commanded the Saturday to be fasted, and took away the crown from
the King of Poland, but Henry the Emperor anno Domini 1083. deprived him of
his place, and placed in his sted Clement the third. Hildebrand forsaken of
all, fled to Salerne, where he ended his life in great misery. 1086.

Victor the third, defended Gregory's acts against the Emperor, and Clement,
erected by him; he was poisoned (as Harmanus, Carsulanus, and
Praemonstratensis writes) by his Deacon, who at Masse-time put the poison into
the Chalice.

Urban the second, was made pope by Matilda, and the Norman Lords in Apulia, in
despite of the Emperor; he excommunicated Clement the third, established by
the Emperor, and the Emperor himself, on the other side, Clement
excommunicated him as an usurper.

Urban, first caused all that should take order, to swear with this clause, So
God help me and the holy Evangelist; He dyed anno 1099. the same year dyed
also Clement the third, who in his time saw the death of three popes.

Paschall the second, an Italian, would not take the place upon him, until the
people had cried three times, Saint Peter chooses thee worthy man Raynard,
for so was he called before; he did provoke and arm Henry the fifth to
rebel against the Emperor his father; he dyed. 1118.

Gelasius the 2. chosen without the Emperors consent, was deposed, and in his
sted was set up Gregory the 8. who dyed in exile.

Calixtus the second, of the royal bloods of England and France, continued
his predicessours excommunication against the Emperor, with whom he took
peace. Gregory the 8. whom he had made Pope yet living; the Emperor yielded up
his right to the Pope, and was absolved; he took Gregory and put him into a
monastry, he dyed of a fever. 1125.

Honorius the second, of base birth, for his learning was made Pope; he by his
Cardinal condemned all the English Clergy of adultry which had wyfes, and was
taken him self in one night in the same fault; Honorius dyed anno 1130.

Innocentius the second, sought to suppress Roger Duke of Sicilia, for saying
that he was King of Italy, whom the Pope in a battle overcame, but the Duke
his son took the Pope and his Cardinals, in this time the Romans created
Leo his son Pope, and called him Anacletus; By the aids of Phillip King of
France, and Lotharius of Germany, he overthrew Anacletus with Duke Roger; for
which he crowned Lotharius Emperor.

He gave to Reginald his chiefest Captain, the Dukdom of Apulia, which was the
inheritance of Roger; but after Reginalds death, Roger claimed his right, and
being withstood, he took the pope, who for his ransom made him King of both
Sicills, and so since that time the kingdom of Sicill is called S. Peter's
patrimony; he dyed anno 1143.

Celestine the second, a Thuscane, dyed the sixth month of his Popeship.

Lucius the second, disanulled the office of Patricianship in Rome, which the
Romans being weary of the Popes yoke, had made in the time of Innocentius,
because the Pops took upon them all sway within the Country and abroad, about
which, he was by the Citizens slain in a tumult 1145. having not reigned a
year.

Eugenius the third, for his learning was had in great reverence, yet seeking
to suppress the Patrician, he was driven from Tiburie into France, and
returning to Rome dyed. 1152.

Anastasius the fourth, of a Cardinal becam pope, he died in the second year
of his popedom.

Hadrian the fourth, an Englishman, before called Nicholas Breakspeare,
suffered the Emperor Frederick the 1. to hold his stirop, and was angry with
him for mistaking it; he dyed 1159. being choked with a fly as he drank
water; he made King Henry the second of England, Lord of Ireland.

Alexander the third, was chosen pope, but not by all parties, and therefore the
Emperor appointed Octauius, whom he called Victor the fourth, after whose death
three Popes succeeded in order, Paschalis, Calixtus, and Innocentius, against
Alexander; he trod upon the Emperors neck, who sued being excommunicated to
be vbsolued; and dyed. 1181.

Lucius the third, a Thuscane, borne of an honorable house, enjoyed the
popedom with much trouble; he died at Verona, anno 1185.

Vrbanus the third, for his seditious and troublesome dealing, was called
Turbanus; he dyed anno 1188.

Gregory the eight, was careful for the recovery of the Holy land, who going
to stirrre up the Pisans and Genowais in this matter, he was poisoned when he
had reigned two months.

Clement the third, after the death of William King of Sicill, who had no
heir, claymed it to be tributary to the Church of Rome, but the people chose
Tra^cred, bastard to King William, who withstoode the pope and his forces; he
dyed. 1191.

Celestine the third, crowned Henry the sixth Emperor, and put the crown upon
his head with his foot, whilst he stooped, and then spurned it off, saying, I
have power to make and unmake Emperors at my pleasure; he dyed. 1198.

Innocentius the third, enraged that Phillip was made Emperor against his
will, said, Either shall the Pope spoil Phillip of his crown and Empire, or
else shall Phillippe take from the Pope his Apostolical dignity; He stirred
up Otho a Duke against him, and by another Otho he was slain; who was
afterward made Emperor by the Pope.

He excommunicated Otho, and spoiled him of al his estate, creating in his
place Frederick the second; he also excommunicated and cursed king John of
England, but by submission he received his crown of Pandolphus the Popes
Legate; he dyed. 1216.

Honorius the third, granted Archbishops power to give pardons, faculties,
dispensations, dualities, pluralities, within their Diocese, being sick of
the spiritual dropsy, he drank up the treasures gf the Clergy, and had two
Prebends, of every cathedral Church in England, one of the Bishops stipend,
and the other from the Charter, as Matheus Parisius writes; in his time it
rayned blood for the space of three days in Rome, he dyed. 1227.

Gregory the ninth, maintained the quarrel of Honorius, against the Emperor
whom he excommunicated and cursed three times, as Abbas Vspergensis, writes;
whilst the Emperor was warring in the Holy land, he took Apulia into his
possession; he made the division in Italy, between the Guelphs and Gibelines;
he died for thought that the Emperors power prevailed against him. 1241.

Caelestine the fourth, an aged man, purposed to pursue the quarrel against
Frederick, but that he was poisoned the 18. day of his reign.

Innocentius the fourth, deposed Frederick from the Empire, and cursed his
son Conradus; in his time by a counsel held at Lions, it was decreed that
the Cardinals should ride on their trapped Iennets through the streets, and
wear red hats, and crimson robes, to signify, says Parisius, that they are
ready to spend their blood for the catholic faith, (but as Platina writes)
for the honor of their estate.

Robert Grosted Bishop of Lincoln, detested and defied both in preaching and
writing this popes covetousness, pride, and tirany, nor would admit an unlearned
youth to a canoniship of Lincoln, but rebuked the pope for it in a letter.

Cestensis in his seventh book, writes, that when this Bishop of Lincoln
dyed, a voice was heard in the popes Court, saying, Veni miser in iudicium Dei;
Come thou wretch to be judged of God; and that the pope was found dead in his
bed the next day, and a blew stroke upon his body, as though he had been beaten
with a staff, anno 1253, he being at Naples, and gaping for the kingdom of
Sicill.

Alexander, the fourth, persecuted the King of Sicill, and in his time anno
1258. Richard Earl of Cornwall, son to King John of England, was chosen King
of Almaine for his great treasure, and the pope procured that he was chosen
Emperor, but he did that closely, because he had likewise for the same matter
taken a bribe of Alphonsus King of Spain, wher-vpon a Poet made this verse;
Nummus ait pro me, nubet Cornubia Romae. Thus money says, for love of me,
Cornwall with Rome shall linked be.
This Pope dyed anno Domini. 1262.

Urban the fourth, before Patriarch of Jerusalem, as soon as he was pope
commanded Soldiers out of France, to subdue Manfred the enemy of their
Church; while this pope was from Rome at Pruse, the Romans coveting their old
liberties, made a new kind of officers, calling them Branderesies, who had
power of life, and death in their hands.

Mascaeus says, that a blazing star appeared three nights before the death
of Urban, and ceased the same night he dyed. 1264.

Clement the fourth, before he came to be Pope, was a married man, and had three
children by his wife; he sent for Charles Earl of Aniow, to bring an Army
into Italy, where he slew Manfred, and was made King of Sicill and Jerusalem,
upon condition that he should pay yearly to the pope forty thousand crowns;
he dyed at Viterbium, 1270. and the seat was void two years.

Gregory the 10, of the house of Millaine, made peace between the Ven^tiuns
and Genevvayes he excommunicated the Florentines.

After the Empire had been void a long time, he made Rodolphus Earl of
Haspurg Emperor, because he should maintain civil dissension; and after that
Alphonsus king of Spain had bestovved huge sums of money in hope to be
Emperor, (especially the Duke of Cornwall being dead) the Pope appeased him
with words enough, but no recompense in money toward his charges.

He died at Arelium in the fifth year of his popeship, and is there buried,
who never came to Rome, nor saw it. Parisius.

Innocentius the 5. dyed the same year that Gregory did, reigning but 6. months.

Hadrian the 5. died at Viterbiu^ ere he was consecrated Pope, 40. days after
his election.

John the 22. a Physician by profession, succored with money and
ecclesiastical lyuings, diverse young men that were toward in learning, and
especially the poorest. He prophesied by the course of stars, that he
should live long, but whilst he was vainly vaunting thereof, the Chamber
wherein he was, fell down suddenly; Valerius calls the place which fell
down, Gamesters hall, and Stella the Popes precious Chamber, for the
gorgiousnes thereof, he reigned 8. months.

Nicholas the 3. by his falshoode, brought Flaunders, Bononia, and the royalty
of Rauenna, (which long time belonged to the Emperor) under his own power,
he dyed suddenly of an Apoplexy, without speaking any word. ann. 1281.

Martin the 4. bestowed great privileges upon the begging Friars; and as he
was taking his accustomed recreation, with his Cardinals, (as Carsulanus
writes) a certain secret disease came upon him, whereof he dyed, an. 1285.

This Pope, in the first year of his reign, received into his familiarity,
the Concubine of his predecessor Nicholas; but to avoid the like chance that
his child had by her, (if he should have any) which was borne with hair, and
claws like a beast, he commanded all Bears which were painted in his
Palace, by a pope that was of Vrsinus house, to be blotted out, to avoid in
his concubine the sight thereof, which he thought wrough^ great effect in
conception.

Honorius the 4. decreed, that the Carmelites putting of their rich robes,
should wear white weeds, and that they should be called our Ladies brethren,
he dyed. 1288.

Nicholas the 4. loved all men alike, and thought that he ought no more duty
to his kindred then to other; who seeing Rome in his time sore turmoiled with
civil dissentions, died with grief. 1291.

Caelestine the 5. after the seat had been above 2. years void, got the place,
at the first time he sat in the Consistory, he went about exactly to reform
the church of Rome, that the Clergy might be example to other, he thereby
purchased great hatred. Wherefore he resigned his Popeshyp, and determined to
live an Ermite, as Massaeus vvriteth, but he was imprisoned by Boniface, and
dyed 1292. Of this Pope sprang a sect of Monks called Caelestines.

Boniface the 8. raised great vvarres in Italy, and excommunicated the French
King; giving the title of the kingdom to the Emperor, that by this means,
(as Carrion writes) the Germans and Frenchmen might ^all to dissension; he
was taken by them who fled for fear of him, and cast in prison, where he dyed,
1304. He entered as a Fox, he ^aigned as a Lion, and dyed like a dog.

He was the first that devised the Jubilee, according to the Jews tradition.

Benedict the 11. the son of a shepherd, of an excellent wit, and very
eloquent, applied himself to assuage all the civil broils in Italy. When
he was first made Pope, his mother came to see him, being aparrelled by the
Senate in seemly order, but he did dysdaine to call her mother, until she
had put on her homely apparel again; Then, quoth he, I know this Matron, for
she is my mother. This reports Leander Albertus.

After he had appeased those braules which his predecessors had procured, he
dyed, and as some say, poisoned by a fig which was given him, ann. 1305. Of
him was written these verses.

Aut rem peruerte, maledic, malefac, maledicte.
A re nomen habe Benedic, benefacte, Benedicte,
Clement the fifth, translated the Court of Rome to Auinia in France, an. 1505.
and there it continued 70. years, to the great damage of the Romans. At his
coronation* was Phillip King of France, and his brother Charles, and John
Duke of Britain, where Duke John, and twelve more, by a wall tha^ was
overthrown by the prease of people* were slain, the king was somewhat hurt,
and the Pope being thrust besides his horse, los^ a Carbuncle stone out of his
Miter, valued at 6000. florences.

After diverse decrees of superstition, he died of the bloody flixe at Rocca
Maura, a Tent upon Rhodanus, ann. 1314. the seat was void 3. years.

He caused Frances Dandalus, a noble man of Venice (who came to sue for favor
for the Venetians) to be bound with a chain about the neck, and like a dog to
live under his table, feeding upon what fell from his trencher, ere he could
assuage his fury. Sabel.

John the 23. a Frenchman was chosen, to him Charles the fair (as Sleidan
vvriteth) first of all permitted to levy tenths upon the Ecclesiastical
revenues, and that they should divide the booty between them.

He maintained (and was therewith charged in the Counsel of Constance) that
the soul of man dies together with the body; which he never purged himself
of, he dyed in the 90. year of his age. 1335.

Benedict the 12. renewed the curses of pope John against the Emperor
Lodouicke, yet in the end he absolved him, notwithstanding that the Kings of
France and Naples willed him to the contrary, and therefore they called
Benedict the defender of an Heretic.

Clement the sixth, excommunicated all the Princes, Lords, and Bishops, that
consented to the doings of Jews, (as Naucler vvryteth) to deface the Empire,
he created Vicounts, and made them Viccars thereof, and the Emperor on the
othreside, appointed other Viccars for the Church.

This Emperor, was by the Popes procurement poisoned, and his son Charles
who succeeded him, morgaged to the Electors, the common revenues of the
Empire, which they enjoy to this day; for they compelled Charles to take an
oath, that these pledges should never be reclaymed, whereby at length, the
Empire thus decayed, the Turk invaded the Church of Christ, and made great
spoil thereof.

This Pope, while his servant went to dynner, leaving only his
chamberlain with him, fell down suddenly, and dyed of an impostume, ann. 1352.

Innocent the 6. Doctor of both laws, and of an Advocate made Bishop of
Claramont, and of the Cardinal of Hostia and Penitentiarie to the Pope, was
made Pope himself, who while he was preparing an Army against the Turks,
he dyed for grief that the Romans were at civil dissension, ann. 1362.

This pope, (according to most vvriters) was a very niggard, but for
maintenance of vvarres very prodigal.

Urban the 5. was made Pope at Auerino, to him Briget a woman of Swelande
came, when he was at Rome, and by reason of a vow which she had made, she
desired that there might be religious persons both men and women, of the
order of S. Briget. He was poisoned, ann. 1371.

In his time the order of Jesuits and Scopetines first began, as Johannes
Palionedorus vvriteth.

Gregory the 11. was made Cardinal at 18. years of age, by his uncle
Clement, and was very learned; he excommunicated the Florentines, and demanded
tenths throughout the Empire; he dyed of extreme pain in the bladder, 1378.
he removed the court from France to Rome again.

Vrbanus the 6. was a poor man, and very obscure, Jane, Queen of Sicill,
yielded her kingdom at his commandment, and Otho Duke of Brunsmier and
Prince of Tarentum, offered him the like, which he unkindly requited, for by
his means, Otho was murdered, and Jane imprisoned, where she was strangled
to death by one Duke Charles, who violently got the kingdom of Sicill.

This Pope, as Stella says, was a crafty man, and one that would seek to
revenge any injury do one unto him, he dyed in Rome, an. 1390. poisoned as some
think, after he had misgouerned the popedom 10. years, none being sorry
for his death. He dead, his nephew Fraunces was thrust from all his living,
and despised of all men, according to the saying, cu^ moritur praesus, cognatio
tota fit exul. It is thought, that in his time one Bertholdus Swart, an
Alchumist and a Monk, in the North part of Germany, first devised and
contrived Gunnes, to the hurt of many a brave soldier.

Clement the 7. a Frenchman, was chosen by diverse Cardinals, who fled from
Urban in the third month of his election, fearing his cruelty. He was
ambitious needy, and yet very prodigal, (as Theodoricus writes,) by reason of
these two Popes at once seated, all Christendom was deuied, some taking part
with Urban, and some with Clement, he died 1392.

Boniface the 9. being scarce 20. years old, was made Pope by consent of those
Cardinals that remained at Rome; he could neither write nor sing, as
Theodoricus witnesses, and nothing during his time could be demanded, were
it never so unjust and absurd, but he would grant it for money.

There was never any Pope did bear such rough sway over the Romans as he
did, as Cranzius writes, he canonized Briget borne in Sweazeland, and ann.
1404. he died of the Colic and stone.

Benedict the 13. before called Peter of the moon, before he was Pope,
disputed against such authority, and the Clergy, he died 1424.

Innocent the 7. was much troubled about a murder that his Nephewe Jews did in
Rome, which he maintained, and therefore he and his Cardinals were hotely
pursued to Viterbium: but commanding the half of ecclesiastical livings both
in France and England, he took the foil (as Gaguinus says) and died
shortly after at Rome. an. 1407.

Gregory the 12. Patriarch of Constantinople, promised that he would renounce
the bishopric, if Benedictus likewise did not refuse to renounce also. But
when Benedictus fled into Spain, Gregory revoked his promise; whereupon, by a
Counsel they were both deposed, and in their sted, Alexander the 5. was
chosen, and Gregory for grief dyed suddenly. 1415.

Alexander the 5. was a Franciscan Friar, and vvoorthily called Alexander (as
Platina says) because he being but a beggarly and begging Friar, might now be
matched with the proudest Prince in Europe, for prodigality and courage;
whereupon he would oftentimes say, I am a rich Bishop, a poor Cardinal,
and a beggarly Pope. He was poisoned by his physician Marcillius Parmensis, as
Baptista Panaelius reports.

John the 24. caused this Alexander to be poisoned. When he was in Bononia,
he threatened the people and Clergy to be revenged, if they did not choose a
pope according to his mind, and of many named, he allowed none; vvhereupon
he was desired to appoint one. Give me (said he) the robe of Saint Peter, and
I will bestow it upon him that shall be pope; which he then put upon himself,
and said, In the name of God, amen, I Balthazar Cossa am Pope; which they durst
not reprove, although mislike.

In the Counsel at Rome, at two sundry times, an Owl sitting upon a beam of
the Temple, and fastening her eyes upon the pope, did with her noise salute
him; whereupon it brake up, and nothing was done, nor so much as the Owl
chased away, as Nicholas Clemanges writes. This pope dyed being deposed. ann.
1419.

Martin the fifth was made pope, by the decree of the counsel of Constance,
which to establish him, did deprive Benedict, Gregory, and John. He dyed at
Rome, of the falling sickness, an. 1431. and was buried in a tomb of Brass, in
Lateran.

Eugenius the 4. refused to come to the Counsel of Basil, because it was
said that a Counsel was above the pope, and therefore he was deposed, and
condemned for an Heretic, and Amadeus Duke of Subandia, an Heremite, was
placed in his stead; he dyed, ann. 1446.

Faelix the 5. before a Duke, being an aged man before he came to be pope,
lived to see the day that the sons of his sons, matched in marriage with
Kings daughters, and in the end, went into the wilderness with six
Knights, to lead an Hermites life.

This pope being demanded whether he kept any hounds? and to show them, he
brought the^ that asked him to a place where a great company of poor people
sat down together at dinner, saying; Behold, these are my hounds, which I
feed daily, with the which I h^pe to hunt for the kingdom of heaven, he
deposed himself for unity sake, and died, 1447.

Nicholas the 5. in one year got to be Bishop of Bononia, Cardinal and
Pope, in his time the Turk vvone Constantinople He revived with great
diligence learning and knowledge, (which was the^ almost drowned with
barbarous sophistry,) and appointed stipends for the maintenance of learned
men; he dyed, ann. 1455.

Calixtus the 3. was an old impotent man, he decreed that no man should
appeal from the Pope to a general Counsel, and dyed ann. 1458.

Pius the 2. among the learned Popes, he was most learned, and a most diligent
writer, he was made Poet Laureat in his youth by Frederick the third.
Volateranus writes, that ambition did overthrow many virtues in him, among
many of his prouerbiall sentences, he left this in vvriting, There is a great
cause why the Clergy should be deprived of marriage, but greater cause why they
should be suffered to marry. he dyed. ann. 1464.

Paul the second, being made Pope, gave his mind wholy (as Volateranus
writes) to ambition, riotousnes, and pleasure, he died suddenly of an
Apoplexy. 1470.

Sixtus the fourth, in the space of 2. years, (for he reigned no longer) spent
of himself alone in riot, 200000. crowns, and becam in debt above threescore
thousand, he dyed at 28. years of age, being waste through his incontinent
life. 1474.

Innocentinus the 8. was altogether unlearned, yet to get money, he found out
the title written upon Christ's Cross in three languages, which was found
hidden in a wall; also the iron head of the spear wherewith his side was
wounded; and before any one might see or kiss these relics, he should pay
well for it, he dyed 1492.

Alexander the sixth, first called Rodericus Borgia, was a riotous tyrant, and
in league with the devil for the papacy. He made his son Duke of Valentia
by magic, who was called Caesar Borgia. Of his wars and his sons, read
Guichardine, and Volateranus.

He made his eldest son Duke of Candie, who a little while after, not without
his brothers procurement, was murdered in the night, and cast into Tyber. His
daughter Lucretia was married to three Princes, one after another, the Duke of
Pisauria, Alosius of Aragon, and Alphonsus of Ferrara.

He prepared a feast for diverse Cardinals and Senators, purposing to poison
them, but (by the providence of God) he was poisoned himself. 1499.

Pius the 3. called first Franciscus Picolhomeneus, succeeded him, he raised
an Army to drive the Frenchmen out of Italy, and died seeing no event thereof,
of an Ulcer in his leg. ann. 1503.

Julius the second rose, A remo ad tribunal; from a vvhirry-slaue to be Pope,
for so he was in his youth, he made Rauenna, Seruia, Imola, Fauentia,
Foroliuinium, and Bononia, subject to his Empire. Vicelius says, that he was
rather given to wars then to Christ. He cast Peter's keys into Tyber, saying,
Because Peter's keys are able to do no more, let the sword of Paul help to
do it. This Bibliander vvryteth of him. He dyed. 1513.

Leo the tenth, of the house of Medices was of his own nature a gentle and
quiet person, but greatly ouer-ruled by the counsel of cruel and contentious
men. He had no care of preaching the Gospel, but rather contemned it; for
Cardinal Benbus moving a question out of it, the Pope answered, All ages can
testify, how profitable that fable of Christ has been to us and our company.

In the year 1518. as soon as he heard it reported, that the Frenchmen were
by his means slain, and driven out of Italy, he laughed at the news so
vehemently, that therewith he presently fell down dead at the table.

Hadrian the 6. Schoolemaister before to Charles the Emperor, still kept the
name that he received in Baptism, called Hadrian, he dyed having reigned 4.
years. 1523.

Clement the 7. got the place by violence, and possessed it with much trouble,
and an. 1534. he was poisoned by a strange practice, for both he, and certain
Cardinals, were poisoned with the smell and smoke of a certain Taper, which
with a strange confusion was poisoned for the same purpose.

Under this Clement, Nicholaus Machiauell, Secretary of Florence did flourish,
who in his first book of the history of Florence, says; That for the most
part, the mischiefs that happened among the Christans, proceeded of the Popes
their ambition; and that before the ^ime of Theodocricus, King of Lombardy, the
year of our Lord, 500. they were ever subject to Kings in civil matters.

Paul the 3. was an Astrologian, and a Magitian, and given to all
incontinencie, he had a book of 45. thousand harlots, who for the ^iberty of
their stews, did pay unto him a monthly tribute. He did openly excommunicate
and curse the most renowned prince King, H. the 8. Et donauit regnum, primu^
occupaturo, and gave his kingdom to him tha^ would first invade it; he reigned
15. years*

Julius the 3. before called John Merry o^ the Mount, was a man of beastly
condition* and a maintainer of Sodomitie, he caused to be stamped upon his
coin; Gens et regn^ peribit, quod mihi non inseruit, that Nation and kingdom
shall perrish, which does not serve me, he dyed when he had reigned six
years. ann. 1555.

Marcellus the second, vvoulde not change his Christian name, he dyed the 20.
day after his election.

Paul the fourth, founded a new sect of Religious men in Venice, called by an
holy name, Jesuits, of the name of Jesus, before he was Pope, for the which he
was made Cardinal; he was altogether given to vvarres. He dedicated a book
of the reformation of the Church to Paul the third, and yet made none in his
own time.

Pius the fourth, before called Johannes Angelus, borne at Millaine, of the
house of Medices, enjoyed the place five years, eleven months, and fifteen
days, in the reigns of Ferdinando and Max. Emperors, and dyed anno Domini,
1565.

Pius the 5. borne at Alexandria, succeeded him, and sat in the Sea 6. years.

Gregory the 13. before called Hugo of Bononia, swayed Popedom 13. years, in
the time of Maximilian and Rodolphus.

Sixtus the 5. borne at Millaine, lived in the place 5. years 4. months, by
his means one Clement a Iacobine Friar, killed the most Christian King of
France, Henry the third.

Vrbanus the 7, possessed the place 13. days. Gregory the 14. ten months, ten
days, Innocentius the 9. two months, after these anno Dom. 1592. Clement the
8. was elected Pope, who at this day enjoys the place.

Of War. There is but one just title of war ingenerall, that is, necessity,
according to the old saying, nulium bellum iustum nisi necessarium; which is
just and necessary two ways, the one is in defense of the innocent, the other
is in revenge of injuries.
THE continual wars which the Sicilians had, made them like savage beasts.
Plut.

The Aeolians intending to aid the Argiue^ in their war, Archidamus writ to
them in a letter, only these words, quietness is good.

Silla, for his victories against Mithridates let out five ounces of the blood
of his vain Cardiaca, and offered it to Jupiter Capitolinus. Plutarch.

The Romans were 500. years in conquering Italy.

The Oracle of Apollo answered those o^ Cyrrha, that if they would live in
peace at home, they should make war with their neighbor strangers; and the
Romans, when they had none to wage war with, fell to civil dissentions,
which was their overthrow.

Caesar, noted two great faults in Pompey, the one when he had the better of
him, and did not follow his fortune, the other, when in the last battle at
Pharsalia, he charged his Soldiers being ranged, to stand still in their
places, whereby he was overthrown. Appian.

Hanibal never fought any battle, without laying some ambush.

Traian, was never vanquished, because he never undertook war without just
cause; the same Liuius writes of the Romans in his first Decad.

The Romans out of their Country were invincible, they were ever assaylants,
and sildome times defendants. Eutropius.

There is a people in Germany called Catti, whose strength consists in their
footmen, others go to skirmish, and the Catti to war. Tacitus.

The Lacedaemonians, of all people in peace and war were most valiant, being
in the beginning more then men, but in the end less ^hen women.

Frenchmen, loosing the first encounter, ^oose also the victory. Liuius.

C. Marius, never gave his enemies occasion to force him to fight.

Darius against Alexander, Pompey against Caesar, Haniball against Scipio,
Antonius against Augustus, and Mithridates against Syl^a, had greater forces
without comparison, ^hen their enemies, and yet were overcome.

Fredericus Oenobarbus, when he had ouer^hrowne Millaine, sowed salt there, and
har^owed it, thereby to show that the same City was brought to utter
destruction.

If there be any fault committed generally (...) all the Soldiers in the
camp, the Prin^es of the host take the tenth of the mul^^tude, that by the
punishment of a few, the rest may be assoiled. Plutarch.

F. Max. sent to Rome to the Senate (...) money, to redeem his Soldiers which
H^^nibal had taken prisoners, and being den^^ thereof, commanded his Son to
sell all (...) lands, and bring money for their ransom.

Three hundred Noblemen of the house the Fabij, took upon them alone to wa^
battle against the Vientines. Liuius.

C. Marius refused those Soldiers who (...) not six feet, or at the least
five and a half (...) height. Vigetius.

Pyrrhus charged his Muster-maysters (...) choose them that were of large
stature, and (...) said he, will make them valiant. Idem.

P. Aemilius, to avoid the sun that shine in the face of his host, was so
long in ra^gin^ his Army, that by the time the battles shol^ join, the sun
was upon his back. Mariu^ used the like policy against the Cymbrian^ and
Augustus against the Flemings.

Polemon, to make his Soldiers fiercer (...) assailing the Lacedaemonians, cast
his colou^ into the midst of his enemies, where-vpo^ they pressed with great
violence, esteeming (...) great shame to abandon of their Ancient.

Eumolphus, for that he feared a famine, (...) his provision, for the which his
Souldiou^ ^^oned him to death.

Xenephon, was very curious in his proui^^on of Martial furniture, he had an
Argoli^n target, an Athenian breast plate, a Beo^an head-peece; he was a
Philosopher and a ^aptaine.

Titus, the Emperor, being praised for a ^ictory that he obtained, answered,
That it ^roceeded from God, who made his hands but (...) instruments to serve
him. Josephus.

Caesar, when he had overcome Pompey, ^^oke nothing but his letters, and left
the trea^^re to his Soldiers; the like did Alexander and many other.

Charles the fifth, was bound by oath, not to ^^ing any foreign Soldiers into
Germany.

Of Felicity. Of all the Philosophers who contended about ^^e chiefest
felicity, the Peripatetikes judgment to be allowed above the rest, who said,
that it ^^nsisted in the goods of nature, fortune, and the ^ind; of the first
are health, beauty, strength, ^ersonage; of the second, riches, love, nobility,
(...), etc; of the third, virtue, who is divided ^^to the four cardinals. For
the gifts of the ^ody, look in the head of beauty.
ARistophanes writ a Comedy called Plutus, whom he termed blind, where-vpo^
Demetrius said, that Plutus was not only blind, e but Fortune also, for she
many time^ bestowed her gifts upon unworthy men.

Ptolomey, of a common Soldier, was chosen King of Egypt, Telophanes of a
chariot-wright King of Lidia, Darius the son o^ Histaspis, the quiver bearer of
Cyrus, king o^ Persia, Agathocles of a Potters son, King of Sycania, and
Tamberlaine of a shepherd became King of Scythia.

Old Paynters have drawn Timotheus he Athenian Captain in lively colors,
harnessed, and well weaponed, and Fortune standing over his head, holding in
her hands a spreading net, where-with-all she caught Cities and Regions.

The gold of Toulouse and Seians horse, were both unfortunate to the
possessors.

Hercules in his challenge at Olympus, (...) himself the unknown and
fortunate.

Jason Pheraeus, was hurt by his enemy with a sword, and supposing he had
slain him, he left him, but the sword opened an impostume in Jason, whereby
the enemy did heal that, although unwittingly, which no Surgeon was able to
cure. Cic. de not. deorum.

Homer, faigneth two vessels to be in heaven full of destinies, the one of
good, the other of bad, and he accounts him happy, who equally pertaketh as
well of the one as of the other.

Policrates, tyrant of Samos, was so fortunate, that in all his life he never
tasted of grief or loss, howbeit, to partake some sorrow with others, he
cast a Ring of an inestimable value into the Sea, which was afterward found in
a fishes belly, presented to him by a poor fisherman; in the end Policrates
was hanged. Herodotus.

Pittacus, a Painter, made a ladder in a temple at Mitylene, serving to no
other use then as a gift dedicatory to Fortune; signifying thereby, that those
that clymed up with ease Fortune favored, and came headlong down if she
frowned upon them. Pausanius.

F. Maximus, Marcellus, Scipio, Sylla, Marius, and other great Captains, had
the oftener charge of Armies committed to them, not for their valor only, but
in regard of their good fortune. Cicero.

The Elizian fields, where the Poets feign the souls of the righteous to
abide, are in the Islands of Atlas, which we call the fortunate or happy Islands.
Homer.

Sylla, having got the Dictatorship, yeelde^ himself and all his actions to
the favor o^ Fortune, saying, That he reputed himself t^ be Fortunes child,
and there-vpon took to hi^ the surname of Faelix.

Caesar entering upon the Sea in a little Frigot, and the weather very
tempestuous, the Pilot making some doubt of waying up the anchour, Caesar said,
Be not afraid my friend, for thou carriest Caesar and his fortune. Plut.

After the death of Caligula and Nero, the Senate caused all their riches and
Jewels to be burned, and buried in wells, fearing that in their tiranicall
goods, there might be hidden some evil fortune, by the possessing of which,
Rome might be lost, and the commonwealth impoysoned therewith. Suetonius.

The Emperor Adrian did wear a Ring of gold, which he said, was once the
Ring of Drusius Germanicus, and it had this poesy engraven, Illis est grauis
fortuna quibus est repentina, Fortune to them is most grievous whom she
assaulteth suddenly. M. Aurelius.

Bibulus, riding through Rome in triumph, a tilestone fell from the roof of a
house and killed him.

Lucia, M. Aurelius sister, having a needle on her breast, her child between
her arms, ^aying his hand upon the needle, thrust it into her breast, whereof
she dyed.

Cneius Rufferius, one day coambing of his head, by chance did strike one of
the teeth into it, wherewith he gave himself a mortal wound, and dyed.
Aurelius.

S. Ambrose, being in a rich man's house, and understanding that he had every
thing in affluence and ease, presently departed, fearing least he should be
pertaker of some misfortune; and afterward the house was swallowed in an
earthquake.

Theramenes, one of the 30. tyrants, being at a feast amongst a number upon
whom the house did fall, and he only escaping, was pronounced happy, but he
answered, O Fortune, to what further mischief do thou reserve me? Valerius.

Themistocles, before he was elected to bear authority in the commonweal,
was little worth, but when he had once occupied the place of superiority, after
he was banished, his goods being praised, amounted in value to an hundred
talents.

Rome was happy in the birth of Cato Censorius, and Scipio, for that the one
warred with their enemies, the other with their manners.

Of Fame. Fame is one of the parts of good fortune, in the opinion of some
Philsophers and of the Poets, feigned to be the follower of virtuous and noble
actions, and fitly compared to the shadow which accompanies the body, and
attends upon true honor, which is the reward of virtue.
AMongst the Romans, the lineage of the Cornelij was had in great estimation,
for of them all, never one was found a coward, or a defamed person.

Marius, was never offended with any report that went of him, because if it
were true it would sound to his praise, if false, his life and manners should
prove it contrary. Salust.

Antonius, the Emperor, only amended his life and manners, by the report of
those as he had sent about the City, to understand what was said of him.

Publicolaes fame was gotten by leading of arms; Solons by civil actions.

The fame that Milciades got at Marathon, would not suffer Themistocles to
sleep.

Dionysius, as long as he perceived himself to be well reported of, he was a
good man, but when the privy talk to his defamation came to his ears, he then
began to leave his good nature, and to exercise all kind of cruelty. Diod.

The Persians, when any of their Countrymens good name was called in question,
they examined the whole cause of their life, and if they found that their good
actions did counteruaile their bad, they were acquitted; if otherwise, reputed
vile and unworthy of any calling. Herodotus.

Gorgias Leontinus, and Protagoras, for all the fame of their honor and
renown, yet notwithstanding were as far from knowledge, as boys from manhood.
Aelianus.

Artaxerxes, hearing of the fame of Hyppocrates, sent unto the chief governor
of Hellespont earnest letters for him.

Poor Codrus, and ragged Irus, are as famous in respect, being beggars (with
Poets) as Mydas, and Caesar, two famous and wealthy Kings of Lidia, are
mentioned of Plutarch.

Aristophanes, makes as much mention of Cleonimus the coward, as Homer does
of valiant Achilles.

Iuuenall, and Claudian, report no less of the little Pigmees, then Ovid or
Virgill of the monstrous Cyclops.

Polyphemus, and Enceladus, two huge monstrous Giants, are not so famous in
Virgill for their bigness, as Conopas, or Molon, two little Dwarfes, of two
feet length, are renowned in Pliny for their smalenes.

Lysimachus, was famed over all the world, for that he being but a young
Soldier under King Alexander, killed a Lion.

Ilerdes was so famous for archery, that he could kill a bird flying in the
air, so could Catenes, and Commodus.

Paris, was famous (though otherwise infamous) for that when neither Hector
nor Troylus, nor all the power of Phrygia could overcome Achilles, he with an
arrow slew him.

The fame of Rome in Tullies youth, was but in her minority, and had not as
then passed the mount Caucasus, but afterward it grew in strength, and spread
her wings over all the world. Cicero.

Julius Caesar wept, beholding the Image of Alexander the great, at four and
twenty years of age, saying, Am not I miserable that have done nothing worthy
of memory, and yet this Prince at these years had executed so many notable
things.

An Indian being commanded by Alexander to shoot before him, because he had
heard of his excellency in that Art, would not do it, whereupon he condemned
him to death; who going to execution said, That he had been a very good
Archer, but because he had long time intermitted the exercise, he feared he
should loose the reputation he once got, and chose therefore to dye. Curtius.

Alcibiades, excelled in all Nations wheresoever he came, every man in the
thing he had most skill in. Thucidides.

Cn. Pompeius, who was but 24. years of age, tryumphed over Affrike, a thing
never erst seen in any Roman. Eutropius.

Alexander, refused to come to the feasts of Olympian gams, because there was
no kings to try the prices with-all.

Pompey, from his youth, showed in his countenance great sparks of honor, a
pleasant mildnes joined with a manly gravity, and in his conditions and
behauior, a reverent excellency of kingly majesty.

Ptolomey, having overcome Demetrius, and put his host to flight, at the City
of Gaza, restored him his treasure and all his stuff, with eight thoussnd
prisoners, saying, that be strove not with him but for honor and Empire; which
Demetrius shortly after ouercomming him, requited in the like sort.

Drusius, the Almaine, used to visit the graves and toombs of the most
renowned which were buried in Italy, especially at hi^ going to warfare,
saying, That beholding their monuments, he did recover both strength and
stoutnes. Dion.

There came from Thebes a Knight to Rome, for no other purpose, but to see
where it were true or no that was reported of the notable things there: whom
Mecaenas asked what he thought of Rome and the Romans, who answered, The
memory of the absent does more content me, then the glory of the present. Cic.
Plinius.

Caesar gave 52. battles at his pleasure. Cyrus overcame both Asieas,
Pirrhus, came down into Italy. Atyla King of the Huns, defied all Europe.

M. Marcellus, who was the first that saw the back of Haniball in the field,
was asked, how he durst enter into battle with him, who answered, I am a
Roman borne, and a Soldier, and by him shall I make my renown everlasting.
Sextus Cheronensis.

Julius Caesar, being counseled to wait upon the Consul Sylla, to the end
that by serving him he might do himself some good, answered, I swear by the
immortal Gods, I will never serve any to be of more worth and greater then I
am. Suetonius.

Of Fear. This perturbation has his deriuation from ^he moving of the mind,
and Metus (as Varro says) is quasi motus animi, a moving of the mind, for it
seems that the mind is fled, and the body much terrified, when some evil
happens toward us.
THE Siracusan Dionisius, had more fear of the divine Plato, which was in
Grecia, then of all his enemies he had near him in Sicilia.

Herodes Ascolonita, did more fear John Baptist, then all the kingdom of
Judea.

Dionysius the tyrant, was troubled with such torment of fear, that being
afraid of the Barbours razors, he used to sindge his beard with burning
coals. Cicero.

Alexander Pheraeus, although he dearly loved his wife Thebe, yet coming to
her from banqueting into the chamber, he com^maunded one to go before with a
dravvn^ sword, and sent his Guard to ransacke the wo^mens Cofers, and see that
no weapons (...) hidden in their garments. Cicero.

When Pompey and Caesar became ene^mies, and so to civil wars, the Kings
a^^ people of the Occidentall part came to Iu^^^us Caesar, and the mighty and
most puissan^ of the Oriental, came in the aid of great Pompeius, because
these Princes were loved of few, and feared, and served of all. Eutro*

Mauritius, dreaming that he should be killed of Phocas, asked Philippicus what
he was, who answered, an ambitious Centurion, but fearful, then Mauritius
replied, If he be fearful, then is he a murderer. Orosius.

Numa refused the guard of 300. Archers, which Romulus had. Liuius.

The Crocodiles of Aegipt, if they be pursued fly, if feared, pursue them that
fly. Herodotus.

Q. Fabius Max. caused the hands of all those which had fled from the Roman
standard, to be cut off, as a terror to all faint and cowardly Soldiers. Val.

Amongst the Spartans, it was death to loose or cast away a shield in war.
Epaminondas ^ad written upon his shield, Aut hunc, aut ^^per hunc.

C. Valienus, cut off the fingers of his left ^and, because he vvoulde not
follow the ^varres in Italy; but the Senate confiscated his goods, and
condemned him to perpetu^ll bonds.

The Egiptians called Ochus an Ass in their mother tongue, comparing his
cowardnes and blockishnesse, to the weakness and unskillfulness of that
unreasonable beast, in hi^ disco^mendation and reproach; wherefore he violently
snatching away their god, which was an Ox, went and offered the same to an
Ass.

The most fearful of all men, are the Garamants, for they are afraid of
every thing, and can abide the sight of none, though they be armed, yet they
do not use their weapons, for they are afraid to hurt, and when they are
hurt, they will not for very cowardice revenge. Herodatus.

Cicero being called by Clodius into judgment, (because of his own
authority, without permission of the Senate, he had commanded Lentulus and
Cethegus to be punished) he was of such an abated courage, as having changed
his garment, weeping, as he was going, fell at the feet of every one which
he met.

Demosthenes, nothing inferior to Cicero in eloquence (if by study not
extempory he would have spoken) when he should have defended himself before
the Athenians, he so forsook himself, as he had rather go into perpetual
banishment, then by talk openly to beseech favor or forgiveness at the hands
of the Athenians.

Nero, after he had killed his mother, confessed that whilst he slept, he
was troubled by her, and tormented with the sight of Furies. Cor. Tacitus.

A soldier that fled (whom Epaminondas that famous Thebane General pursued)
in returning back slew him.

Niceas, the general Captain of the Athenians, through the fear which he had
conceived of the darkness of an ecclips of the Moon, and not knovving the
cause thereof, stayed so long determining with himself, that his enemies
enclosed him round about, vvhere-vpon, he was taken alive, and put to death,
besides forty thousand Athenians that were taken and slain.

In the City of Sparta, which for Arms and Arts, flourished most among the
Grecians, there was a Temple consecrated to fear, which they said, better
preserved the estate of the Commonwealth then any other thing.

Claudius the Emperor, was so faintharted, base minded, and blockish, that his
mother said often of him, That nature had begun, but not finished him.

Agamemnon dispensed with a rich coward for going to war personally, for a
Mar^ which he gave him. Homer.

M. Aurelius was so far from fearing his subjects, that he had neither guard
nor porter in his Court.

Of Ingratitude. Under this monster, have all vices with a curse been
comprehended: (omnia dixeris si ingratum dixeris;) most rightly figured in
swine, who eat the Acorns, but never look up to the tree.
SOcrates, being pronounced by the Oracle of Apollo to be the vvisest man in
all Greece, was poisoned for his religious care he had in bringing up the
youth of Athence.

The Syracusans banished Dion, by vvhos^ wisdom and valor they recovered
they^ liberty, and being afterward repealed, they killed him.

Anthony, in the time of Vespasian, after al^ his service against the
Vitellians, and after h^ had recovered Rome, was suspected by Mutianus,
brought to Rome without authority, and visiting Vespasian in Asia, he was so
coldly entertained, that he dyed shortly after.

Philip the French-king, put one of his soldiers out of pay, because he was
unthankful, and caused him to be marked in the forehead with the word
unthankful.

The ingratitude of the Romans tovvard Scipio, was by reason of the
conceived suspect of his fortunes, the suddainenes of his expedition, and the
greatness of his enemies. Plutarch.

Plato, that princely Philosopher, called Aristotle a Mule, because a Mule
when he has sucked his fill, and has enough of his Dammes milk, casts up
his heels, and kicks unkindly; by this he signified the ingratitude and
unthankful nature of Aristotle, for he having received his Philosophy from
Plato, disdained his Master, and in despite, gathered an assembly, and
planted a School. Laertius.

The Athenians greatly commended thankfulness, yet no Nation was more
unthankful then themselves.

Caesar, when he had overcome Pompey at Pharsalia, gave great charge to his
Captains, that in any wise they should save Brutus; but he afterward, like
an ungrateful person, was the chiefest of the conspirators. Appian.

Laena, who by Ciceros help had been saved from death, pulled his head out
of the Litter and cut it off, having three strokes, and making three wounds
for want of cunning. He cut off his hand also, with which he wrote against
Anthony. Idem.

The noble King Seleucus was killed by Ptolomey Ceraunus, whom he had saved
from the fury of his Father, which vvoulde have murdered him.

Craesus being relieved before he came to his kingdom by one Pamphaes,
afterward in token that he had not forgotten this good turn, he sent him a
chariot full of silver.

Darius, when he was not superior to a private man, receiving a rich robe of
Solon for a gi^t, after that he was confirmed in the throne royal, he
recompensed his courtesy committing unto him the government an^ jurisdiction of
the country of Samos.

Pyrrhus was exceedingly grieved for the death of a friend, who dyed before he
ha^ requited his many favors.

The Romans gave him intelligence of a treason intended against him, who to
shevve himself thankful, sent back unto them a number of prisoners, and
would receive no ransom.

An Arabian Turk, Admiral of the Infidels in their war against Baldvvin
King of Jerusalem, was with his wife and children taken prisoners, whom the
king set free, in lue whereof, he went by night and told him, of the purpose
of his companions, and led him out of the town from danger.

Cato the elder, sold his old servant that had served him a long time, in
the market, as we use to sell beasts; a foul blot in so famous a man.

Solon, for all the good deserts of his country, was banished from thence, and
constrained to end his life at Cyprus. Valerius.

Of Treason. The enemy to loyalty is Treason, a thing of ^ll others most
odious to God, and among men ^east prosperous, as by the events appear.
TArpeia, for love of gold, did betray the Capitol of Rome unto Tatius King of
the Sabines; but with the gold, received her deaths vvound. Liuius.

Antigonus made much of those Traitors that went about to pleasure him, but
having once obtained his purpose, he rewarded the with death.

A Schoole-maister among the Phalerians, having the bringing up of all the
noble youth in the City, betrayed them to Camillus, hoping thereby to get
reward and favor of the Romans, but Camillus disdaining his treason, caused
him to be stripped, and his hands bound behind him, and gave his scholars rodds
and vvhyps to beat him home to the City. Plutarch.

Fabritius sent Pyrrhus word of his traiterous Physician. Plut.

Lyciscus rotted above the ground for his treasons against the Orchomenians.

The Ambassadors that come to the Emperor of Tartary, before they deliver
they^ message, must of force pass betvveen two fires, only for this cause,
that if they bring any poison, by the force of the flames it may kill
themselves.

The Athenians would suffer none to be buried that were traitors to their
country*

Bessus, for his traiterous murdering of Darius, was adjudged by Alexander to
be torn in sunder with two trees bowed down together by maine strength, one
against the other, unto which his body was fastened. Curtius.

Lasthenes, having helped King Philip to become master of Olynthus, whereof
he was an inhabitant, complained to the King that certain called him traitor;
but he received this only answer, that the Macedonians were naturally rude
and gross, calling a Spade a Spade, and all things else by their proper name.

Darius caused the head of his son Ariobarzanes to be cut off, because he
sought to betray his Army to Alexander.

Augustus, with his own hands put out the eyes of one that was accused unto
him of treason.

Mahomet having taken Constantinople, through the treason of John Justinian of
Genua, after he had made him king, according to promise, within 3. days after
cut off his head.

Dioclesian the Emperor, took an oath in the open assembly of the soldiers,
that Numerianus was not slain by any his treason, and therwithall drawing
forth his sword, he ran Aper thorough, who being his Father in law, had
trecherously slain him. Eutrop.

M. Antonius an Orator, fled from the wrath of Marius into a Farme-house, the
Keeper whereof received him gently, and hyd him, and sending his servant to a
Tavern for wine oftener then he was wont, the Vintner asked him why he came so
often for wine? he told him secretly that it was for Antonius; who sent word
to Marius, and was by a Captain of his slain, who brought his head to Marius.

Decimus Brutus, one of the conspirators against Caesar, put to flight by
Anthony, in his escape was taken of thieves, and asking who was Lord of that
place, they told him, Camillus, whose name he much esteeming, desired to be
brought to him; who when he saw him, made him fair presence, but privily sent
to Anthony, who could not abide to see him, but willed Camillus to kill him.

Attilus the eldest son of Anthony, vva^ betrayed by his Schoolemaister
Theodorus who took a goodly jewel from his neck^ when he was killed, the
which being required, and denied of him, he was hanged.

Of Names. The qualities of the mind, whether they be good or evil,
(especially in great personages) commend a perpetual memory to their
prosperity, either of their honorable fame, or vile infamy; therefore the
ancients gave certain names to the true deseruers of both.
IT was a sure sign that Adam should be Lord of all creatures, when at the
first he could call them all by their names. Amb.

The Stoics were great searchers for the original of words and names.

The Trojans, for their nobility and gentry, were called Dardans, for their
fearfulness, Phryges, and for their valor, Trojans.

The first of the Fabij was surnamed Pictor, for his excellency in the Art of
paynting; when he had painted the vvalls of the temple of Health, he writ
thereon his name, leaving behind him a memory that he had been ^ paynter.

Titus Manlius, the worthiest of all the Senators, killed one of the
Frenchmen which provoked him to fight hand to hand, and ^he^ he had slain
him, he plucked off a chain of gold which his enemy wore about his neck, and
put it about his own, whereof both he and his posterity were called
Torquatij.

Prophets are called Seers, because they see the mysteries of the Gospel.
Vrbanus.

Mar. Valerius, going to fight with a French man, a Crow lighted upon his right
arm, and sat there still, afterward, when they came to handy gripes, the
same Crow smote the Frenchman upon the eyes, that he could not see, by
means whereof he was slain, and Valerius was afterward surnamed Coruinus.

In the old Testament, four men's names were given them before their birth,
Ismaell; Isaac, Sampson, Josias, in the new, only John and Christ.

Romulus was called Quirinus, of a Spear, for that vveapon he used; and the
Knights of Rome were called Quirites, that is, spear men.

Aristippus was called Metrodidactos, because he was taught of his mother.

Calliope was named Calliopea, for her ex^cellencie, and Penelope, Penelopea,
for the sweetness of her voice.

Adam was buried in the same place when Christ his Cross was set up, and
therefo^^ it was called Caluarie, because the origina^^ and head of mankind was
buried there. Augustine.

Paris lay the first night with Helena in the I Will of Cranae, and afterward
called it by her name, Helena.

Colossians are denominated from the great Colossus in Rhodes, a statue of
brass, being once one of the worlds seven wonders.

The Heathens called the Christians Sarme^titios, and Semiassios, because they
were tied to halfe-penny stakes, and burned to death with shrubbes.

Aborigines, are homebred people, the Athenians were so called, in token
whereof they did wear Grasshoppers in their hats. Diodorus.

The river Tygris, is so called for his swift current. Iustine.

Valentinianus the Emperor, was called Funarius, for that before he was
chosen, holding a roape or cord in his hand, five strong ^ouldiers were not
able to pull it from him. ^^^^linus.

Within twenty years, Italy had 9. Em^erours, which reigned by succession,
and the ^ne was slain of the other by occasion, the ^ast was called
Augustulus, that is, little noble, or little full of majesty; the diminution
of the name, was an evident sign that the governance of the Augustus should
fail ^n Italy. Agathias.

The Romans had certain Senators called Pedarij Senatores, who being slovve
of counsel and pronouncing their sentence, did follow the footesteps of other
Counselors, saying after the^, and therefore were so called. Fenestella.

There were two Emperors in Rome unlike in name, and much more in manners, the
one of them was named Nero the cruel, the other, Anthony the meek; the which
ouernames the Romans gave them, the one of meek, because he could not but
pardon, the other of cruel, because he never ceased to kill.

The name of Knight, or Gentleman, the Romans did never admit, either consent
to entitle those that could gather much riches, but such as had been famous
for being at the victory of many battles. Cicero.

Prince Charles, for his great and happy victory over the Southern people,
was afte^ surnamed Martell the Maule, because he^ broke and battered the force
of them like ^ maule, or hammer of iron.

Cato was not first a surname, but a name o^ merrite, for the ancient Romans
called him Cato, that was wise by much experience. Of this name were two
famous, Cato Censorius, and Cato of Vtica.

Jonathan, for his valor, was named Iebonathan.

Sergius Orata, and Licinius Muraena, took their sirnames of fishes, for that
one of them greatly loved the Gylthed, the other, the Lamprey. Petrarch.

Nemrod, the first tyrant, was called Oppressor hominum, an oppressor of men.

Cicero was called Pater patirae, the lover of his Country.

The sea of Icarus, was so called, for that Icarus was there drowned.

The sea Aegeum, of Aegeus king of Athence, who drowned himself therein.

Mare Tyrrhenu^, of Tyrrhenus King of Lidia; Hellespont, by a woman named
Hell.

Tyberinus, altered the river which was before named Albura, to the name of
Tyber (...) his death.

Hesperides the daughter of Atlas, gave the Hesperian sea his name.

Mare Myrtoun, by Myrtilus, whom Oenomaus cast therein.

That which we call Euxinus, the Sea that begins at Bospherus, was first
called Axenos; that is, Inhospitalis, because the inhabitants did kill and eat
the passengers, but after, being made civil, was called Euxinus.

The Romans, if their Emperor were courageous, they would call him another
Caesar, if virtuous, Octauian, if fortunate, Tiberius, if rash, Caligula, if
cruel, Nero, if merciful, Traiane, or Anthonius Pius, if beautiful, Titus,
if idle, Domitian, if patient, Vespasian, if temperate, Adrian, if religious,
Aurelianus, if sage and virtuous, Aurelius.

Of Contemplation. Contemplation has three degrees, the first is an election
and choosing of good before evil; the second is, as it were an habit or
inioying thereof indeed; the last consists altogether in the mind of man,
from which the true example of all virtues do flow In it all good qualities
be inprinted, which impression, the Platonists (...) Idaeas, being nothing else
but inward conception of things.
CArneades and Archimedes, were accoun^ted as dead men when they were alive
forasmuch as their minds being distracte^ through earnestnes of
contemplation, the natural action of their bodies seemed to cease and give
over, the one forgetful to reach his hand to the dish, being at meat, the
other, not knowing what the matter meant, when the town of Siracusa was taken
wherein he lived. Laertius.

Socrates was seen studying a whole day, continuing the space of 24. hours
in contemplation, and discoursing in his mind, which was, when he drew out
this conclusion out of his thoughts, that there was b^t one only God, and that
the soul was immortal.

Mison the Philosopher, lived altogether a contemplative and solitary life,
who when one by chance met him laughing to himself, and demanding the
cause why he laughed, having no company? answered, Even therefore do I
laugh, because I have (...) (...) company with me. Laertius.

Scipio, was never less alone, then when he ^ad no company; and Tully, when
he was ^hought to have been idle, studied most. Cicero.

Democritus plucked out his eyes, because ^he pleasures of this world should
not draw ^im from contemplation.

S. Bernard, a most excellent man for lear^ing and holiness, got all his
knowledge wherein he excelled all other of his time) (...) the woods and
fields, not by the instruction ^f man, but by contemplation and prayer.

Saint Augustine writes of himself, that (...) this sort he understood
Aristotle's predi^aments, which are accounted amongst the ^ardest things, and
also the liberal Sciences, and no man taught him.

The Hare, the Pelican, and the Swan, live ^olitarily, and the last is merry
at her death, in ^ope to see shortly her beloved Apollo. Plato

Hiero, the tyrant of Syracusa, gave over his ^ingdom, and lived a solitary
life.

Craesus, after the death of his son Adrastus, ^^ued in contemplation. Herod.

Jerome, Petrus Diamanus, Caelestinus, ^orsaking the world, betook them to
solita^^nes of life.

Timon of Athence, was so given to solitar^^nes and melancholy, that he hated
the (...) of all men, and therefore was called M^^santhropos, he used and
employed all his (...) to persuade his Countrymen to shorten the life's, having
set up Iibbets in a field, which h^ bought, for them that were disposed to han^
themselves. Plut.

Anthony, dispairing of his fortunes, build him an house in the Sea, at the
Lanteme and ramped it about, seperating himself from the company of men,
protesting to follow Timon, calling his house Timonion, or Timons Tabernacle.
Appian.

Tresilaus, overcome with a melancholy passion, persuaded himself to be the
righ^ honor of all the great Navy that arrived a^ the port Pyreus; of which
humor, when he by Physicians was thoroughly purged, he cursed them, saying,
That they had robbed (...) of his pleasure and wealth.

The Emperor Lotharius pricked in conscience for his evil committed against
(...) Father Lodouicus Pius, resigned his Empire, and spent the remainder of
his life into monastry.

Appian, writes of a solitary way by the people Sapaei, which for the
solitarines, the very birds could not discover, by which Bru^us being
distressed and afraid, was guided by Roscopolis, who persuaded him to go that
way. Appianus.

Of Agriculture. Agriculture, or husbandry, took beginning (...) our
forefather Adams fall, and since in every succeeding Age has been highly
esteemed, whose companion is Labor, the true handmayd of virtue. The vpholders
of this Art (as the Poets write) were the last that waxed wicked, and Justice
forsaking the earth, left her last footsteps amongst husbandmen.
THis was so honored in old time, that even the Roman Emperors and mighty
Kings and Potentates, have not been ashamed to exercise it.

Dioclesian, left his Empire at Salona, and Attalus likewise to labor in this
Art.

Cyrus, set, planted, and grafted trees with his own hands, checker wise. So
did Seneca Planetrees.

From the honor of the earth and husbandry, the noble sirnames of Fabij,
Lentuli, Cicerones, Pisones, have been denominate. Cor. Ag.

From the breeding and feeding of Cattle the Iunij, Bubuli, Tauri, Statilij,
Pomponij, Vituli, Vitellij, Porcij, Catones, Annij, took their better names.

Romulus, and Remus, Romes first founders, were sheepeheards, Apollo, Mercury,
Pan, Abell, Abraham, Jacob, Moses, David, were sheepheards.

The Gardens of Adonis, Alcinous, Tantalus, and Hesperides, were subjects for
the finest Poets.

Semyramis, had goodly flowers hanging in the air, and Massinissa strange, and
famous garnished Gardens, to the wonder of Affricke.

Tarquinius, in the time of that first old Rome, walked pleasantly in his
Garden, and cropping the tops of Poppy. Liuius.

Lucullus, after his victories obtained in Asia, took his recreation in
Gardens.

Sylla, forsaking his Dictatorship, spent the remainder of his life in
gardening.

When the Romans would commend any man, they used to call him a good man,
and a good husband, insomuch, as the Senator^ themselves lived in the Country,
and at occasions were by Purseuants called to the city*

Quintius Cincinatus, and others, were called from the plough to be Dictators.

King Agis, one day requested the Oracle of Apollo, to tell him who was the
happiest man in the world, who answered, One Aglaion, be known of the Gods,
and unknown of men, and making search for him throughout all Greece, found at
length that it was a pore gardener in Arcadia, who 60. years old, never went
from home, keeping himself with his only labor in his Garden. Liuius.

M. Cato Censorius, was as ready and apt to learning, as to wars, to matters
concerning the field, as the City, and also to the exercise of husbandry.

He was the most excellent husbandman of his time, and was the first amongst
the Romians, that gathered the precepts of husbandry, and brought them into the
form of ^n Art. Petrarch.

Quintius Cincinnatus, while he was ea^ing his four Acres of land, by decree
of the Senate and people of Rome, was chosen Dic^ator. Florus.

Abdolominus, at the commandment, or rather permission of Alexander, from a
^oore Gardener, was advanced unto the kingdom Sidon, and by contemning the
kingdom, was reputed greater then the kingdom.

C. Marius, was an hireling ploughman, and spent the first years of his life
in the fields* but afterward was seven times Consul o^ Rome.

The pleasure that Lucanus had in this world, was nothing else but a little
Garden, and when he died, he commanded his grave to be made in it; where he
was buried.

Of Poverty. This burden, whether it come by birth or some sinister chance,
is, or ought to be a means to bring man to a ready knowledge of himself, an^
by this, to a more near knowledge of God, who sometime sends it as a trial,
other-while as ^ punishment, to the godly first, the burden is light* to the
repining punished, intolerable, who loose the benefit thereof by their
impatience and murmuring.
ARistides, surnamed the just, being very poor, was chosen to leauie and
gather the trybute before all the rich men in Athence.

Whilst the name of poverty was honored at Rome (which was by the space of
400. years after the foundation thereof, Pleasure could never set foot as
there, but after that Poverty began to be contemned, ^ertue immediately took
her flight from ^hence, which was their utter overthrow.

Valerius Publicola, having four times ^eene Consul of Rome (the only man
for government in war and peace) his poverty is ^ecorded not to his shame, but
to his praise. Liuius.

Poor Aristides, had not the least honor ^n the service at Salamis, and at
Plateus, was ^he chief leader of all the Athenian forces, ^ho^ Virtue did put
forward, Poverty could not hold back nor dismay. Herodotus.

Fabritius, being in poverty, was sent in Em^assage amongst other Romans to
Pyrrhus, of whom Pyrrhus took such lyking, that to win him to be his, he
proffered him ^he fourth part of his kingdom. Eutropius.

Ephialtes, being cast in the teeth with his poverty, said, Why do not
thou make ^ehearsall of the other thing, namely, that I love ^aw, and regard
right? Aelian.

One of Catoes sons, of 15. years age, was banished for breaking of an
earthen pot in a maids hand, that went for water, so wa^ Cinnaes son,
because he entered a Garden, and gathered fruit without leave.

The Ostracisme, amongst the Athenians was a banishment for a time, whereby the
brought down them that seemed to exceed in greatness. This was invented by
Clisthenes.

A rude rusticke fellow, happened to meet Aristides, bearing a scroale of paper
in hy^ hand, and desired him to write the name o^ Aristides therein, who
meruailing thereat asked, whether any man had been by him injured, No (quoth
he) but I cannot in any wis^ endure the surname of Iustus. Plutarch.

At such time as the Ephesi banished they^ Prince Hermodonus, they pronounced
thi^ sentence, Let none of us excel another, but i^ any so do, let him no
longer here dwell, but inhabit else where. Cicero.

Celliodorus, the Philosopher, was banished in the prosperity and fury of the
Marians, not for the evils they found in him, bu^ for the vices he reproved in
them.

Vulturnus, a man in Astrology, profoundly learned, was banished by M.
Antonius, because Cleopatra hated him.

Bestius, and Colla, Gentlemen of Rome, when they had boldly declared their
service for the commonwealth, and reprehended the Senators before they would
be cast out by decree, voluntarily exiled themselves, Appian.

Sittius, was the first and only man, that as a stranger, was an outlaw in his
own Country. Idem.

Of Death. Death is feigned of the Poets, to be the sister of Sleep, both
borne of their mother Night, a Goddess impartial and inexorable, as sparing
none, and the Aegiptians by an Owl sitting upon a tree signify death. This
all-killing power, triumphans cedit, and by death is overcome.
EPaminondas, ready to give up the ghost, willed the poisoned shaft to be
pulled from his deadly wound, and when it was given him to understand, that his
shield was found safe, and his enemies put to flight, he cheerfully departed
out of this world. Cicero.

Gorgias Leontinus, being very sick, a friend of his demanded of him how he felt
himself in body, he answered, Now Sleep begins to deliver me to the power
of his brother Death.

Asdrubals wife, the last Lady of Carthage* had the like end in death, as the
first Lady Dido had, for she threw her self and her two sons into the fire.

Herod, because he would make the Jews sorry for his death, whether they
would or no, dying, commanded to sley all the Noble men's children of Jury.
Josephus.

Vespasian ready to dye, stood up and said, It becomes an Emperor to pass
out of this world standing.

Calanus, an Indian Gymnosophist, when he had taken his long leave of
Alexander, piled up a bonfire in the suburbs of Babylon, of dry wood, of Cedar,
Rosemary, Cypres, Myrtle, and Laurel, then he mounted the pile, the Sun
shining in his face, whose glorious beams he worshipped, then he gave a token
to the Lacedaemonians, to kindle the fire, and stoutly and valiantly dyed.

Cercidas, an Arcadian, ready to dye, said to his companions, I am not loath to
depart this life, for I hope to see and talk with Pythagoras among the
Philosophers, with Liuius among the Historiographers, with Orpheus among the
Musicians, and with Homer among the Poets; which words as soon as he had
uttered, he gave up the ghost.

Plato dying, thanked nature for three cau^es; the first, that he was borne a
man, and not beast; the second, that he was borne in Greece, and not in
Barbary; the third, that ^ee was borne in Socrates time, who taught ^im to die
well.

Antemon, was so desirous to live, and so ^earefull to dye, that scarce he
would travail ^broade, and compelled to go, two of his ^eruants bore over his
head a great brazen Target, to defend him from any thing which might happen to
hurt him.

Massinissa, King of Numidia, rather committed his estate and life unto dogs
then unto men, as his guard to keep and defend him from death.

Hector said to Andromache, Be not sorry for my death, for all men must die.
Homer.

Polydamas, entering into a Cave to defend himself from the rain, through the
violence of the water, the Cave fell down upon him. Cicero.

Anacreons breath was stopped with a grape kernel, that stuck in his throat.
Pliny.

Euripides, returning home from King Archelaus his supper, was torn in pieces
of dogs. Gellius.

Aeschilus, sitting in a sunny place in Sicily, an Eagle flying over, taking
his white bald head for a stone, struck the shell of a Tortoyse which was in
his bill against his head and dashed out his brain. Valerius.

Pyndarus, laying his head down to sleep in the bosom of a boy whom he loved,
neue^ awaked. Suidas.

Ennius, would not have his death lamented, because he was famous in his works,
yet Solon would have his death bewailed, and writ to put his friends in mind,
Let my departure wayed be, and let my friends draw sighs for me.

Trophonius, and Agamedes, having built a sumptuous temple to Apollo of
Delphos, begged the most profitable thing that might be given to man, after
the third day they were found dead. Cicero.

Velcurio, the learned Philosopher, lying upon his deathbed, when his friends
came to comfort him, said, The Father is my Creator, the Son my Redeemer,
the holy Ghost my Comforter, how can I then be sorrowful or dismayde?

The day before that Caesar went to the Senate, he had been at a banquet with
Lepidus, talking merely what death was best for a man, some saying one, and
some another, he of al praised the sudden death, which happened to him. Appian.

The Scots in their own Chronicles, have recorded, that of one hundred and
five Kings, ^here dyed not above 50. of natural deaths. Gasper Peucerus.

Of Usury. Usury (of some called Interest, but without reason why, since money
let to interest returns but with his proper sum) the daughter of
Covetousness and Ambition, may well be called a continual sire, which ever
increases through the consuming of such as fall therein. This has been so
odious amongst the Heathen, that the practizers thereof have been severely
punished.
EVe took up sin of the devil, as it were by lone upon her bare word, Adam
by co^senting unadvisedly, subscribed to the bond, but the burden of it, has
ever been, and shall be laid upon the necks of his posterity.

In the time of king Phillip, Augustus, Lews the fifth, of king John, and
Charles the sixth, the Jews and Italians which held banques, and exercised
usury throughout France, were ryfled and banished.

In sundry places, debtours were privileged, among others in Dianaes temple
Ephesus, into the temple of sparing and we ordered expense usurers might not
ente^ Pausanias.

Licurgus would suffer no usurers to live among the Spartanes.

The old Indians and Germans knew n^ what usury meaned.

Amasis, King of Egypt, made a law, that the Praetor should call every one to
account, ho^ they lived, and if by usury, they should b^ punished as
malefactors. Herod.

Cato, drove all the usurers out of Sicilia, and (altogether undone by them)
restored he to her former glory. Val.

Asellius was slain, for making a law against usurers. Appian.

There was a law amongst the ancient Grecians and Romans, which forbad all
usury surmounting one penny for an hundred by the year, and they called it
Vnciarie usury.

This law was since that, brought to a halfepenny a year among the Romans,
and not long after, usury was clean taken away by the law Genutia, because of
usual seditions, which arose through the contempt of laws concerning usury.

It was provided in Rome, that no Senator should be owner of any ship
containing 300 Amphores, because immoderate gains was ^ot in the Noble men
allowed.

In Thebes, it was by straight order forbidden, that any man should be put in
office, which in ten years before the election, had practiced any unlawful
chaffering.

The Egiptians and Athenians, seeing the error of covetous usury to take
footing in their provinces, by approved judgment concluded, that by no
instrument, plea, execution, or other means in law, a body might be detayned,
the original being for corrupt gain.

The Romans had a law, that no money should be lent to young heirs upon
usury, neither allowing the detinew pleadable, nor the usury answerable;
having a private eye into those immeasurable gains of those greedy Carles,
who compass the Fathers Lands, before the son come to it. Fenestella.

By this unlawful getting, many of the best and most ancient houses in all
Italy, were brought into utter ruin and confusion.

Of Prodigality. Prodigality, one of the companions of Ple^^sure, is called of
the Stoics a dissolution, or to^ much loosing of reverent virtue, and a token
o^ him which desires to be a tyrant; such Lions ((...) Aristophanes terms
them) are not to be nourished in a commonwealth, for if they should men must
serve to satisfy their appetite, being a greedy of expense, as the covetous of
money.
CLeopatra, the last Queen of Aegipt, invited Anthony to a feast, at which
she dissolved in vinegar a Pearl priced at a^ hundred Sestercies.

The son of Aesopus the Tragedian, was so prodigal, that at diverse suppers
he would dissolve rich pearls in vinegar. Horace.

Lucullus, was so prodigal in sumptuous expenses, and desired in all his
buildings to seem so magnificall, that he came into contempt among the
Romans, and was called a Roman Xerxes. Plut.

There was a law among the Grecians, that those which had prodigally wasted
their patrimony, should not be interred with their ancestors. Alexand.

Prodigal lauishing, and palpable sensuality, ^rought Pericles, Callias the
son of Hip^nicus, and Nicius, not only to necessity, ^t to extreme
poverty; and when al their money was spent, they three drinking a poi^oned
potion to one another, died all three.

Apicius, after he had by banqueting spent is whole patrimony, because he
would not ^ade a miserable life, hanged himself.

Epicharmus an Athenian, having a large ^atrimony left him by his parents,
consu^ed it in six days, and all his life time after ^ued a beggar.

Straton Sydonius, could in no wise abide that any one should go beyond him
in pro^igall expenses, vvhereupon arose a great ^ontention betwixt Nicocles
Ciprius and ^im, whilst the one did what he could to ^xcell the other.
Theopompus.

Poliarchus was so grounded in prodigali^ie, that he would bring forth the
dead car^asses of dogs and Cocks (if he loved them ^hen they were living) and
gather all his ^riends and acquaintance to the burial of them, sparing no
costs; he raised upon their ^raues great pyllars, and caused Epitaphs to ^e
carved thereon. Aelianus.

Chrysogonus, laid hands upon the goods of Sextus Roscius, that he might
riotou^^ly spend that, which the other had wicke^^ly gotten. Cicero.

Caligula, in one year of his reign, spe^^ prodigally 67. millions of gold,
which T^^berius his predecessor had gathered tog^^ther. Tacitus.

In Rome it was provided by law, that (...) Senator should be indebted above
a certain sum prescribed. Fenestella.

Aemilius Lepidus, having built an hou^^ which cost six thousand pound, was
for that cause deprived from the Senate.

Diogenes, hearing that the house of a ce^^taine prodigal man was offered to
sale, said* I knew well that house was so full of meat an^ wine, that ere
long it would vomit out his ma^^ster.

To erect Tombs, to wear gold-rings, (...) use spyce in meat, to allay wine
with vva^ter, and to bear sweet smells; the men of A^sia sent as presents to
the Romans, in re^uenge of the Cities and blood that they ha^ taken from
them. Cicero.

Caligula the Emperor, suffered his own brother to make him a feast full of
all excess, wherein there were two thousan^ sundry sort of dishes, and seven
thousand (...) ^f fowls.

One of the Fabij, by reason of his prodigal ^xpences, was surnamed Gurges.

Caligula was so prodigally minded, that he ^ould often say, it became a man to
be ey^her thrifty, or an Emperor.

Alexander was naturally given to spend much, and Darius to heap together,
lock ^p, and keep. Plut.

Ptolomeus the first was so prodigal, that that soever his servants had
bought in the morning, he would give away before night; and being by his
nobles advised to be more ^oderate in his largess, he answered, You ^re
deceived, to think that the poor and needy Prince is troubled.

Alexander the Roman, very sildom gave gold or silver to any man but to
soldiers; ^ffirming it to be unlawful for him that was ^teward of the
Commonwealth, to convert that which the provinces had contributed, ^o the
private sports and pastimes of hym^elfe and his favorites. Lampridius.

Of Pride. Pride is a sin of the soul, which is not seen and perceived of
any, but of God only; and therefore Moses gives no temporal punishmen^ to
proud men, but reserved them to the judgment of God.
ROmulus, puffed up with the glory he^ had attained unto, became more severe to
his Senators, and therefore he was slain of them at the flood of Caprea.
Liuius.

Agamemnon, considering the destruction of Troy, and his own tryumphant estate
^ said, that the overthrow of Priamus mad^ him proud; but afraid vvithall,
least he^ through pride, as Priamus was, might be overthrown. Seneca.

Plautianus, being in chief honor and credit with Seuerus the Emperor,
left no^ a Country or a City unspoiled, to uphold thereby his greatness and
pride. Dion.

The Romans, because they would curb^ the pride of the Jews, took their
kingl^ dignity from them, and divided their kingdom into a Tetrarchie. August.

Chares waxed so proud because he ha^ hurt King Cyrus in the knee, that he
becam^ stark mad. Plutarch.

Virtue, at the first raised the Templers, and^ vpheld their honors, but their
pride and sloth, was their utter overthrow. Polych.

Menecrates because he was excellent in the Art of Physic, caused himself to
be called ^upiter; Philip minding to correct him for his pride, invited him to
a feast, and caused a ^able to be provided for him alone, which he was glad
of, but when he saw that in sted of meat they gave him nothing but incense, he
was ashamed, and departed from them in great rage.

Dioclesian the Emperor, called himself brother to the Sun and Moon, and
made an Edict that he would have all men to kiss his feet, whereas his
predecessors gave their hands to their nobility, and bovved their knees to the
simpler sort. God suffered him to dye a mad man.

Socrates, when he savve that Alcibiades vvexed proud because of his great
possessions, showed the Map of all the world, and asked him whether he knew
which were his lands in the territory of Athence; who answered they were
not described there; how is it then (quoth he) that thou braggest of that
which is no part of the world?

Antiochus had that admiration of himself, that he thought he was able to
sail on the earth, and go on the seas.

Egnatius would laugh of purpose, to show his white teeth. Catullus.

Palaemon a Gramarian in Rome, promised immortality and everlasting felicity
unto any he dedicated his books to. Cor. Agrip.

Sparsus, amongst ignorant men, vvoulde seem a great scholar, but when he
came where scholars were, he fained himself mad, as though he were not
ignorant in any thing, but by his infirmity to excuse himself from reasoning.
Seneca.

Poppeia, Neroes concubine, had her horses shooed with pure gold. Martial.

Archidemus, the son of Agesilaus, being overcome by Phillip, understanding
that he vvexed proud thereof, sent him this message, If thou measure thy
shadow now being a victor, with thy shadow in times past, when thou wast
overcome, thou shall find it no longer then in those days. Brusonius.

Julius Caesar confessed (and that with boasting) that he slew in battles,
eleven hundred, ninety and two thousand men. Pliny.

Pompey the great surpassed him, who caused to be written in the Temple of
Minerua, That he had overcome, put to flight, and slain, and upon yeeling,
received to mercy, twenty hundred, fourscore, and four thousand men.

Cato Censorius boasted, that he took ^ore Towns in Spain, then he had
been ^^ves in that country. Plut.

Agesilaus King of Sparta, hearing an Athe^ian boasting the thicknes of Athens
vvalls, ^ayd, That the same did well become them, because strong walls were
wont to be built for wo^en.

A Roman Patricide being ambitious of honor, and a coward, to obtain the
same, de^ermined to set fire on the Treasure house, where the people of Rome
laid up their ^reasure. Liuius.

Pyrrhus might have been a great Prince ^f he had not been ambitious, and
had fol^owed Cineas counsel, who dissuaded him from his voyage into Italy;
but he said, that from Tarentum he would go to Rome; from Rome to Sicilia,
from thence to Carthage; and when he had overcome the^, he would be king of
all Greece, and the^ would rest himself.

Pompey could abide no equal, and Caesar no superior.

Fabius the proud Senator, dyed with swa^owing a hair in milk.

Spurinus Metellus a Senator of Rome, was murdered, by reason of his ambition,
and his house utterly rased by Cincinatus Dictator, because he sought by
means of a certain distribution of wheat, to make himself king of Rome.

M. Manlius upon the like occasion, vva^ thrown down headlong from a Tower.
Liuius.

Diogenes would tread upon Platoes carpets and cushions, and said that he
trod Platoes pride under foot; but thou doos^ that (quoth Plato) with
another greate^ pride. Laertius.

The proud and stout nature of Coriolanus, was the cause of his ruin,
notwithstanding, that therewithal he was one of the absolutest men in all
Rome. Liuius.

Epaminondas, perceiving himself to be somewhat prouder for his victory at
Leuctra, came abroad the next day homely apparrelled in some grief; and when
he was asked whence his sadness proceeded? he said he had no cause of
heaviness, but did that because he had been too well pleased the day before.
Thucidides.

The goodness of Aristides, and the meekness of Cymon, made the government of
the Athenians well lyked of all the Nations of Greece, but the arrogancy of
Pausanias, made it to be the more desired.

Philip King of France, and John his son, lost Guien by their
ouer-hastinesse, and Charles recovered it by gentleness and humility. Froisard.

Zeuxis, when he had finished the picture of Atalanta, being strooken with
admiration of his own work, brake into these words, and writ underneath it,
Painters will sooner envy then imitate my doing.

Salacon, being known to be a very poor man, was of so proud an humor,
that he took upon him as though he had been as vvealthy as the best, from
him came this proverb, Saloconica superbia. Suidas.

Anthony had two children by Cleopatra, the one Alexander, who^ he called the
Sun, the other Cleopatra, whom he called the Moon. Appian.

Scipio and Haniball discoursing of the excellency of a Captain, Scipio asked
him whom he thought to be the best Captain in the world? he answered
Alexander, whereat Scipio stayed; then he asked him who was the next? he said
Pyrrhus; at which he grieved; then who the third? he said, my self. Scipio
seeing him so advance himself, said, in what place would thou have put thy
self, if thou had not been overcome of me? he answered, I would then
have set my self before Alexander.

Pericles persuading the Athenians to follow the vvarres, in an Oration vainly
praised himself, saying, That for counsel in this matter, they could not
admit a more sufficient man then himself. Thucidides.

Iugurtha killed his brethren Hiempsall and Adherball, that he alone might be
King of Numidia. Salust.

Aelius Adrianus the Emperor, boasted that whilst the Commonwealth was in
quiet estate, he got more then all other Emperors in wars, and destruction
of Realms and Countries; his name was so much feared, that many kings sent him
presents, seeking to be at peace with him. Eutrop.

The ambition of Marius and Sylla, kindled civil vvarres with such
extreamitie, that the streets of Rome did run with the blood of the
Citizens. Suet.

Alexander answered the Ambassadors of Darius who entreated for peace, and
offered his daughter in marriage, that as the heavens could not suffer two
Suns to rule, so the earth might not permit two Alexanders.

Of Envy. The most ancient vice of the world is Envy, and that which shall
not end until the world end, is Envy.
THE Poets have always written, that the envious persons are continually
tormented by Megera, one of the Furies of hell.

Caligula offered sacrifice to Envy, as fearing himself to be subject to her
fury, and therefore desirous to stand in her grace. Dion.

Aristotle envied Isocrates so much, that he was wont to say, It were a shame
for Aristotle to hold his peace, and let Isocrates speak.

Homer had his Zoilus, Virgill his Meuius, Cicero his Lycinius, yea, the Gods
themselves had their Momus.

Fauorinus was wont to wonder how he could live, because the Emperor
Adrian envied him, and therefore on a time yielding to the Emperor in a
certain disputation, when his friends that stood by, meruailed thereat, he
said; shall not I yield to him that has twenty legions of soldiers?

Plato and Xenophon, Demosthenes and Aeschines, greatly despised each other.
Antoninus and Geta, brothers and successors in the Empire to Seuerus their
Father, envied so each other, that Antoninus slew his brother Geta, that he
might rule alone. Herodian.

The Athenians, through the envy they bare to Themistocles, caused Timocreon a
Rhodian Poet, in his verses to report him a covetous person, a violater of his
faith, and no keeper of hospitality.

Caligula was wont for envy to those he met, to shave their hairs of
behind; he was so envious, that if he saw any Roman that had fair golden
hair, he would cut it off with his own hands. Sueto.

Anthony caused the head of Cicero to be set before him when he was at meat;
and his wife Fuluia pulled out the tongue thereof, and wore it in her bonnet.
Plutarch.

Metellus, at what time Pompey was appointed to succeed him in his office of
Proconsulshyp in Spain, for envy threof brake all the furniture of war,
consumed all the victuals, famished all the Elephants, suffering his soldiers
to do what injury they could against Pompey.

Plato being in Aegina, it was told the chief Judge that a man of Athence was
in the City, which ought by law to die, he calling Plato before him,
demanded what he was? Plato answered, a Philosopher; one envious of him and
good letters, hearing the name of Philosopher, said, this is no man, but a
beast, then replied Plato, saying; I ought to be free by law, being a beast
and no man; whereupon they dismissed him. Laertius.

Politian writ to an envious man; thou enuiest all things to all men, except
envy, and the same thou do envy in another man, which is more envious then
thy self.

The mortal hatred betwixt Caesar and Pompey, was not because the one had
injured the other, but for that Pompey had envy of that great fortune of
Caesar's in fighting, and Caesar of the great grace Pompey had in government.
Suetonius.

Themistocles being demanded by one that met him, why he was sad? answered,
The sorrow that I have, is for that in 22. years since I was borne, I think
not that I have done any thing worthy memory, because I see no man in all
Athence bears me envy. Plutarch.

The Salamines buried their dead with their backs turned against the
Agarenes, which were their mortal enemies, showing thereby, that their
enmity endured not only in time of their life, but also when they were dead.

Publius seeing Mutius (a dogged and envious man) sadder then he was wont to
be, said; Either some misfortune is befallen Mutius, or else some good fortune
to those that he enuieth. Macrobius.

So mortal was the hatred between the two brethren Eteocles and Polynices,
that when their bodies (according to the custom of the Country) were burned,
the flame parted in sunder, showing thereby that their envy was not ended in
death. Seneca.

Caligula was desirous of his own ease, and yet he was envious to those that
were at ease as well as he. Sueto.

He envied Homer so much, that being determined upon a time to abolish the
memory of him, he said, that he might well have as much power as Plato, to
vveede him out of his Commonwealth. Suetonius.

Dyonisius the tyrant, to avoid envy, advanced a man that was wicked, and
greatly hated of the people, and being demanded why he did so, Because
(quoth he) I meant to have a man in my Realm that shall be more hated then
my self.

So mortal was the envy between Themistocles and Arestides, that Themistocles
said to the Athenians, Except ye cast me and Aristides out of the City, into
the bottom of the sea, ye shall never have a quiet Athence.

Alexander would not that Aristotle should publish those books which he had
read to him, because he desired alone to pass all others in learning and
feats of war.

Alcibiades, to avoid the ouer-great envy of the people, and to turn aside
the evil speeches they had of him, cut of the tail of a dog that he had
bought very dear, and drove him through the City, to the intent he might
busy men's heads about talk of his dog, and not about other matters.

Narsetes being an Egiptian borne, was very much envied of the Romans,
because he daily increased in honor and riches.

Had not that which Carmenta or Nicostrata the wife of Euander writ of the
wars of Troy, been at that time throught envy thrown into the fire, the
name of Homer had (without doubt) at this day remained obscure. Aurelius.

Viriatus a Spanyard, King of the Lusitanians, and a great enemy to the
Romans, was so aduenturous in all his vvarres, and valiant in person, that
they, by the space of fifteen years, could never have victory of him; but
when they saw by experience that he was inuinsible, through envy they caused
him to be poisoned.

Alexander could not abide Perdiccas, because he was warlike, he hated
Lysimachus because he was cunning in ordering a battle, he envied Seleucus,
because he was full of prowess and courage, he abhorred Antigonus, because
he was ambitious, he grudged at Attalus, because his power was princ-like.
Plutarrh.

Plato envied Democritus, because he made no mention of him in his books,
thinking that he made no account of him.

It is an old custom to murmr at virtuous deeds, Socrates was reproved of
Plato, Plato of Aristotle, Aristotle of Auerrois and Ramus, Sicilius of
Vulpitius, Lelius of Varro, Marinus of Ptolomeus, Ennius of Homer, Seneca of
Aul. Gellius, Cratonestes of Strabo, Thesalleo of Gellian, Hermagoras of
Cicero, Cicero of Salust, Origin of Hierome, Hierom of Ruffinus, Ruffinus of
Donatus, Donatus of Prosper, and Prosper of Lupus.

Of Wrath. This vice proceeds from the overmuch in^^med blood about the
heart, the which by no ^eanes yields leisure to understand the cir^umstances
which reason teaches.
THE manner of the Pythagorians, was much commended, who when they had once
uttered their choler, would take one another by the hand, and lovingly embrace
before evening.

The carriage of bundels of sticks bound together upon Pollaxes, was to show
that the wrath of a Magistrate ought not to be too ready, for that while
leasurely those bundels so bound were losed, it brought some delay and space to
anger. Plutarch.

Cotys, King of Thracia, when one brought a present of goodly vessels of
glass, after he had well recompensed the gift, he brak^ the^ all, for fear
least through choler) whereunto he was subject) he should be moved to wrath
against any of his servants.

Theodosius, being wrathfully moved against those of Thessolonica, for a
co^motion which they made, and for slaying his Lieuetenant sent thither an
Army, whereupon 1 thousand were slain, neither women (...) children being
spared, afterward repenting, (...) commanded the execution of his letters
pa^tents should be held in suspense thirty day^ after signification of them,
namely, when a^ny were to be punished more severely the^ of custom.

Ajax, impatient for the loss of Achilles a^^mour, killed himself. Ovid.

Darius, being in an exceeding rage against the Athenians, for sacking the
City Sardis prayed God that he might revenge that injury, and ordained that
thrice a day, when his meat was upon the table, one should say unto him,
remember the Athenians. Herodotus.

Clinias, by playing upon the Harp, and Theodosius by reading the Alphabet,
learned to forget their anger. P. Diaconus.

Alcimenides, a King among the Grecians, favored one Pannonius highly, who one
day playing with him at the ball, they contended about a chase, and the one
said it was thus, the other contrary; and thus contending the King enraged,
commanded his guard presently to strike of his head. Plut.

Ptolomey, finding Eusenides, whom he ^reatly loved, talking with a Curtezan
who^ (...) likewise loved, made her drink a cup of ^oyson, and caused him
foorth-with to be ^rangled.

Constantius, the Emperor, had a minion ^alled Hortensius, whom he dearly
loved, and ^ne day a Page giving him drink in a glass ^y mishap, the glass
fell out of his hand, and ^rake in pieces, whereat the Emperor was ^ery angry;
in this unhappy hour Horten^us came to the Emperor, to present him ^ertaine
bills to be signed, which he was con^ented to do, and for that the Ink was
too ^hick, or the pen so naught that he could not ^rite, he commanded in a
rage Hortensius ^o be beheaded.

Pyrrhus, in his wrath, slew his trusty Secre^ary Fabatus. The Emperor
Bitillion his ^reatest friend Cincinnatus; Adrian, his on^y favored Amproma;
Dioclesian, his ^^iend Patritius; Alexander, Clytus. P. Di^conus.

Periander, in his rage murdered his own ^ife, and then with judgment
considering ^he fact, he caused those strumpets which ^^censed him thereto to
be burned.

Cataline said, that he could not quench ^he fire begun in his house with
water, and therefore would pull it down. Salustius.

The foolish revenge of Xerxes is memo^^^ble, who when Hellespont molested him
his passage, commanded, that it sho^^^ have three hundred strypes, and willed
th^^^ hundred pair of fetters to be thrown the in to bind it. Iustine.

Darius, after he had taken Babylon, ^^^uenged their old malice, with the
murder 3000. Citizens. Herodotus.

Alexander, after he had subdued man kingdoms, went into the temple of
Iupi^^^ Hammon, to know by oracle whether yet ^^ny were alive that had slain
his father Ph^^lip, that he might seek further revenge. (...).

The Athenians did honor to Aristiget and Harmodius, for killing the tyrant
Hipachus. Thucidides.

There were eleven persecutions, of the p^^^matiue Church.

The first, was in the reign of the Emper^^ Nero, who caused the bodies of
Christian to be torn in pieces with dogs, and to (...) the dogs more fierce,
they were braced skins of Bears, and other savage beasts; vnd^^ him suffered
Peter and Paul. Eusebius. continued 3. years. Tacitus.

The second, was by Domitian, who vnde^^^^anding that one should spring out of
the ^ne of David, which should expel him his ^mpire, he caused al those to be
put to death which descended from the race of David, a^ongst the Jews, he
exiled and confined John the Evangelist, into the I Will of Path^os, it continued
2. years. Orosius.

The third, was by Traiaine, who determi^ed by torments to punish the
Christians, and therefore by public edict, ordained ^^at the Christians
should worship the Idols (...) the Gentiles, upon pain of death, which ^hey
refusing to do, he made a great slaugh^er of them, afterward he stayed
persecution, and gave them liberty. Eusebius.

The 4, was in the time of Mar. Aurel. sirna^ed the Philosopher, who persecuted
the Church millitant in Asia and Europe, where ^ucius Varus was Governor. Idem.

The 5, under Septimus Seuerus, which per^ecution caused God to disturb his
peace, ^or one of his Captains, called Albinius, re^elled against him, who
made all Britain re^olt from him, calling himself Emperor, du^ing his life.
Orosius.

The 6, under Maximus, who most deuilishly persecuted the Christians, being
offended that A. Seuerus had supported them.

The 7. was in the reign of Decius, (...) persecuted them in despite of his
predicesour Phillip, who was christened. Idem.

The 8. in Valerians reign, who in the b^^ginning greatly favored them, but
afte^^wards he was seduced by a Magitian of Ae^gipt, because they impugned his
deceipts sorceries, and persecuted them with gre^^ slaughter. Orosius.

The 9. in the time of the Emperor Aur^^lius, who the first 6. years used them
most l^^uingly, but in the end by the provocation the devil, he persecuted
them througho^^ all the confines of his Empire. Eusebius.

The 10. under Dioclesian, which continu^ed 10. years together, of the which
Euseb^^us and Orosius were eyewitnesses, some were broiled and scorched
alive, others, the flesh carded, as though it had been wool.

The 11. and last, was by Iulianus Apostat^ who seeing that the blood of the
Martirs wa^ the seed of the Church, tempted diverse (...) preferments and
offices to commit idolatry This was the greatest wound that ever the Church
received. Ruffinus. Cassiodorus.

Pressilla, a woman of Campania, was the nurse of Caligula, she had against
all nature of women her breast hairy, as she was gyuin^ ^uck to Caligula, a
young child angered her, whom she tore in pieces, and with the blood ^hereof
anointed her breasts, so that he suc^ed together blood and milk, which made
^im so cruel. Dion.

The women of Campania had this custom, that when they would give their teates
to a ^hild, first they did annoint the nipple with ^he blood of an Hedghogge,
to the end that children might be more fierce and cruel. ^dem.

Pyrrhus was borne in Greece, nourished in Arcadia, and brought up with Tygres
milk, (...) to say more plainly, Pyrrhus for being borne in Greece was sage,
for that he was brought up in Archadia, he was strong and courageous, and for
to have sucked Tygres milk, he was very proud and cruel. Homer.

Pantaleon, tyrant of Elis, caused those Ambassadors that came to him to be
guelded, and made the^ to eat their own stones. Heraclid.

Bagoas, an Eunuche, not content to have murdered Artaxerxes, surnamed Ochus
king Aegipt, caused his bones to be sawed in sunder, to be filed and scraped,
to be shaven, and carved, and made handles for swords and daggers. I marvel
he forgotte to make dice of them.

Euilmerodat, or Balthazar, the son of N^^buchadnezer, gave his fathers dead
body (...) be devoured of Vultures, fearing that h^ would revive again, who
of an Ox, cou^^ become a man.

Tiberius Nero, put one to death, that ^ craftily tempered glass that it would
bend and bough with Iron (being himself one ^ his Crafts-mayster) saying,
That gold and si^^uer, if such were permitted, would be of no est^^mation.

Dionysius, caused Damocles to sit in (...) chair of estate, abounding with
all kind (...) delicacies, but over his head did hang a n^^ked sword, thereby
to show the estate where in tyrants stood. Plut.

Galba, assembling together the people (...) three Towns in Spain, under
color (...) treat of something for their wealth, caused so^dainly to be
murdered 7000. among who^ was the flower of all the youth. Valerius.

Octauius, when he took Perowse, choo^sing out three hundred of those that
ha^ yielded, as well of the better sort, as of the vulgar, slew them in manner
of sacrifices before an alter, newly erected Diuo Iulio. Su^tonius.

Antonius Caracalla, offended with them of Alexandria, entering the City in a
peaceable manner, and calling out all their youth into a fair field, enclosed
them with his Soldiers, and at a sign given, killed them every one, using the
like cruelty against all the rest, and clean depopulated the City. Herodianus.

Volesius Messala, being Proconsull of Asia, slew with the sword in one day
300. and then walking proudly among the courses, with his hands cast abroad,
as though he had atchiued a worthy enterprise, cried out, O kingly deed.
Seneca.

Theodosius, the Prince (a man consecrated to the true God) fradulently calling
together at Thessalonica 7000. innocent persons, as it were to see plays, sent
in Soldiers amongst them, who slew them. Eutropius.

Of Covetousness. The better hap a man has to attain to riches, the more is he
accursed, in being more tormented with the feauers of the mind and unquietness.
This vice is held to be the root of all evil, lacking as well those things
which it enjoys, as which it wants.
THE Scithians only, make no use of gold and silver, for ever detesting and
condemning the monstrous sin of covetousness. Solinus.

Caligula, was so covetous, that there was no kind of lucre, or mean to get
money by, how unlawful so ever it were, which he sought not out, insomuch as
he laid a trybute upon urine, and sold his sisters gowns, whom he had sent
into banishment. Valerius.

Calipha, King of Persia, having filled a Tower with gold, Jewels, and precious
stones, and being in war against Allan king of Tartary, was so ill succored
of his own people, because he would not give them their pay, that he was
taken of Allan, and famished in that Tower where all his treasure lay.

Dionysius the elder, and advertised of one that had hid great store of money,
commanded him upon pain of death to bring it to him, which he did, although
not all, but with the remainder dwelt in another place, and bestowed it upon
inheritance, when Dionysius heard thereof, he sent him that which he took from
him, saying, Now thou know how to use riches, take that I had from thee.

Hermocrates, ready to die, bequeathed his goods to himself.

One at the hour of his death, swallowed many pieces of gold, and sewed the
rest in his coat, commanding that it should be buried with him. Atheneus.

One besieged in the Tower of Cassilina by Haniball, chose rather to sell a Rat
which he had taken for 200. Roman pence, then to satisfy his hunger, whereof
he dyed straight after, but the other saved his life by that dear meat.
Valerius.

The Popes Camera, or Eschequer, is like unto the Sea, whereinto all Rivers do
run, and yet it ouerfloweth not. P. Martyr.

The wife of Lot looking backward, turned into a pillar of salt, shows that
none in the way of deliberation should desire things past. Augustinus

The old Clergy being asked why they cannot live by their holiness but by
covetousness, answered, Nunc aliud tempus, alij pro tempore mores. Polychr:

Demonica betrayed Ephesus to Brennus of Senona, for gold, who demanded her
reward of him, who brought her to a great heap of gold, and loaded her so
heavy therewith, that she died under the burden.

Euclio, had hidden such treasure under the ground, that he durst not go out of
his house for fear of robbing, nor tarry in it for fear of killing. Plautus.

Adrian, surnamed Sophista, when a neighbor of his had sent him a few dainty
fishes, for a present in a silver dish, he took both the silver dish and the
fishes, saying to the messenger, Thank thy master, and tell him, I take his
fishes for novelties, and his silver dish for a present.

Simonides, when he was requested to do any thing gratis, id est, for nothing,
said, That he had two chests, the one shut up for thanks, the other always
open for money. Plut.

Vespasian, when he heard that a silver Image of great substance should be
made for a monument of his worthiness, he straight held out his hand, saying,
Behold, here is a place ready to set an Image, a sure foundation from falling.

Vespasian, of pure misery, niggardship, and covetousness, commanded in Rome,
to be made public places, to receive urine, not to keep the City more
sweet, but to the end they should give him more rent. Suetonius.

Simonides, being demanded why he hoorded up money toward the end of his
old age, Because (quoth he) I had rather leave my goods to mine enemies, then
to have need of the relief of my friends while I am alive.

Virgill, in his sixth book of Aeneiads, puts those persons in hell, which
have done no good to their friends, kindsfolk, and neighbors, but have been
wholly wedded to their riches, without imparting them to others. Virgill.

Ochus, King of Persia, would never go into the Country of Perseland, because
that by the law of the Realm, he was bound to give to every woman that had
borne children, one French crown, and to every woman with child two.

Plato, thought it almost impossible, for a man very rich to be honest, yet
Solon as wise as he, desired to have riches, but not to get them by wrong.
Plut.

Anacreon, having received of Polycrates five talents for a gift, was so much
troubled for the space of two nights with care, how he might keep them, and
how to employ them best, that he carried them back again, saying, That they
were not worth the pains he had already taken for them.

Socrates, being sent for by K. Archelaus, to come and receive store of gold,
sent him word that a measure of flower was sold in Athenc^ for a penny double,
and that water cost him nothing.

Lycurgus, abrogated the use of gold and silver coin, and appointed Iron money
to be current, by this means he banished from them the desire of riches.

Caligula, took of every Curtezan, as much of her gain as she could get of
any man at once.

Pertinax, being advanced to the degree of Emperor, did not forget his
niggardlines, but parted Lettice and Artichawkes in two, that the one half
might be for his dinner, and the other for his supper. Eutropius.

The parsimony of Fabritius, is not to be condemned, for the age wherein he
lived, ought to excuse him, in the which all magnificence was unknown to the
Romans.

Justinian the Emperor, for himself procured riches, and for the devil he
cheapned souls, he was covetous, and maintained the heresy of the Pelagians.

Epimenides curse of riches was, that all the treasures hoorded up by the
covetous, should be wasted by the prodigal.

The Romans, and the Carthagenians, were friends a long time, but after they
knew ^here was in Spain great mines of gold and silver, immediately arose
between them civil wars. P. Diaconus.

Darius, being very rich and covetous, sent to Alexander in scorn, to know
where he had treasure to maintain such an army, who answered, Tell thy
master that he keeps in his Cofers his treasures of mettalls, and I have no
other treasure then the hearts of my friends. Plutarch.

Angelot, a Cardinal, was so covetous, that by a false door he descended into
the stable, and every night stole away the Oats, which his horse-keepers had
given his horses, and continued it so long, till one of the horse-keepers
hyding himself in the stable, did so be labor him with a Pikeforke, that he
had much ado to crawle away. I. Pontanus.

Of Sloth. In this vice, wit, understanding, wisdom, and all honest endeavors
are buried, as it were in a grave, from which arises the loathsome stench of
corrupt manners and disordered life, making of men women, of women beasts, of
beasts monsters.
ALexander, an Emperor of the East, given to great idleness, demanded of hi^
wise men, if he had long to live, they aunswe^red him, yea, If he could take
away the teeth o^ a brazen Boar, that stood in the market place meaning
thereby, that he would shorten his days except he gave over his idleness.
Zonarus.

A Senator of Rome, who was saluted by an^other, riding in his chariot,
answered, I will not say God save you, since in going thus at you^ ease, you
show you have no desire to live long.

Epaminondas, discharged all his Soldiers which grew fat, saying, That as a
woman too fat does not easily conceive, so does fat hinder a man from doing his
charge, as arms do which are to heavy.

Scipio, being arrived at his camp, banished all Soldiers, slaves, and Pages,
and all unprofitable people, and made each one to carry his own armor.

The Sabies, having abundance of all kind of riches, spent their times
slothfully.

The Nabathies, having nothing, but what they get by their virtue and labor,
are good husbands, and abandon all idleness.

Metellus, when he was arrived in Africa, he took away whatsoever might
seem to ^ourish slothfulnes, and caused proclamati^n to be made, that none
should presume to ^^ll either bread or any other food dressed, that the
carriers of water should not follow ^he Camp, that the Soldiers should have
^o pages, nor beasts of carriage, that each one should keep his rank, cast
his trench, and carry his victuals together with his fur^iture. Salust.

In the Islands named Baleares in Spain, the children might not eat, until
with their slings they had strooken down their meat, which their parents
used to set for them upon an hie beam or poale. Pliny.

Epaminondas killed one of his soldiers being a sleep, that was set to
vvatch, saying that he left him in the same estate he found him.

The kings of Persia and Macedonia, were every morning awaked, to put them in
mind to take care of that which God had committed to their charge. Herodot.

At certain games of Olympus, there came a Philosopher of Thebes, which had
made all the apparel he wore himself; the assembly meruailing that one man
could do all this, he answered, The sloth of man is the cause that one Art is
divided into diverse; for he that knows all Arts together, must needs kno^
one alone. He was reputed a vaine-glor^^ous Philosopher.

More hurtful was the City of Carthag^ to Rome after her destruction, then
durin^ the whole course and season of wars which the Romans had with her,
for that vvhil^ they had enemies in Afric, they knew no^ what vices meant in
Rome. Gueuara.

The great Numantia in Spain, could ne^uer be vvone (notwithstanding 14.
year siedge of the Romans,) till Scipio purge^ his Camp of loyterers,
perfumers, and har^lots.

Darius plunged the Babylonians in all manner of idleness, that they might not
have the heart afterward to rebel.

The same policy used Cimon, to diminis^ the force and power of his allies,
by graun^ting them whatsoever they required.

The carelessness and negligence of Dionisius the younger, getting the upper
hand o^ him, carried him to women and lechery, and at length did break in
sunder his Adaman^ chains; that is, the great number of his warlike
soldiers, and his store of Gallyes, o^ whom his Father boasted that he left
his kingdom fast chained to his son.

Sardanapalus through his slothfulness, was ^uercome by Arbactus, and lost the
Mo^archie of Assyria.

The Pheacons counted it the greatest feli^^tie that might be, to do nothing.
Homer.

The Romans used to punish idleness so ^^arply, that the husbandman whose
ground ^as found barren, and his pastures vnoccu^ied, was presently put from
the place, and ^is ground given to another man.

Macarius and Diogenes, for that they would ^ot be accounted idle persons, the
one would ^emooue heaps of sand from place to place, and the other vvoulde
tumble his tubbe up (...) down.

Augustus did win the soldiers unto him ^ith rewards, the common sort with
plenty of victuals, and all generally with the plea^ure of ease. Tacitus.

When Augustus reproched a certain plaier because through his occasion there
was a tu^ult among the people, he answered, It is ^ood for thee, o Caesar,
that the people be vvith^eld by our idle exercises, from busying their ^raines
about other matters. Dion.

Of Gluttony. This deadly enemy to health, replenisheth the body with humors,
wind, inflammations, distil^lations, and opirations; and change of mea^ draws
pleasure out of the bounds of sufficien^cie; Pleasure, in all things which
pleases whereas in simple and uniform things, deligh^ never exceeds the
appetite and natural neces^sitie.
THE Arigentines, builded as though the^ should alvvayes live, and did feed,
a^^though they should always die. Plato.

The Emperor Septimus Seuerus, and Io^uinianus, dyed with eating and drinking
to much.

Valintinianus, a famous Emperor, dye suddenly of a surfeit.

Lucullus, being asked one day by his ser^uaunt, whom he had invited to his
feast, see^ing so much meat prepared? answered, Lucullus shall dine with
Lucullus. Plut.

Vitellius Spinter, was so much given t^ gluttony and excess, that at one
supper, h^ was served with two thousand several kin^ of fishes, and with
7000. flying fowls.

Mulcasses king of Thunis, after he was de^riued of his kingdom, in his
return out of Almaigne, being without hope that the Emperor Charles the fifth
would help him at ^ll, he spent one hundred crowns upon a Peacock dressed
for him. P. Iouius.

Maximilian the Emperor, devoured in one day forty pounds of flesh, and drunk
an ^ogshead of wine.

Geta the Emperor, for three days together continued his feastiual, and his
delicates were brought in by the order of the Alphabet.

Astydamas, being invited by Ariobarza^es to a banquet, eat up all that alone,
which was provided for diverse guests. Vopisc.

There was a contention between Hercules and Lepreas, which of them both
should first devour an Ox, in which attempt Lepreas was overcome,
afterward, he challenged him for drinking, but Hercules was his master.
Aelianus.

Aglais, whose practice was to sound the trumpet, devoured at every meal
twelve pounds of flesh, with as much bread, as two bushels of wheat would
make, and three gallons of wine.

Philoxenes, a notorious glutton, wished he had a neck like a Crane, that the
svveet^ meat which he eat might be long in going down. Rauisius.

Lucullus at a solemn and costly feast he made to certain Ambassadors of
Asia, a^mong other things, he did eat a Griph boi^led, and a Goose in paste.
Macrob.

Salust, in his inuectiue against Cicero, a^mongst many grave matters whereof
he accused him, he spoke of his wanton excess as having poudred meats from
Sardinia, an^ wines from Spain.

Lucullus took great pains himself i^ furnishing of a feast, and when he was
aske^ why he was so curious in setting out a ban^quet, he answered, That
there was as great discretion to be used in marshalling of a feast, (...) in
the ordering of a battle, that the one might be terrible to his enemies, and
the other acceptable to his friends. Plut.

In Rhodes, they that love fish, are accounted right courteous and free-harted
men, bu^ he that delights more in flesh, is ill though of, and to his great
shame is reputed a bond slave to his belly. Aelianus.

Sergius Galba, was a devouring and glut^tonous Emperor, for he caused at one
banquet 7. thousand byrds to be killed. Suet.

Xerxes having tasted of the figs of A^hence, swear by his Gods that he
vvoulde ^ate no other all his life after, and went forth^vith to prepare an
Army to conquer Gre^ia, for no other cause but to fill his belly full of the
figs of that Country. Plut.

Plato returning out of Sicill into Greece, told his scholars that he had seen
a monster, meaning Dionisius, because he used to eat ^wice a day. Idem.

Aristotle mocking the Epicures, said, that upon a time they went all into a
temple together, beseeching the Gods that they would give them necks as long as
Cranes and He^ons, that the pleasures and tastes of meats might be more long,
complaining against Nature for making their necks too short.

The Sicilians dedicated a Temple to Glut^ony, and erected images to Bacchus
and Ce^es, the God and goddess of wine and corn. Pausanias.

M. Manlius, in times past made a book of diverse vvayes how to dress meat,
and another of the tastes, sauces, and diverse means of services, which were
no sooner published, but by the decree of the Senate, they were burned, and if
he had not fled speedily unto Asia, he had been burned with them.

There was a law in Rome called Fabia, b^ which it was prohibited, that no man
should dispend in the greatest feast he made, about an hundred Sexterces. Aul.
Gellius.

The law Licinia, forbad all kinds of sauce at feasts, because they provoke
appetite, and are cause of great expense. Idem.

The law Ancia, charged the Romans t^ learn all kind of sciences but
cookerie.

The law Iulia, was that none should be (...) hardy as to shut their gates
when the^ were at dinner, that the Censors of the Cit^tie might have easy
access into their hou^ses at that time, to see if their ordinary were
according to their ability. Macrob.

Nisaeus a tyrant of Syracuse, when he understood by his Soothsayers that he
had no^ long to live, the little time he had left, he^ spent in belly-cheere
and drunkenness, an^ so dyed. Rauisius.

Mar. Anthonius set forth a book of hy^ drunkenness, in which he proved
thos^ prancks he played when he was ouercom^ with wine, to be good and
lawful. Plut.

Darius had written upon his grave this in^scription; I could drink good store
of wine, and bear it well. Rauisius.

Ptolomey, who in mockery was calle^ Philopater, because he put to death his
Father and mother, through wine and women, dyed like a beast. Valor.

Lacydes a Philosopher, by too much drinking fell into a palsy, whereof he
dyed.

Aruntius a Roman, being drunken, deflowred his own daughter Medullina, whom
she forthwith killed. Plutarch.

Tiberius Caesar was preferred to a Pretorshyp, because of his excellency in
drinking.

Diotimus, was surnamed Funnell, or Tunnell, because he gulped down wine
through the channel of his throat, which was powered into a Funnell, the end
whereof was put into his mouth, without interspiration between gulpes.
Rauisius.

In the feast of Bacchus, a crown of gold was appointed for him that could
drink more then the rest.

Agron the King of Illyrium, fell into a sickness of the sides called the
Plurisie, by reason of his excessive drinking, and at last died thereof.

Cleio a woman, was so practiced in drinking, that she durst challenge all
men and women what soever, to try maisteries who could drink most, and
overcome all.

Cleomenes, king of Lacedemonia, being disposed to carouse after the manner of
the Scythians, drank so much, that he became and continued ever after
senseless.

Cyrillus son, in his drunkenness, wickedly slew that holy man his father,
and his mother great with child, he hurt his two sisters, and deflowred one of
them. August.

Androcides a Gentleman of Greece, hearing of Alexanders excess in
drunkenness, vvrote a letter to him, wherein was a Tablet of gold, with these
words thereon engraven, Remember Alexander when thou drinkest wine, that thou
do drink the blood of the earth.

Those of Gallia Transalpina, understanding that the Italians had planted Vines
in Italy, came to conquer their Country; so that if they had never planted
Vines, the Frenchmen had not destroyed the Country. Liuius.

Four old Lombards being at banquet together, the one drank an health round
to the others years, in the end they challenged two to two, and after each man
had declared how many years old he was, the one drank as many times as he had
years, and likewise his companion pledged him, the one was 58. the second,
63. the third, 87. the last, 92. so that a man knows not what they did eat
or drink; but he that drank least, drank 58. cups of wine. P. Diaconus.

Of this evil custom came the law that the Goths made, that is; We
ordain and command, upon pain of death, that no old men upon pain of
death, should drink to one another health at the table. Idem.

Of Lechery. This bewitching evil, being an unbridled appetite, in
whomsoever it reigns, kills all good motions of the mind, alters,
dries, and weakeneth the body, shortning life, diminishing memory, and
understanding.
CYrena, a notorious strumpet, was surnamed Dode camechana, for that she
invented and found out twelve several ways of beastly pleasure. Cor. Arip.

Proculeius the Emperor, of an hundred Sarmatian virgins he took captive, he
deflowred ten the first night, and all the rest within fifteen days after.

Hercules in one night deflowred fifty.

Theophrastus writes of an Indian herb, which who so eats, is able to
perform 70. several actions.

Johannes a Casa, Archbishop of Beneuento, and Legate in Venice, writ a book
in praise of the abominable vice of Sodomitrie.

Sigismond Malatesta, striued to have carnal knowledge of his son Robert,
who thrusting his dagger into his fathers bosom, revenged his wickedness.

Cleopatra, had the use of her brother Ptolomeus company, as of her husbands.

Antiochus stayed a whole vvinter in Chalcidea, for one maid which he there
fancied.

Lust was the cause of the vvarres between the Romans and the Sabines.
Liuius.

Thalesthis, Queen of the Amazons, came 25. days journey, to lie with
Alexander. Justinius.

Adultery in Germany, is never pardoned. Tacitus.

Messalina and Popilia, were so incontinent, that they co^tended with most
shameful harlots, prostrating themselves without respect of time, place, or
company, to any, though never so base. Plut.

Claudius deflowred his own sisters, and Semiramis burned in beastly lust
toward her son Ninus.

Nero caused Atticus a Roman Consul to be slain, that he might the more
conveniently enjoy the company of his wife. Corn. Tacitus.

Commodus, not contented with his three hundred Concubines, committed incest
with his own sisters. Herodian.

Caligula did the like, but the one was slain by his wife, the other by his
Concubine.

Adultery was the cause of the first alteration of the City of Rome. Eutrop.

Sempronia a woman, well learned in the Greek, and Sappho, no less famous,
defended luxury and lust by their writings.

Cleopatra invited Anthony to a banquet in the province of Bithinia, in the
vvood Sesthem, where, at one instance, of threescore young virgins, fifty and
five were made mothers.

Cleophis a Queen of India, saved her kingdom and subjects from destruction,
by a nights lodging with Alexander, by whom she had a son called Alexander,
who was afterward King of India; she was ever after called Scortum Reginum.
Iustine.

Heliogabalus, not only deflowred, but also married a virgin Vestall, saying
it was reason that Priests should marry Nuns, because that in times past
he had been Priest of the Sun.

Jane Queen of Naples, was hanged up for her aduoutry, in the very same place
where she had hanged her husband Andreas before, because he was not (as she
said) able to satisfy her beastly desire.

Feron King of Egypt had been blind 10. years, and in the eleventh, the
Oracle told him that he should recover his sight, if he washed his eyes in the
water of a woman which never had to do with any but her husband;
vvhereupon, he first made trial of his own wife, but that did him no good,
after, of infinite others, which did him all as little, save only one, by whom
he recovered his sight, and then he put all the rest to death. Herodot.

Iulia the daughter of Augustus was so immodest, shameless, and unchaste, that
the Emperor was never able to reclaim her; and when she was admonished to
forsake her bad kind of life, and to follow chastity as her Father did, she
answered, That her Father forgotte that he was Caesar, but as for herself,
she knew well enough that she was Caesar's daughter.

Cornelius Gallus, and Q. Elerius, two Roman Knights, dyed in the very
action of their filthy lust. Pliny.

Arichbertus, eldest son unto Lotharius, King of France, dyed even as he
was embracing his whores.

Alcibiades was burned in his bed, with his Curtezan Timandra. Plut.

The Egyptians punishments against adultery, was, to cut of the nose of the
woman, and the privy parts of the man.

Alexander when a woman was brought to him one evening, demanded of her why
she came so late? she answered, that she stayed until her husband was gone
to bed. Which he no sooner heard, but he sent her away, being angry with the^
that had almost made him commit adultery.

He was angry with Cassander, because he would by force kiss a minstrels maid.

Rodolphus King of Lombardie, being taken in adultery, was slain by the
vvomans husband whom he abused.

Roderigo, King of Spain, was deprived of his kingdom and life by the
Sarazins, who were called in by an Earl called Julian, that he might be
avenged of the king for forcing his daughter.

Caelius Rhodoginus, in his 11. book of antiquities, tells of a certain man,
that the more he was beaten, the more he fervently desired women.

The vvidowe of the Emperor Sigismund intending to marry again, one persuaded
her to spend the remainder of her life after the manner of the Turtle-Doue,
who has but one make; If you counsel me, (quoth she) to follow the example
of byrds, why do you not tell me of Pidgions and Sparrowes, which after the
death of their makes, do ordinarily couple themselves with the next they meet.

Hiero, King of Syracusa, banished the Poet Epicharmus for speaking vvantonly
before his wife, and that very justly, for his wife was a true mirror of
chastity.

Sulpitius Gallus, put away his wife by deuorce, because she went abroad
unmasked.

Pompey caused one of his soldiers eyes to be put out in Spain, for thrusting
his hand under a woman's garment that was a Spanyard; and for the like offense,
did Sertorius command a footeman of his band to be cut in pieces. Sabellicus.

If Caracalla had not seen his mothers thigh, he had not married her.
Suetonius.

Speusippus the Philosopher, one of Platoes followers, was slain for his
adultery. Tertullianus.

Tigellinus dyed amongst his Concubines. Tacitus.

Rodoaldus, King of Lombardy, was slain with a certain matrone, even in the
action of their concupiscence. Paulus Diaconus.

By the law of Moses, adulterers were stoned with rigor, which our law does
not ob^erue, for were it to be so in these days, we should not find stones
enough to fulfill it.

A Nun, finding in her Book, at the bottom of the leaf, these words,
Bonum est omnia scire, determined to try what the carnal copulation of man and
woman might ^ee, but turning over the leaf, she saw in the beginning
thereof, Sed non vti, vvhere^pon to her grief she altered her purpose, and
her joy lasted but a while.

Rutilius, Consul of Rome, caused the temple of Lucina to be burned, because
his daughter (great with child) made her vow, and kept her 9. vigils, and upon
more devotion, was desirous to be delivered in the temple.

The Persians, would not show their wives unto strangers. Josephus.

The Tarentines, and the Capuans, were very mortal ennemies, by chance one
one day in the camp of the Capuans, two Captains fell at variance, because
they both loved one woman, which when the Tarentines perceived, immediately they
gave them the onset, and overcame them.

If Scipio Affricanus had not scowred the Roman Armies of leachery, the
invincible Numantia had never been overcome.

Phalaris, the tirant, would never grant man any thing that he desired, neither
ever denied any thing that a dissolute woman requested. Plut.

Caligula, gave but 6000. sextercies only, to repair the walls of Rome, and
10000. sextercies for furring one of his Le^mons gowns. Idem.

Dionysius, the tyrant, albeit of nature he was most cruel, yet by his
Curtezan Mirta, he became so tractable, that she only did confirm all his
provisions of the weal public, and he did but ordain and appoint them.

Themistocles, was so enamoured of a woman that he had taken in the wars of
Epirus, that she being sick, and let blood, he also was let blood, and washed
his face with the blood that issued out of her arm.

When Demetrius had taken Rhods, there was brought to him a fair Gentlewoman,
which he made his friend in love, which she perceauing to be great, showed her
self angry with him, and refused his company, but he abandoning his estate, on
his knees prayed her to pardon him.

Autenaricus, a famous King of the Goths, after he had triumphed over Italy,
and made himself Lord of Europe, was so far in love with Pincia, a Curtezan,
that whilst she combed his head, he would make clean her slippers. Olaus.

I. Caesar diversely was spotted with adultry, as with Posthumia, the wife of
Seruius Sulpitius, Lelia, the wife of Gabinus, with Tartalin, the wife of
Crassus, with Musia, Cnerius Pompeyes wife, and Seruilia, the mother of Brutus.

Of Desperation. The last of all the perturbations of the mind, is Desperation,
and is of all other most pernicious; this destroyer of all hope of better
fortune, enters so far into the heart of man, that it makes him offer
violence to himself, then the which nothing can be more dangerous to the
soul.
BRutus, and Cassius, after the death of Caesar, desperately killed themselves.

Anthony, when he heard that Cleopatra had slain her self, desperately ran
upon his sword.

Empedocles, because he could not learn the cause of Aetnaes burning, threw
himself into it. Horace.

Aristotle, for that he could not give a reason of the flux and reflux of
Eurypus, drowned himself.

Themistocles, was not ashamed of this damnable speech in his mouth; If a man
should show me two several ways, the one leading to heaven, the other to
hell, of the twain I had rather take the latter. Aelianus.

Spira, the Italian, being exhorted to say the Lords prayer, desperately
answered, That he could not with his heart call God Father, because the
devil was his Father, nor have any place but amongst the reprobate.

The Donatists, rather then they would be forced from their fancies, slew
themselves, yet this did nothing fray the Church of God from compelling them by
the rigor of Princes laws, without any respect of their wilful desperation.
August.

Ptolomeus, that killed Pompeius, being overcome by Caesar, drowned himself in
the River Nilus. Eutropius.

Phylostrates, being destitute of all his friends, by the reason of a
contagious wound he had, led a poor and miserable life, and like a beggar
wandered from place to place, thereby to signify, that though he were in such
misery, as no man more, yet had he rather in that grief so consume his days,
then desperately to kill himself.

Fimbria, killed himself in Asia, in the temple of Aesculapius, because he
would not be taken of Sylla. Appian.

Timocrates, an Athenian, seeking to avoid the fear of death by water, as
then ready to be sunk in a ship, killed himself. Thucidides.

Sabina, the wife of Adrian the Emperor, being without all reason or modesty,
was cruelly entreated, and with extremity driven to desperation, murdered her
self. Eutropius.

Arbogastus, being vanquished by Theodosius the Emperor, fled out of the
battle, and not finding place of refuge or security, with his own sword
killed himself. Ambrose.

Artaxerxes, caused his eldest son Darius to be slain, for certain
treacherous demeanours, the second brother next to him, forthwith in his
fathers presence, drew out his persian Acynax, and desperately murdered
himself. Aelian.

Mithridates, naked of all comfort, and desperate in his unhappy fortunes, when
he could not dispatch himself by poison, for that he had always used
Antidotes (from whence at this day we call our Mithridate) desired Bitalus a
Frenchman, and one of his Captains, to kill him, which he obayed. Appian.

The Assapeians, besieged of the Romans, seeing no way to escape their
tyranny and bondage, brought all their goods and riches into the marketplace,
and piled upon them great heaps of wood, and swear 50. of the chiefest of
their City, that they with themselves, wives and children, should go up to
it, and if they were further distressed, to set it on fire. Idem.

Of the Devil. The devil has diverse names, he is called Diabolus, Daemo^,
(and of Plato Cacodaemo^) Satan, Lucifer, Leuiathan, Mammon, Asmodeus,
Beelzebub, Baal, Berith, Belphegor, and Astaroth.
THE devil suffered Herod in words, to pretend the worshipping of Christ, when
he intended in his heart to kill him.

He made Pilate to confess Christ's innocence, and yet against his own
conscience, to give sentence of death against him.

He caused Judas to kiss Christ, as though he loved him, and then to betray
him.

The devil caused Pilates wife to dream, that she was troubled, because of
Christ, and prayed him not to meddle with him, for that the devil knew by his
death the restoration of mankind.

It is written in the discourse of the lives of the fathers of Aegipt, that one
of them saw in a vision, the assembly of devils, and hearing one report the
diversity of illusions, wherewith they had beguiled the world, he saw their
Prince make great gratulation and recompense, to one of those ill spirits, that
had deceived a virtuous man of the Church, the^ to all the rest, stirring
thousands to transgressions and sins.

In Italy, an unlearned woman possessed with the devil, being asked, which
was the best verse Virgil made, answered, Discite Iustitiam monite et non
temnere diuos. Louicerus.

A maid, borne in Saxony, before she was twelve years of age, and one that
neue^ knew what learning meant (possessed as the other) prophesied in Greek,
and Latin the wars that were to come in Saxony Idem.

The King of the Sodomites, in the person of the devil, said to Abraham, Give
me the souls, take thou the rest.

The devil disputed with Michael about the body of Moses.

A Musition showed his cunning before Antigonus, who^ he oftentimes found fault
with, bidding him set up his treble string higher, and then his mean; the
Musition said, The devil is in it (o King) by the Gods I swear, if thou art
more expert then I. Aelian.

The head and leader of evil spirits is Lucifer, which has that name, for he
was made more clear and bright then other Angels. Gregory.

He waxing proud against his Creator, lost his light and fairenes, and as he
was worthy he got him a foul dark shape of Apostasy, with him fell a
multitude of Angels, who by the permission of God, change themselves into
Angels of light, to deceive the world.

One writes pleasantly, that he is called Diabolus of Dia, which in Greek
signifies two, and Boulos, which is Morsus, because he makes but two bits of
a man, one of the body, the other of the soul.

The evil Angel or spirit of Brutus, appeared to him sitting in his tent,
whom he boldly asking, what man or God he was, answered, I am Brutus thy
evil spirit, and at Philippi I will meet thee again, where he dyed.
Plutarch.

Leuiathan tempts with pride, Mammon attempteth by avarice, Asmodeus seduceth
by leachery, Beelzebub inciteth to envy, Baall Berith, provoke to ire,
Belphegor moves to gluttony, Astorath persuades to sloth.

Of Hell. Hell has likewise diverse names, Infernus, Barathrum, Tartarus,
Orcus, etc, from the which there is no redemption.
PLuto, the Son of Saturn and Ops, is of the Poets feigned, to be the GOD
of hell, and riches, he was called Februus for certain sacrifices for the
dead, offered to him; in sted of a Scepter, he has in his hands keys, for
that there is no return from hell.

Proserpina, the daughter of Ceres, as she was gathering flowers, was stolen
away by Pluto, and afterward called the Queen of hell, and the dead.
Apollodorus.

The three Judges in hell, were Minos, Aeacus, and Rhadamanthus.

The three destinies, Chotho, Lachesis, and Atropos, were feigned to be the
daughters of Jupiter and Themis.

The furies of hell, were called Eumenides, and Erimies, with which the guilty
consciences of men were tormented.

There are four floods in hell, Acheron, Stix, Cocptus, and Phlegeton, whose
Ferriman was Charon, and the Porter of hell it self, three headed Cerberus.

The Elizian fields, were feigned to be the place where the souls of the
blessed remained, and the flood Laeche, or of forgetfulness, where who so did
drink, forgot whatsoever before they remembered.

FINIS.
A Table of all the special matters contained in this book.
A.
ABstinance, vide temperance. Accusation, vide slander. Adultery, vide
leachery. Angels, 4.37. Age, 54, 59. Arts, 69.93. Arms, 93, 134.221.
Arrogance, 112. vide pride. Antiquities, 147. Astronomy, 151. Agriculture. 234.
Arithmatique, 153. Astrology, 156. Aristocratia, 164. Archbishops of Rome, 185.
Apparel, 93, 43. Apparitions, vide visions. Ambition, 189, vide pride.
Adversities, vide poverty. Avarice, 45, vide covetousness. Authority, 163.
Anger, vide wrath. Ancestors, 240. Abundance, 256.
B.
BEauty, 75, 29, Benefits, 44, vide liberality. Banishment, 108, 120, 152.
Bishops of Rome, 185. Blessedness, vide felicity. Blasphemy, 12. Blessing, 107.
Boasting, vid. pride. Bounty, vide liberality. Books, 243.
C.
CHastity, 78. Christ, 1, 106.139. Children, 111, 34. Captains, 49. Chiualry.
151. Cardinals, 156. Circles, 6. Care, vide sorrow. Cruelty, vide wrath.
Courage, vide fortitude. Clemency, 41. Continency, vide temperance, chastity.
Content. 29. Covetousness, 253, 12. Constancy, 63. Country. 87. Commonwealth,
87.148. Cruelty, 12. Curiosity, 2. Comaedians, 93. Craft, 120. Cosenage, 120.
Contemplation, 232, 139. Counsel, vide prudence. Counsailours, 147. Cursing,
107. Colonies, 148. Coronations, 79. Confessors, 190. Clergy, 213. Courtesy,
vide clemency. Cowardice vide fear.
D.
DEath, 237, 30, 33, 154. Detraction, 73, vide slander. Delectation, vide
pleasure. Dicing, 93, 155. Diligence, 60, 27. Dancing, 96, 103. Desperation,
266.117. Devil, 268.122. Deceit, vide lying. Dissimulation, 13, 120.
Destinies, 137, 220. Dreams, vide visions. Divination, vide prophecy.
Democratia, 164. Devotion, 189. Desire, vide covetousness. Delight, vide
pleasure. Drunkenness, 83, vide gluttony. Duarchie, 164.
E.
EDucation, 54. Earth, 136. Elements, 137. Ease, vide sloth. Eloquence, 74,
225. Envy, 246, 41, 73. Emulation, 73, Empire, 164, 172, Emperors, 166,
Electors, 7, 174, Empire of Turks, 182, Equity, vide Justice, Eruditory, 39,
Exercise, vide labor,
F.
FAme, 221. Fortune, 212, 25. Faith, 80. Fashions, vide apparel, 140,
Flatery, 128. Felicity, 219, 131. Fear, 124, 23. Fortitude, 33, Forgetfulness,
vide memory. Fools. 140. Faelix hownds, 216. Furies, vide hell, 225.
Friendship, 66, 21. Friends, 48.
G.
GOD, 1, 13, 14, 51, 111, 149 Geometry, 37, 153. Gifts, vide liberality. Games,
91. Gaming, 93. Grief, vide sorrow. Gods, 141. Goddesses, ibid. Grace, 151.
Gardens, 234. Grammar, 154. Gamsters hall, 209. Gold, 219. Gentleness, 245.
Glory, 223. General in war, vide war. Gluttony, 258.
H.
Heaven, 4, 138. Hierarchies, 4. Hemispheare, 6. Hospitality, 45. Honor, 17,
223. Humility* 44, vide clemency. Hope, 56. History, 113, 151. Hypocrisy, 120.
Hell, 269.141. Holy fire, 146. Homage, 151. Husbandry, 152. Hawking, 153.
Happiness, vide felicity. Hate, vide envy.
I.
Jesus, 1, 3, 22. Justice, 19, 11, 18, 234. Judges, ibid. Imagination, 37:
Jealousy, 73: Idolatry, 120, 144. Ignorance, vide learning. Injury, 217.
Idleness, vide sloth. Interest, 239. Injustice, 120. Infamy, vide fame.
Industry, vide diligence. Ingratitude, 226.
K.
KIngs, 11, 162, 11. Kingdom, 163. Knowledge, vide learning. Knight, 231.
L.
Laws, vide Justice: Learning, 131, 28.39.151: Labor, vide diligence: Lying,
120: Lawyers, 147: Liberality, 12.41: Love, 69: Longing, 104: Lechery, 262.
Lust, ibid.
M.
MAN, 1, 25.138: Marriage, 106.31: Magnanimity, vide fortitude: Memory, 56.223:
Mercy, 15. vide clemency: Money. 152.240: Majesty, 161: Muses, 87: Music,
96.150: Monarchy, 164: Monarchs, 164: Magic, 202: Martyrs, 185: Murder, vide
wrath: Melancholy, 233:
N.
NAmes, 229.137, 151.238. Nature, 93.226: Navigations, 153: Necessity, 14.217:
Necromancy, 151: Negligence, vide sloth: Nobility, vide fame.
O.
OAths, vide faith. 124: Old age, 60: Oracle, 27.82.88.217: Orators, 94:
Opinion, 136: Ostracisme, 236.
P.
PAtience, 51.161. Parents, 111.34: Palingenesia, 38: Philanthropia, 41
Philosophy, 30: Philosophers, 40.131. 236.140 Physic, 243: Physicians, 33:
Pity, 41: Perseverance, 63: Perjury, vide faith: Pleasure, 90, 131, 136:
Perturbations, 117: Planets, 5, 6, 7, 68: Policy, vide prudence, 218. Poverty,
235: Poor, 47, 49: Parasites, vide flattery: Peregrination, 138: Poets, 149,
155: Prayer, 13, 233: Prudence, 24: Prodigality, 240, 45. Promises, 80, 124.
Purgatory, 39: Prophecy, 156.150: Peace, 151: Pastoral Poems, 152: Priests,
156: Popes, 185, 157: Problemes, 165: Pride, 242: Persecution, 250.
Q.
QValities, 137, 229: Questions, 118.151: Quarrellers, 139: Quietness, 139, 217:
R.
REason, 30, 37, 84, 125: Religion, 10, 2, 189: Riches, 46, vid. fortune,
covetousness: Reuerency, 117: Repentance, vide sorrow: Riddles, 165:
Remembrance, vide memory: Rulers, vide majesty.
S.
SAints, 39: Sadness, 117: Secrecy, 65, vide silence: Senses, 40.28, 84: Soul,
37, 137: Sickness, 29: Schoolemaisters, 55: Scholars, 57: Sciences, 69, 134:
Silence, 84. Sin, 102, 136. Satyrs, 151: Servants, 227: Slander, 125:
Solitarines, vide contemplation. Sorrow, 117: Stars, 6, 7, 8, 9^ Soldiers,
30.40, 218: Subjects, 4145, 226: Suspicion, 73: South-saying, vide prophecy:
T.
TEmperance, 28, 78* Timocratia, 164: Thanksgiving, 13, 41: Time. 51.136:
Tongue. 64.84.111.246: Theologe, 156: Treasure, vide covetousness, 113: Truth,
2.120* Treason, 228: Turks. 182: Turkish monarchy. 182.81. Tyranny, vide wrath:
Tyrants, 40.65, 90.
V.
VIctory. 92.218: Virtue. 17. Visions 156: Vows, vide faith. Understanding,
37.84. Usury, 239:
VV.
Wisdom, 24. vide prudence. 138. Wise Men. 26.28. Wine. 30. vide gluttony.
Wit, 56.37. World, 10.137.139. Women, 101, 36.134.244. Wife, 73.84.118.
Widows, 105. War, 217. Wrath, 249.
Y.
YOuth. 54.96. Year. 153.
Z.
ZElotypia. 73. Zodiac. 6, 151.
FINIS.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
IN fol. 71, read Ovid dyed in persecution.

In fol. 82. for King of S. Paul, read Earl.

In fol. 198. for Posphory, read Porphory.

In fol: 197. for denied, devised.

In fol. 241. for righteousness, riotousnes.

In fol. 258. for opirations, opilations:

In fol. 263. for Reginum, Regium:

In fol. 268. for monite, moniti:

In fol. 269. for Chotho, Clotho:

In fol. for 269. Erimies, Erinnies:

In fol. 269, for Cocptus, Cocytus:

In fol. 269, for Laeche, read Laethe.


