MASTER BROVGHTONS LETTERS, Especially his last Pamphlet to and against the
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, about Sheol and Hades, for the descent into
Hell, answered in their kind.

PSALM. 85. I said unto the fools, Deal not so madly. Quicquid amas, cupias
non placuisse nimis. Martial.

LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf, 1599.

To the Reader.
EXpect not (gentle Reader) any matter of great weight and substance in this
answer, the Libellers defense (as he calls it) being naught else in balance of
sound judgment, but the fume of envy, and the foam of vanity: only accept it
as a rod for a fools back, I fear incorrigible, nam senex Psittacus non
capit ferulam: who though he be brayed in a mortar, will still continue to bray
like himself. If thou think it too bitter, compare his Libell and this
answer; the reverend Archbishop, whom with his foul mouthed slanders he
defiles, and himself a vainglorious Thraso, a fugitive abroad, a schismatike
at home, a tormentor of souls with mystical riddles, a clamorous trumpetor of
his own praises, and so judge of both. Some, I know, have said, he is half
mad that should answer him; a smooth color for idleness, and a goodly cover to
shadow their ingratitude, who serve a master for fee, not love, and care not
how he is abused, so they be exalted. I say with David, Adhuc vilior fiam
plusquam factus sum, and, as it is, have done it: if thou approve it, I glory
not: if otherwise, I care not. Vale.

PROVE. 14. 3. In the mouth of a fool is the rod of pride.
SECTIO. 1.
THere is a fantastical fellow in Dion much-what of your humor, Master
Broughton, who was fully persuaded, that, because he had married Tully his
widow, of necessity Dion Co^.
he should prove summus Orator; or in that he had once sat in Caesar's chair,
he must needs become summus Imperator: such is your conceit, as appears by
your manifold malepart letters to her Majesty, his Grace, and the late L.
Treasurer, that be like because a Jew once saluted you with an epistle (as you
faigne) therefore you are the only Hebrician, and in that your arms are the
three Owls, Athens fowls, forsooth, therefore you are the only Grecian in
the world, and which are your own words, by Heroaldie Ep. ad Thesa^
a great gentleman, and therefore no mean place must serve your turn. This
conceit of yours, whetted with some small learning, but especially edged with
natural pride, has made your tongue so keen, and your style so sharp, that
neither spares to wound whom your fancy misliketh. Above all others you have
chosen the most Reverend father the L. Archbishop of Canterbury to lance and
cut therewith, Ep. ad eun^
rejoicing, as you say, to have so high a personage to work upon, threatening
in your letters to a Doctor of Divinity, to Ad D. Stoll.
set either his Graces fame, or your own past cure. I know that Accius is
reported to have cut through a whetstone with a rasor (it may Liuy.
be he deserves the whetstone that records the story) yet that was a miracle,
and a greater would it be accounted by him who knows you both, that your pen,
Sir Hugh, made of a goose quil, should any way pearce, much less wound, the
impenetrable fame of a Prelate, so learned, so grave and virtuous. Whom, if you
knew how little your virule^t letters (parbreakt from a poysonfull stomach,
ingorged with impudent lies, belching forth insolent and unsavory challenges)
did affect or move, were you not past all shame, you would have done with them;
as that Emperor did with his Ajax, long since have put them to the ^et. Aug.
sponge: or, as it seems, being void of all patience, with that railing Poet,
when he saw his Inuectiues nothing moved his adversary, slipped his neck into an
halter, and made a rafter his deathbed: and so, as the Poet said, have made of
your self one long ^lut. did. adul.
letter, to see so small effect of your lying letters. Wherefore if you expect
his Graces own answer to your querulous Libels, for all your much pretended
learning, you show your self, in that, an idiot, to think that either he
should be so idle in that high place, being (...): or so prodigal of precious
^phocles.
time, as to waste good hours in answering such vain follies, or so careless
of his honor, as to stoop the billing of such filthy garbage: yea so much he
pities your madness, (being acquainted therewith from your subsizership in
Trinity College) that when some sons of Zeruiah, in zeal of his high
calling, offered ^am. 16.
themselves to throttle this Shemei and hot-tongued curre, his answer was to
them with Seneca, Quibusdam canibus innatu^ est, vt ^. de rem. fort.
non pro feritate, sed pro consuetudine latrent: It is custom, not curstnes,
which makes him bark. Wherein, under correction, his Grace is deceived in you:
for a dog not wormed while he is young, will in time prove mad: your worm from
your youth has been a proud conceit of your self, which, being no^rished under
your tongue so long, makes it now run riot. It is to late to worm you, and
prevent your madding, but time enough to file your teeth, or muzzle you, to
keep you from biting. And this have I taken upon me to do, the weakest of
many, who would feign have been upon you, yet strong enough to grapple with
Hugh Broughton, a man of such rare wants and singular imperfections. How the
Reverend Archbishop will like it I know not, whose reply, being moved
thereunto, has bin that of Salomons, Answer not a ^u. 26. 4.
fool according to his folly, least thou also be like him. All one with that
of Socrates, fitting, in metaphore, you more aptly: If an Ass Diog laert.
kick me, shall I kick him again? Notwithstanding I take my self, being
both a member of that Church, whereof his Grace next under her Majesty, has
chief government, and also an attendant on him, engaged to him by some favors,
bound in conscience to spend a few spare hours of vacant time, in answering
those saucie letters, slanderous reproaches, and scandalous imputations of a
conceited, malecontented runnagate, such a one whom S. Peter and Jude have
lively described Presumptuous, standing in his own 2. Pet. 2. Iud. verse. 8. 13^
conceit, a wandering star, a raging wave of the sea foming out his own
shame, and speaking evil of them which are in authority. Which raging madness,
had it kept it self in ink under seal, silence had been the best answer,
and your papers, Sir Pamphletor, might have made fit sacrifices for Vulcan his
altar, (...) Homerus and Plut.
(...). But sithence you will needs be mad with a witness, and prove a fool in
print, and slauer out your follies in view of the world, under reformation, it
stands not with Christian policy, or charity, to let you slip uncontrolled,
but as Solomon wi^heth to Answer a fool according to his folly, least he
brave it out, and triumph in Prou. 26. 5.
his own eyes. For though a guiltles conscience, like a marble stone, says
Jerome, shiuereth al reproaches, like arrows, shot against it: Hierony. August.
yet as S. Augustine has well observed, it is magnae crudelitatis, for a
public magistrate, sic in consciencia acquiescere, vt famam negligat, so to
rely upon the innocence of his actions, that he neglect all annoyance of his
good name. And therefore, Mr. Broughton, arm your self with patience, if it
be possible for a proud man to have such a virtue, that since against the law
you have not Exodus 22. 28.
ceased to curse the ruler of the people, and Act. 23.
to revile God his high Priest, which S. Paul repented he had ignorantly done,
though that Priest were an usurper: and against the profession of a Divine,
with such ribauld terms, unsavory, and shameless lies, yea, and contrary
to all humanity, against him, who in the University (by your own confession)
was a chief means of your preferment; Epist. ad Com. Hunt. ad Sed, Olam.
be (I say) as patient as you can, and Psalm. 109.
let not indignation vex you like a thing that is raw, that you may learn, in
your own vain, hereafter to rule your pen, and order your tongue, and forbear
the press, though you will never be taught to know your self, to feel your
weakness, or regard your betters.

SECTIO. 2.
I Remember Theophylact, alluding to that place of Solomon where Theophyl. in
Luc.
he says there is a Married fool, names the wife (...) Lady Selfloue, which
usually is attended by four waiting maids; the first is (...) an inward self
conceit; the second (...) a vaunting utterance thereof; the third (...) a vain
affection of public applause; the fourth (...) a lofty ouerweening, with a
scornful contempt of others: the husband to this wife, says the father, was
the Pharisee, Luc. 18. who left her a widow after his death, till you, Luc. 18.
Mr. Broughton, were borne and came to age (our English Pharisee) for
Nazianzens rule is true, (...): Greg. Naz. (...) ^Naso. Meta. 2.
not the nation, but the affection makes a Pharisee. Narcissus in the Poet,
never so madly admiring his own beauty, as you have delighted in your self,
in so much that, you may see, if you were not blinded sottishly, how Theophrast
his proverb is verified in Theoph. Plut.
you, (...). You have loved your self so well, that none other of judgment
either loves or likes you at all. Yet if looking your self often in this
Selflouing glass, you would do, as S. James says, that is, having considered
your natural face, ^ac. 1. 24.
you could go away, and forget immediately what your fashion was, some hope
there might be of your future humility: but to prevent that, (...) attends
you, putting you in mind of your great pains, your Concent of the Bible, your
Sinai sight, your Daniels weeks, your Rabinicall oracles, your Genealogicall
Catechismes, whereby you are so houen and lifted up, that with Simon Magus your
Preuentor, (for that title fits him better for semblance of pride, ^p. ad Reg.
pa. 3 and literas ad D. Stoll.
then D. Bancroft, whom you call your Preuentor in the Bishopric of London) as
if you were borne at Nonesuch, you are not contentented to be accounted (...).
Act. 8. 9. a great Divine, but (...). Act. 8. 9. 10.
verse. 10. the Cleerer of Divinity, the I per se I, and the belweather of
Divines (it is a poor flock of sheep where the Ew must bear the bell) for
so your masked Jew, viz. your self writes. ^pist. Abr. Rub. ^c dicta.
Behold that is the wiseman, whose praise is gone over the whole earth, even
Hugo Broughton. Which self conceit forgeth such fancies in your head, that as
the runnaway apprentice thought, the bells recalling him, told him he should be
Mayor of London: so your humors building towers in the air, and Bishoprics
in your fancy, feign a sounding in your ears, that you heard the Archbishop
should say you deserved as good a place as himself. That the Varijs epistolis
ad Archiep. and Thesaur.
LL. should give out that you were Nulli secundus for knowledge. That the
Queen should say she would not for all the preferments in the world you should
leave the Realm. That such a noble man should tell you that her Majesty
would, of her self, have given you the Bishopric of S. David's. That Jews
call for you to convert them. Mere buzzings of your own conceited dizzie
brain, (like him in Aelian AElianu^ v^ H^sto.
who thought all the great ships in the haven were his own) none of them ever
meant or uttered by them, but only invented by the strength of your opinion,
pleasing it self with dreams of high desert: which you know ( Master Broughton)
has been the overthrow of many well quallified men, and was among the sages of
Greece accounted (...), the principal impeachment Bion in Laert
of many men's both proceedings and preferments: for many (says the Stoike)
might have proved good scholars, if they Seneca.
had not thought they had been so already, and many had risen to great places,
but that, with Remus, they would attain them Liuy.
by leaping over the wall, not rise to them by degrees and steps. And yet, Non
vlli tacuisse nocet, if you had only entertained this Cato.
(...) and self-conceit, smothering it within your breast, the annoyance had
been yours alone and inward, yet the world might have taken you for a wiseman (
for even a fool, says Solomon, holding Prou. 17. 28.
his peace is counted wise): but (...) so bewitched you, that like an old
bottle with new wine, unless you should vent, you Matthew. 9.
would burst. Whereupon, though the Wiseman his counsel be, Let another man
praise thee, not thine own mouth; a stranger, not thine Prou. 17. 2.
own lips, you, vt ex stulto insanus fieres, as if you were wiser then
Solomon, (for a fool, says he, is wiser in his conceit, then seven men Prou.
26. 16. Job. 32.
that can give a reason) must needs, as Job says, be your own Herald, and
give titles to your self, blazon your own arms, record your own deserts,
even so palpably, that your foes floute you, and your friends pity you. For
thus you pronounce of your self, in writing. The best learned in Europe thank
me most highly. Epistolis ad Arch. and These.
Scotland writes for me. I have found great thanks from Zurick, Denmark,
French, Dutch. I know my self inferior to none for Hebrew and Greek studies.
The best Divines have plowed with my Heyfer, (yet himself never grew beyond a
calfe.) All the learned through Christendom, Jews, Papists, Protestants,
think my pains an honor to the Bible. Lingua quo vadis? What, master Hugh,
will you hyperbolize above S. Gregory, who is contented to marshall the four
Greg. epist.
general Councels in equipage with the four Evangelists, but your scriblets,
forsooth, must countenance the Bible? For Honor is in honorante non honorato.
But of all the most Thrasonicall Braggadoccion Arist.
self-boasting, is that cogd epistle of Abr. Ruben* alias of Hugh ap Broughton
to himself, (which when Master Beza had read, told a country man of ours
being present with him, that sure you were a very vain man) scil. All thy
valuation, M. Hugh, An epistle coined by Br. with a Jews stamp.
is according to the sickle of the Sanctuary, 20. Gerahs to a sickle. The
delights of thy most high perfections are in that man's throat. The sweet smell
of the myrrh of thy learning (which is as signs and wonders in heaven and
earth) is gone over the Ocean sea. God has created thee, M. Hugh, to make the
honor of England more honorable. Thou art a glory and renown even to the
Queen her self. Beside many other phrases given in Scripture to God himself,
profanely abused to your commendation, sauouring not only of arrogancy, but
blasphemy. To such an outrecuidance has your self-conceit carried you. Which
glosing letter, suppose it were true, that a Jew had written, a wiseman would
have either answered at the reading thereof, as that Philosopher did once in
the like, Me hic Diog. Laert.
aut ludit, aut odit. This man would procure me either scorn, or hatred. For
hyperbolicall commendations are motives to both. ^lat. Demet.
Or else have concealed them, least the world should think he delighted in his
own praises, the special cognizance of a fool, in Cato his wisdom. But to
take copies thereof, and disperse them ^ato.
abroad in Basil, and send them into England, and Geneua, that men might point
at thee Leuiculum nostrum Demosthenem, (so ^ul. Tus. quaest.
you call your self in your epistle to the University of Oxford) and suppose
you to be the Homer of our time, the 7. Cities never ^ul. Gel^ius ^ul. pro Arch.
so striving for him, as nations and kingdoms challenge you, this is an
extreme vanity: marry to coin an epistle of your self to your self, under
a Jews name, with such Taratantara fictions and applauses, not learning only,
but even common reason would deem to be a desperate frenzy: for as he is mad
for hunger (says Plutarch) which will eat his own flesh, so is he Plutarch.
de se laud.
much more hunger-starued for commendations, who is driven to praise himself,
especially with forgeries and impostures. Yet, this is the Syrenicall
allurement of your attendant (...), who persuades you that written letters are
personal and private, and selfe-praises under seal are easily concealed, and
therefore least either envy, or time, or silence should suppress them, to the
press with them.

SECTIO. 3.
ANd hence comes your Printed Pamphlets. Belike because it were a sin to
spoil clean paper with base employments, you will blot i^ with your
fooleries, that so it might be sent from the Printers press to the
Apothecaries shop, there Horace epist.
to make cases for spices at the best, Et piper and quicquid chartis amicitur
ineptis. Which prating rhapsodies, like Sappho his parrats, crying nothing but
Magnus Deus Broughton, to win you Herodot.
the more renown, you do not only dedicate to Noble men of high place, (an
insolent indiscretion to make those personages patrones of such boggard stuff)
but many of them most presumptuously you front with the sacred name of her
royal Majesty, (as if your inue^tions were all Treasure trouue, fiske royal,
mines unheard of, for Princes only, being in deed to him that digs in them,
as unto Pompey his soldiers, a lost labor, and Plut. Pomp.
time ridiculously spent, and the stuff it self according to the proverb
Thesaurus carbones) whose singular affability and clemency Eras. adag.
though it be such, that she will vouchsafe the speech of the meanest, and a
small gift from the poorest: yet as Augustus the Emperor, famous in Rome that
way, as not disdaining course intertainment where he was invited, when one as
simply, as boldly, had requested him to his house, cheering him up with Macrob.
Sat.
nothing but brown bread and leekes, at his departure gave his host this
farewell, Non put aram ^e tibi tam f^miliarem esse. The like answer may you
justly expe^^, or a sharper rather, Master Hugh, for your foolish pains;
s^^^lable to that, because you are a Grecian, as Philip of Macedon ^^ue to
such a cenodoxicall Rhodig.
companion as your self, who having ^cribled a pamphlet in the praise of
Labor, with an epistle prefixed to King Philip of Macedon, his book bearing
title (...) the King puts out the (...). and now, says he, the author has
praised himself. Were there in you that learning which you pretend, Seneca
might have taught you what punishment it deserved, Principis imaginem ^eneca.
obscaenis infer, to set the Princes stamp upon base vessels, much more to
dare dedicate to her sacred Majesty infamous Libels, make the best of them,
frothie conceits, fomed out from an hot mouth, working and fretting it self
upon the bit of coffeehouse. What man of common sense or reason, would
presume to print an epistle to a Prince of her divine parts, admirable
learning, singular judgment, and menaging such weighty affairs, containing
nothing else, but a fabulous discourse of a Jews letter sent to. N. that is to
the Noddy your self, ^pr. Basil. 98.
and appoint her who should answer it? And, in another, to persuade her that
while you were expecting her answer touching your preferment, there fell such
foul weather upon the land, ^^pr. 99.
that some godly disposed selected you to auert Gods wrath by prayer and
preaching; which you did, forsooth, by expounding Act. 7. ^ page 3.
how Rempham and Chiun, Babylon and Damascus might be reconciled from Amos to
Stephen, and upon this (so fit a theme for foul weather) the people thanked
you for clearing the heavens by your pains, and Strangers thanked her Majesty
for ^ page 4.
clearing S. Stephen by your pen. First prove this, what Strangers ever thanked
her for you, name them, show their writings, note the time, set down the
words, else are you too impudent to abuse your Princes name, and the readers
patience with such gross vanities; remember what the Poet said of one, almost
as vainly proud in the opinion of his beauty, as you are of your ^autu^ ^gior.
divinity, Ait sese vltr^ omnes nationes sectarier, Is est derisui quaqua
incedit omnibus. And as for the other, for shame, Broughton, (now I cannot
forbear thee) leave to arrogate that to thy self, which all divinity, and
God himself denies thee. Thy prayers and preaching to work miracles with God?
God hears Ioh. 9. Iam. 5.
not sinners. The prayer of a righteous man preuailes with God: righteous he
cannot be, in the meanest degree, which has neither humility, nor charity.
Thy prayers to stop the bottles of the clouds, as Job calls them? the
prayers of a weaned Job. 38. Psalm. 131. and 127. Esaias. 47. Herod. Psalm. 109.
Esaias. 66.
child are as the arrows of a Giant forcible to pearce the heavens: but
proceeding from the spirit of Babel, I am, and there is none but I, they are
like Xerxes arrows shot up against the Sun, these reculing to their hurt
that shot them, and they returning to their curse that made them. To him, says
God, will I incline mine ear, that has an humbled spirit, and a contrite
heart: which sacrifice you could never yet offer, nor can, till you abase your
horns, as Job speaks, and disgarboyle your self Job.
of those corrupt affections, and lofty thoughts, which makes your person,
wheresoever you come, burdensome, and your surquedry intolerable. Se ipsum
immolet qui Deum vult laudare, (says Augustine) and totum te consumat ignis
eius. And when you Augustinus. Psalm. 51.
have made David's sacrifice of your houen imaginations, and Paul's metamorphosis
of your malicious mind, then may you Romans 12.
persuade us that you have wrought a miracle. But what do I speak of reason,
or religion to a mad man? For were you not so, more guilty you are of treason
then reason: for in another of your Paperworkes, you prescribe her Majesty a
time to prefer you, and if she will not, you threaten that then you will
forsake Epist. ad Reg.
the land, and of that you had sent word to the King of Scots. A good subject
verily, and a great loss no doubt. And what spirit does Impr. 99.
that speech savor of in your last epistle to her Majesty, that a chief
Commissioner in her Highness name and authority, suppressing a book of your
schismatic fancies, you should dare to say, that he used more authority
then her Majesty had to lend him. A good world it is, when such giddie brained
dottards, as you are, will limit Princes prerogatives, and charge the High
commission of Atheism, for calling you to account for your delirious doctrine.
It might go hard with you, but that the Civil law pleades for your neck, in
saying, that Furiosus and impubes ^. de iniur. and fam. lib.
iniuriam facere non possunt quia non habent iudicium. The foolish painter in
Plutarch, that had painted a Cock like a Goose, was Plut. and Aelia.
feign to write over the head, this is a Cock: you might have spared that
labor in putting your name to the epistles, for it is a thousand to one, if
her Majesty did ever lose time to read them, she easily gessed that the
author went a crowing with a comb.

SECTIO. 4.
OF the like Lunaticall humor are your epistles to the Lords, especially that
which came from you about Midsomer moon last, To and against the Archhishop of
Canterbury, about Sheol and Hades, senseles for the period, unsound for the
argument, immodest in reproaches, untrue for the slanders, dishonest in false
witnesses, ridiculous for the vanities. Wherein your last attendant (...) does
play her part, with a cup of ouerweening liquour, having so intoxicated your
weak brain, ( For the proudman is as he that transgresses with wine) that as
Zebul being ^bac. 2. ^^d 9.
well tipled, took an whole army of men to be but shadows of mountains, so
you there scorn all others comparatively without all respect, impudently
without all shame, vnsauourly without all discretion, unsoundly without all
judgment, madly without all reason, profanely without all religion,
forgetting that thundering speech of the spirit, as the Sept. read it, (...).
^hilo.
And yet this is that Hel^na, wherewith you are so enamoured, of which you have
so often boasted, and with which you have so long threatened to disgrace his
Grace; in your epistle to her Majesty, you will call him to account for all at
once: in an epistle to the Lord Treasurer, you will put his Graces fame in
print: in your letters to D. Stoll. you will set his Graces fame past cure: in
private letters to himself, belching out unsavory menaces of that, which
here you have disgorged. Wherein you have spent all the vires and power you
have for the defense of a vain paradox, and spit out all the virus and poison
you could conceive, in the abuse of his reverend person, in both fulfilled the
prophecy of Esaias: In the former, having spun the spiders web, for your opinion
heathenish and ridiculous; in the latter, ^ay. 59. 5.
hatching the Cockatrice eggs, your phrases and style being reproachful and
malicious: and because you will be the Homerist of our time (although Master
Beza his judgment was, to a great man's son, who was with him at the receipt
of your Greek epistle, that you might very well have written in Latin) your
answer shall be Homer-like, to the last first. Taking this by the way, which
Pindarus foretold, and you have fulfilled, (...), Pind. Olymp.
that importunate selfe-boasting brings a man to madness: and therefore some not
unfitly have derived (...) from (...). And now I answer.

SECTIO. 5.
IVlian the Apostata, as good a scholar as your self, writing a Lactant.
tractate against the Christians, yet, more wisely then honestly, to allure the
reader, which otherwise would have abhorred the book, entitled it Ad
Christianos: but you, adding gall to Deuteronomy. 29.
wormwood, and impudency to your slanders, have fronted your Libell with
this inscription, To and against the Archbishop of Canterbury. Wherein though
you have watched a double ad^antage, both of this time and generation, having
curious ears, ^hirsting more after great men's disgraces, then Athens after
Act. 17.
news; and also of apology, because as Apuleius (he that wrote the
metamorphosis of your golden brother) has wisely said, that Insimulari quiuis
innocens a quouis nebulone potest: It is an easy Apul. ap^.
matter for every rake shame to revile an innocent, but it is neither safe nor
fit for every man to clear the accused; not fit, because if the answerer
depend upon him whom he defends, he shall be counted a flatterer: not safe,
because in the account of Xenophon and Demosthenes, it is (...): to great men
that are Xenoph. Them. de coror
truly virtuous, there is nothing more burdensome, then the displaying of their
praises. Yet in despite of envy, ex tuo ore te iudicabis serve nequam. Thine
own conscience, and the trial of Luc. 19.
thy countenance shall testify against thee, as the Prophet speaks. Esaias. 3.
9. Exodus 22.
In Moses law he that had slain a Burgleyer by night had been guiltles, but if
the Sun were up when he smote him he was punished as a murderer. Had you not
known him whom you thus have smitten with your tongue, but, like Ajax in the
Tragady, whipped a ram for a man, and lent your blows at randon, S^phocles.
the Civil law might once more have pleaded for you, Error in persona cui fit
iniuria, facit vt non oriatur actio iniuriarum. And F^de iniur. and fam. lib.
your excuse might have been either rash indiscretion, or false information:
but your conscience grounded upon long experience and certain knowledge of the
Archbishops great industry, from his youth, not pregnancie alone; his manifold
knowledge, not pains only; his sound judgment, not knowledge only; his
effectual preaching, not judgment only; his irreprehensible life, not
preaching only; his wise government, not virtues only; makes it (...), as
Philo speaks, and Philo*
doubleth thy sin against thine own head, and finds thee guilty not only
of malicious slander to revile the innocent, but of impudent and infamous
libelling to dishonor the name and place of such a worthy and reverend
Father: of whom (if ever of any man) it may be said as of Zachary, (...), let
not ^urip. (...) ^b. 31.
malice be judge, he has walked irreproueably before God and men: and may
plead for himself against such as thou art, as Job against his exulcerating
comforters, Though mine adversary should write a book against me, would I
not take it up, and bind it as a crown unto me? Having so often verified that
in himself which Saint Augustine speaks, Qui volens detrahit famae meae,
nolens ^ugust. ^^rip. ^lut. ^lly.
addit mercedi meae. For as Telephus wound (...), was healed by the spear that
hurt him; and the st^oke, intending death to Jason and Prometheus, cured both:
so, certain it is, that never any durst touch him with any crime, either for
government or otherwise, but either with an after repentance in themselves they
were confounded, or by his eminent integrity in all good men's opinion they
were confuted, their slanders working his glory, and their own shame. And yet
this sacred Prelate, this honorable Counselor, this grave Divine, to give him
no more titles, then that which S. Basil calls (...), this ^sil. ^aut. Men.
^mer.
Servant of God; tu tu (as one of your owls speaks in Plautus) (...) he may
say, have presumed to profess to write against. Were it as Them. said to
Aeschi: that Aeacus or Rhadamanthus, ^
some person of note, of incomparable learning, of high place, of
irreprehensible deportment (the Reverend Archbishop having, we will suppose it,
given offense) should have confuted him, it had been too much for any such,
without due reverence, to have advanced a Rebutter against his Grace: for the
fathers, we know, howsoever their higher Prelates sometimes offended the Church
with infecting opinions, never professed to write against them, but still
superscribed their epistles and books To such and such. Yet this Vide Bern.
and Aug. and Hilari
had been tolerable in any such person: but for a (...), a fantastical
genealogist, a paradoxicall expositor, a tragical ape, a forlorn Pharisee, a
running-headed fugitive to be thus publicly malepart, in presuming to write
against an Archbishop, auering a truth Apostolical, as the impudence is
intolerable, so I wonder how so many, that have fared so well by his Graces
preferment, can with patience endure, or with silence brook this insolent and
shameless presumption; but that it is known to proceed from an Archilochus
lean and hidebound with hart-fretting envy, but, as the Poet describes him,
(...), Pindaru^
fatting himself up with contumelious scorns, and reproaches. Not sparing the
holy fathers of the Church, the reverend Beaupeeres of divine knowledge, but
giving Melchis. p. ^.
some the babble, as S. Austen by name, p. 49. lib. Sheol.
befooling the penner of the Creed not expounded to his fancy, and in a short
abstract calling all the Latin fathers the plague of Divinity. But Epist. ad
reg.
who can look for more reverence at his hand toward the Ecclesiastical
fathers, whose pride has so carried him past all grace, that he sticks not to
traduce, even in public letters, his own natural father? so far having
been busied in Sems progeny, that he is fallen into Chams opprobrie, accusing
Genesis 9.
his father, in more vile terms then I will express, for an Aleknight and
common drunkard; for an whoremaster and a In ep. ad Arch. Eras. chil.
minion maintainer, (Turdus sibi malum) for a raunger and a beggarly (...);
even in the very same letters, wherein it pleases the foule-mouthed varlet to
entitle the most Reverend Archbishop (I tremble to write it) Nebulo, (...), and
ruina regni. What says Saint Jude? Yet Michael the Archangell, encountering
Jude ver. 9. 11.
the devil, durst not blaspheme. But such a tongue-murthering Cain, an
ambitious Balaamite, (still bawling for preferment) cannot withhold, but
labors like a fly about the candle, to perish in the gainsaying of Corah.
And therefore writing about the descent into Hell, has inflamed his own
tongue with the fire of hell, that as by his genealogicall glosses he has
abused (...), so by his gehennical cursings Iac. 3.
he might set on fire (...), and kindle a dissension about the descention,
wherein there has been so long consent. Hominem malignum forsan te credant
alij, Ego esse miserum credo Martial.
cui placet nemo. Other perchance will guess thee to be a malignant
slaunderer, but I rather take thee to be a wretched skrat pinde with envy,
whom none can please, either fathers in Divinity, or fathers by authority, or
parents natural; but as the Argyraspides answered some forward youths, whose
Plut.
steps thou pasest, so say I, (...).

SECTIO. 6.
NOw if any man would know what ministered the fuel to this flagrant
controversy about hell, to this public challenge and open confutation;
nothing that the Archbishop has either publicly preached, or at any time
printed in that cause. But the brief, and the truth is this; Doctor Andrews
having, in a Sermon upon that article, strongly out of Scripture and Fathers
confirmed the descent, according to the words, you, forsooth, not worthy to
be balanced with him for sound learning, (howsoever most impudently you tell
the old L. Treasurer that he said, knowing you to be his Epist. ad These.
better in studies, that he would yield to you) you I say, quantulus,
quantulus? press into the pulpit not long after to refute his doctrine: which
had it been in charity and zeal for the truth, it had been more schollerlike
and divine: but, as your manner is, with such contempt and contumelies to the
person of the man, you held that course, which neither policy for example, nor
religion for peace could tolerate, upon which you were called before his Grace,
(...). Here Th^^yd.
you began to stir, not only contemptuously refusing to come, but malepartly
answering his Grace with scornful letters, and subscribing them, very
familiarly at the best, in truth most saucely, Tuus (...), your fellow
soldier. ( Sir Hugh your fellows are in Bedlem.) And as that Soldier, your
Pattern and predecessor in the Comedy, said of himself, because Miles gl^^.
he had deigned his presence to one that requested it. Non, aedepol, tu scis,
mulier, quantum ego honorem nunc illi habeo: so you stand upon it mightily, in
a large volume, that you countenanced Ad Dominu^ Thesaur*
his Grace very much, in calling your self his Soldier fellow, yea they are
your own words, that you vouchsafed to call him a fellow in judgment with you
for religion. Nay further you trust, you say, that her Majesty rejoices to
be (...) with your defense for religion. Base vassal, who will not be taught
the duty of a subject to a Prince, but will measure her learning by thy
model. Her Highness knows better then thy self, that (...) in Herodian, and
other Grecians, as also Commilitones among the Romans, is given by an
Euphemismus of Captains to their soldiers, to knit Herod^. Thucy^.
their hearts to them by such familiar titles: and in the Testament, being but
twice used, it is vouchsafed by Paul, the great Philip. 2. Philem. ver. 3.
Apostle, unto his inferiors, but never reciprocal. When you were fellow of
Christ's College (whereof came the proverb) that there were in the house
twelve fellows and a fool, which was your self, you being allowed the same
diet with the Master, if you had written to him, would you have called him your
fellow commoner? Had you written to John Whitgift Doctor of Divinity, and
called him your (...) and fellow Minister, degrees being equal, it had
sauoured of some wisdom and learning: but inditing your letters to the most
reverend Archbishop, and subscribing them with that malepart style tuus (...),
is surely a solaecisme in manners, and argues great want of discretion, yea of
learning: for Xenophon will tell you, that (...) and (...), and (...) and
Xenoph.
(...) are all one, that is a fellow soldier and a follower, and so in authors
synonymically confounded, and ever applied from the better to the meaner, but
not upward: and soothly so you meant, for in the very same epistle, you say, Ad
Dom. These.
that you know your self to be his Graces better, and superior in study,
and knowledge.

SECTIO. 7.
AFter this from letters, running out of the land, (as you pretend) you set
upon him with this late Libell, wherein is contained (as you tell her Majesty)
the marrow of your wisdom. Epist. ad Reg.
Which speech of yours puts me in mind of some Philosophers opinions in
Plutarch, who write that the marrow Plut. Agis. Ovid Metam.
of dead men's bodies, especially the backbone, as Ovid will, does often turn
into snakes. Such marrow, verily serpentine and viperous, does your book
afford, poysonfully sprinkling his Grace with more spite then hurt; for when
you have varied your reproaches with such voluntary phrases, as your addle head
and malicious stomach could gather e triuio, the conclusion is, that he is
utterly unlearned. There were some Philosophers so mad to say, that the Snow
was black; and Anax. Arist. de doelo.
some Mathematicians so senseles, as to avouch that the earth went round; and
some Rhetoricians so impudent, as to reprove Plato and Aristotle for barbarous
and harsh; and Timaeus, as vain an Historian, almost, as you are a Divine,
being Plut. Nicias.
but (...), a writer of yesterda^es brood, vilified and abased the credit of
that worthy and famous Thucydides, the mirror of Historians. Thine own
conscience, Broughton, tells thee, that the Archbishop his indefatigable pains
increased his learning; his learning settled his judgment, his judgment
brought on his gravity, each of these in several won him credit and
degrees, and all together adorned him with preferment. Much is the University
beholding to you, and men of good judgment you make the learned heads of that
time, who selected him above the rest, and singled him to be the Lady
Margarets Reader, and after that, amounted him to be the Chief professor in
Divinity, were he so unlearned, as your Loftines makes him. And it is to be
supposed by any sensible man, that her Majesty aduauncing him to this highest
dignity, and, after that, calling him into her Privy Council, took him to
be a man both of sound judgment, and at the least, of some learning. But this
is the effect and affection of men, so far houen with surquedrie and
self-love, as Menippus in the Moon took men for Luci^nu^. Iac. 18.
moates, so Pharisaically (...) to annihilate all others; and as Philo has
excellently described them, as if he had anatomized you, to account all besides
themselves (...); Philo (...).
(they are your own words of his Grace) babish, unlearned, rifraffe, nobodie.
Briefly, all Divinity besides yours is Atheism, and all learning to yours is
rudenes. But may it please your great Mastership to give a reason why you count
and call him so unlearned? His Lectures in the Schools; his disputations at
Commencements; his Sermons popular both in Court, city and country; his
encounters with schismatikes in print; his assiduous reading in any vacancie
from business; his sound judgment in points of any controversy: all these have
persuaded other to glorify God in him, and moved the Prince to advance him for
them. Your reason is double. First, He has not plowed with your heyfer. You
delight much in that proverb, repeating it five times in your letters and
pamphlets, and surely it accommodates your study well. For as that is but a
barren soil, and a light ground that is broken up with a Cow, so are your
labors trifles which are wrought out by Fantasy. Again, Sampsons heyfer was
his wife, ^ skittish huswife, a Philistine to an Israelite, a treacher to her
husband; yours is Genealogy, a wanton study, and, as you use it, a stranger
to sound learning, a betrayer of profitable Divinity; his heyfer robbed him of
his best strength; and yours has bereaved you of your five wits; the weakening
of his strength lost his liberty and his light, and both these together
brought an house upon his head: your brains weakness has perished your
learning, and abandoned you the land, and, I will not prophecy, but remember
thy end and thou shall do the better. Your meaning is he has not spent his
years in the Hebrew Rabbis. Why? you that are the great scholar of the
world, remember you not that of Pindarus (...), It is not all one kind of
Pind. Olymp. 9.
learning that maintains and adornes us all? And you the special cleerer of
Divinity, have you forgot the diversity of gifts by the same spirit, some to
have tongues, some prophecy, Ephe. 4.
some interpretation? Is Divinity so near driven, that as Rahel cried, Give
me children, or else I dye: so it must say, give me Genesis 30.
Rabbis, or else I perish? Who like young men with gray hairs, as the Poet
speaks, carry titles of Fatherhood and Mastership, Pindarus.
being but Punies, either for time or skill, compared with the Fathers. For if
a man should ask you in Jacobs phrase, where Genesis 31.
were they yesterday, or before yesterday? your Talmudists many hundred years
after Christ, and your Philosophers Pic. Mirand. Rhod.
scarce 300. years old. And howsoever there be that equalize some of them with
S. Paul his time, yet none of those worthy streams deriuing their divine
knowledge from the Scriptures fountain, the great Fathers and Doctors of the
Church, I mean, did ever mention any of them, to my remembrance, unless it be
Hierome, of whom anon; I am sure not borrow Hier. tom. 3.
any direction of interpretation from them. And the splendent brightness of the
Truth, which in Christendom burns still so gloriously, is borrowed from
these men's lamps, not any way nourished with Rabbis oil. And so, by your
argument, both ancient Fathers and modern writers are as utterly* unlearned as
the Archbishop. I crave pardon of his Grace for abasing him in parallel with
such an one as thou art. But he from the beginning of his studies, directed the
aim of his learning to those two scopes which S. Paul set up, (...) ver. 1.
Cor. 14.
12. and (...) verse. 40. the building and ornament of Gods Church. Like
Zacharies good shepherd carrying two staves Zach. 11.
Bands and Beauty. The source of which building he reared up by opening the
capable mysteries of the Trinity, the work of our redemption, the incarnation
of our Savior, the force of prayer, the effects of faith, the strength of love
and unity, the right use of the Sacraments, the means to salvation, the
horror of sin, the comforts of the spirit, with the power thereof in the
Scripture, in the Ministry, in the conscience, most of these being points in
capite, as the Apostle speaks: Coloss. ^.
to which he joining, by Gods assistance, good example of life, and by
authority inioyning maintenance of unanimity and uniformity, informed the
ignorant, and reformed the froward, and got reverence of all. Whereas thy great
selfeboasted learning is like that Thessalian Scopas his wealth, for as he
counted himself, therefore, happy and rich, even because Plut. ^at. May.
his whole revenues consisted (...)* in nifles and things unprofitable: so do
you think your self unmatchable in knowledge, because your Rabbis have
taught you who was Melchisedecks father, and what was the age of Mordecai, and
what meant Abacucks mess of potage; which Nazianzene calls (...), not (...),
trifling, not learning, and Naz. (...).
the Apostle most fitly (...) knowledge so nicknamed: 1. Tit. 6.
Nay, they can tell you, who were before Adam, and the name of the man which
was his schoolmaster, and will show you that the Sun in the firmament has
been eternal, that the Vide Ca^. in Mich. and Ram(...). H^m^od. P^utarch.
law was given before the creation, that the Messiah was created before the
worlds. Neither are their works like Homer his Egypt (...), etc. or the
Polypus head one thing good and another pernicious: but, as Master Beza, a man
as skillful in the Rabbis as you, Sir, writes often, they are pleni ineptijs
Bez. in Man.
and blaspemijs, full of ridiculous fables and horrible blasphemies; and
therefore by Master Caluins judgment and counsel, the reading of them to be
avoided, as writings quibus Call. in Hag.
nulla adhibenda fides. And grant there be, as the Earl of Pic. in Hept.
Mirand. writes, the mysteries of the profoundest Divinity in some of their
Cabalists, yet, as the Poet said, Turpe est diffic^les habere nugas, and
stultus labor est ineptiarum; and the same may Ma^^ial.
with more ease, and safety, and with less loss of good time be found in the
Fathers and classical authors Christian: for S. Hierome, another manner of
Hebrician then Braggadoccion Broughton, confesses that their aniles fabul^ are
so infinite, Hier. tom 3.
and their volumes so many, that it would ask long time even to run over
them, besides the traditions so filthy, vt erubescam dicere, says the father,
that a Christian would blush to read them, and loathe to hear them. And yet
with this Rabbinicall rubbish and untempered mo^ter have you labored a lomie
and sandy building many years, telling the poor ignorant artizans in London
of Caina^ in Luke, of Chiu^ in Amos, of 430. years in the Judges, of an
excellent Catechism to be framed out of the 1. of Matthew. and the 3. of Luke.
And which was a mighty timber log to rear, to persuade them that Adam fell
the first day of creation, or else the Lion must eat grass (did not the Echo
of the Church leave out the g. r. and give you the rest?) and for this you
account your self the Non parel for knowledge, and worthy of an Earldom,
Epist. ad Com. Hunting.
if learning had the guerdon. Neither was it needful to fill your boasting
books with glorying of your reading Rabbinisticall; for as they which suck the
milk of ill nurses commonly Plutarch. Genesis 30.
prove ill conditioned: and as Jacob* sheep, in ramming time, by the sight of
pilled rods brought forth party colored lambs; so your selfe-conceiuing
phan^asie, being ever in the ^aning mood, by your continual reading those
fabulous masters, brings into light nothing but fantastical and party
colored pild conceits half mad, half foolish; and by sucking of their
traditions, as of their milk, you have taken in their conditions. For this is
generally observed in those Jewish writers, that Volunt haberi pro oraculo
quicquid illis in Call. in Hos.
mentem venit. And is not this your vain? Whatsoever you obtrude upon us in
your Paperworkes, without ground or reason, they, which will not yield and
subscribe, be they never so learned, are but Hogs to pearls; disgracers of
Divinity: and be they never so religious, enemies they are to God his truth,
Iulians, Lucians, Apostates, Scoffers, unsettled in their Epist. ad Oxon. Acad.
studies. But in sooth, Sir Hugh, had nature through custom, or bitterness from
discontentme^t, forced you into this Rabshikaes Esaias. 38.
vain against the reverend Archbishop, yet something you should have objected
which had bin probable: but so bluntly, like another Ned, to call him whom her
Royal Majesty, the Noblest personages, both the Universities, the whole
Church, for his studies, through his confere^ces, by his labors extant, and
employments daily, acknowledge, reuere, and prefer as a most judicious and
grave Divine, to call him, I say, utterly unlearned, and unable to judge of
Divinity, will be counted not impudency only, but a frenzy. What sudden
constellation has wrought this strange Metamorphosis, that Tam subito coruus,
qui modo cygnus erat, that he, whom you Martia^
not long since made vmpire of that great controversy twixt D. R. and your
self, whose arbitrament (which you say made for you) you triumph in, and
account of as great validity as the ^^ist. ad Oxo^ fine.
Princes own; yea when you thought the meanest of him, it pleased you to
vouchsafe him the name of a Scholar of reasonable Epist. ad Nob. Ang.
good account in speech for a Baron, that now upon the sudden, within a years
compass at most, he, I say, should prove utterly unlearned, and unable to
judge of learning? But true is that of Solomon, Non recipit stultus verba
prudentiae, nisi ea Prou. 18. ^.
dixeris quae versantur in cord eius. And as Augustine writes of some male
contents, like the Israelites, Nisi homini Deus placuerit, Exodus 32. Augustinus.
Deus non erit; with them God shall be no God, if he fulfill not their lusts;
nor with you any man shall be learned longer then he subscribes to your fancies.

SECTIO. 8.
But what art thou that iudgest thy betters? Remember him that said, Hypocrita
eijce primum trabem. The deepest Matthew. 7.
point of learning, and most profitable which ever thou were conversant in, was
Gabriels message and D^niels weeks: wherein, as many heretofore, so of late
Master Lively has with sound learning controled your wisedomnes, and till you
have answered him, (which you more scornefully threaten, then you dare, or can
learnedly perform) never brag of your knowledge, nor bumbast your books with
such Thrasonicall threats, Nihili coaxatio. I can tell you, you have roused a
lion. Plautu^* Virgil*
Nescis quantus in clypeum insurgat* quo turbin^ torqueat hastam. As for your
other learning, except your tongues, (wherein you are no extraordinary man in
Master Beza his opinion) it is all contained within one word Geneal^gie. For
like the painter in the Poet, who could express in colors nothing well, sed
simulare cupressum, if any man would have his pourtraiture H^ratius.
taken, or any other picture pourtraied, his answer still was, will it please
you that I shall paint a Cypress tree? Semblable is your skill: confer we
with you about substantial points of salvation, presently you are upon us with
Melchisedecks father, or whether Kis or Mord^ca^ were in the captivity, and
herein like Sard^s ^igellius in H^^^ce, ab o^o ad mala, you are in for all day,
(...) it is your Hor. Sat. 3.
element: mary take you thence, as Plutarch notes of some such like your self
(...), you are like him who Piut. Lucul.
while he holds his peace is a wiseman in Salomons judgment. Remember you not
( you Cynosura and Lucifer of nations, Prou. 17.
the stupor and admiration of the world, the admirable scholar of the British
soil) how in Leydon thrusting your self forward to dispute, the question
being about Original sin, within two or three syllogismes you had wrong in
the controversy of Melchisedecks parents? and there you might say, as Cato
when he had got his sword, (...), now I am Piut. Cat. iun.
where I would be. And was it not you, our Hector, and A^as, the propugnacle of
English faith, and the Epitome of all learning, when you had by means labored
in your self to be a disputer with certain Papists in prison, having to that
purpose laded a porter with huge volumes, even in the very entrance of the
conflict, the controversy arising which translation of the Bible should
determine, and you taking the Septuag. and they replying that there were diverse
copies, many editions and great diversities of them, and therefore asking you
which you would stand to? very learnedly, iudiciously, and soundly you
answered, I will be judged by that Septuag. copy which was found in a wall at
Geneuah. You choked them presently, but it was with laughter. And for your
mysteries, wherein you challenge such a grace above his Grace, for plain, and
yet Epist. ad Reg.
profound exposition: first, as high points, as obscure, and, I am sure, more
in number are within the compass of S. John's Revelation, then in Daniels
prophecy, and those the Reverend Archbishop (of whose Grace still I ^raue
pardon for this disparagement offered him in comparing him with thee) unfolded
both learnedly and profitably, to this days remembrance, in the Doctors Chair
at Cambridge, before thou were crept out of thy Alphabeticall shell: and do
thou talk of plainnes, which make riddles of easy histories? Let him that
reads judge of perspicuitie in this example, among Ep. impr. ^as^* 97. in
o^^a^^.
many other, printed and sent by thee to the Council. Aba^uck brought Daniel a
mess of potage, whereas the sentence written in great letters, The just shall
live by faith, this for two points. Justice challenge^ of Daniel to have
stopped the lions mouth, and faith, told by the King of him, made the saying of
the amiable Prophet to be the mess of potage to him that always makes God
the judge. Where is your heyfer now to unfold your riddle? It is no marvel
you so affect the Scottish mist; for where the head does (...), the tongue m^st
needs (...): And now whether is Daniel or Praefat. ad Daniel.
you the to^mentor of souls? Yea but say you, his Grace has borrowed all his
knowledge from the Fathers, ( hui, s^crilegi^m) but mine is wrought out of mine
own invention. So Epist. ad Reg.
of all other creatures the Spider works his web out of his Pli^y.
own substance, but the strongest web a poor fly may break. And a(...)
(...) most commonly come of excrements. Arist.
But in truth, M. Broughton, dissemble not by whom you thrive and line: In
Herodotus you may remember a story whereof came the proverb, (...), The table
of the Sun, E^^s. ex Her^d.
a field wherein every morning there were victuals sound ready scattered for
any that would gather them, which the poorest sort ver^ly did think had come
from heaven by the Suns influence, whereas indeed the Magistrates ^ad
conueighed them thither closely and unknown to the people: and Bell his priests
privily lurched the viands, which were Dan. 14.
supposed to be devoured by the Idol: so cloak your stealth as closely as you
can, (like a (...), in Demosthenes sense) Demost. and Vlp. in cundem.
there are some that can tell and smell from whence you borrow and gleane your
much bragd-of Concent, and your gloses: and if you continue exasperating, there
are that will scatter ashes to descrie your footing, and deplume your borrowed
feathers, returning you like a Coote, telling you that Aesop. Horat.
even for those two places, whereof you arrogate to your self the first
apocalypse; that Mercerus, is your great master for Epist. ad Reg.
S. Steuens Rempham, upon Amos: and S. Austen your Index and gnomon for S.
Peter's place of preaching to the spirits. And Epist. contra Arch. p. 10.
whereas you say (after your saucie manner in a cothurnicall challenge) that if
his Grace cannot see that you have cleared Peter more then any before, the
cause is his ignorance in the Hebrews. Why? silly fellow, his Grace will not
only answer thee with Solomon, that there is nothing now which has not been
Eccles. 1. Augustinus.
said before: but will reach the 99. epistle of S. Austen, and there will show
thee whence thou had the purest light for clearing S. Peter. Only here is
the difference, as the Poet said, At male cum recitas incipit esse tuus.
Whatsoever is sound in Martial.
thy writings it is borrowed: but the Lunaticall conceits, which therewith are
blended, are thine own. And this is sufficient for your first great challenge
of his Graces vnlearnednes, his ignorance of the Rabbis traditions, viz. the
opprobry of Christianity, and the scumme of Divinity. Wherein least you
should be counted as the only malicious slaunderer, and detractor of so
reverend a person, you call to witness D. Sarauia, who told you, ass you say,
that he could not beat into his Graces head the bare conceit of your deep
studies. Varijs epistolis ad Reg. These. Arch.
Yea but D. Sar. cries out, Os impudens, and requested one to tell you that you
did falsely belie him in this, and wheresoever in this kind you name him: and
thinks verily it is but your spleen against him, breaking out in revenge of
an old quarrel: for your Mastership being in love with a rich Merchant
strangers daughter, and using the good Doctor as a mediator for the match, the
father a wise grave man, but once hearing of Broughtons name, in no case would
admit his daughter the speech or presence of such a giddie headed Lysard: and
upon this you raued in your passions against the Doctor, chafing extremely
that he had not sufficiently commended you so highly as you deserved. And
therefore he takes this to be but the (...), and vomit of a choleric
stomach, to make him an author of a malicious slander.

SECTIO. 9.
YOur second reason is, that the Archb. is no Grecian, nor knows one letter
of the new Testament. Qui semel verecund ae limits transilijt, knauiter fit
impudens. Who knows it not ( Broughton) that, in his public Lectures, he ever
read out of the Greek Testament, and has brought up some under his private
tuition, which are able to pass through any part thereof as readily for the
Grammar as thy self, and more soundly for judgment, (for thou art mad,) and
without either thy calfe or heyfer dare challenge thee at the Greek Testament,
for a better Benefice then that which a London Alderman should have paid an
hundred pound for, to thy behoof, by thine advice? And how knows your
Rabbinship that he is no Grecian? For he has falsely translated page 56. 57.
(...), and by it has marred all Divinity and discipline. It is a mighty
word, belike, that carries such weight. But pull in your ears you Cumane
beast for all your Lions skin: an earthen potsherd though it be gilded will
easily discover it self, says Solomon. He is very simple who knows not your
meaning, Prou. 26.
it is a Bishopric you have expected, and hunted after mainly; and defeated
of your hope, as being a very lump of intolerable pride, and singular
indiscretion, now you would feign currie favor with the Presbyterian faction,
though the time was, when they angered you, that you could call them ignorant
hotliuered fellows, of an unseasoned zeal. But to Epist. ad Oxon.
your reason. His Grace in his answer to the Admonition, (for Resp. ad Admo.
page 15. sect. 3.
thither you revoke us) expounds (...), Matthew. 20. a tyrannical and lustful
government, exorbitant from the mild course of law and justice, such as the
Heathens used over their subjects with oppression and unlimited license. And
very fitly and fully has he so translated it, for (...) in composition is not
idle, but signifies Budeus. Eustatius.
either as (...) an addition; or as (...) an opposition; or as (...) a
transgression. Against this you bring two arguments, both borrowed, by your
leave, from the invention of that great replier against the Archbishop, and
that is some discredit for Epist. ad Nob. fine.
you, that disdained to be any Bishops Chaplain, to be a Presbyters
licktrencher: for you, the graund Mintmaster of learning in our age, sapere ex
commentarijs, and to have scientiam Sen. Quintil.
atramentalem non mentalem: we expect from you, strange flower of Athens*
things new and unheard of. Is your own heyfer now decayed, that you must
borrow two calves from him? and use the help of his art, when Plutarch tells
you that of all artizans (...) Cartwrights do make nothing Plut. (...).
straight, but as their instruments are bowed, so their workmanship is crooked?
Quanto tu melius hoc inuenisses Thraso? But Terent. page 56.
the first is, S. Luke puts it without (...), and therefore even a simple and
si^les government is forbidden the Clergy. I answer, that as the authors of
this argument, being great patrones of the second marriage after divorce by the
party innocent, when they are urged out of S. Luke. chap. 16. 18. that
Whosoever puts Luc. 16. 18.
away his wife, and marieth another, commits adultery, without limitation
or exception, send us back for a nisi unto S. Matthew 19. 9. and so for that
matter Luke must be judged Matthew. 19. 9.
by Matthew. By the same authority we remit them and you from S. Luke to S.
Matthew and Mark, for the simple to be Matthew. 20. Luc. 22.
expounded by the compound. Your second stolen argument is, that our Savior
speaks of those rulers which were called (...) beneficial men, and therefore
all, even the mildest government, is meant by (...). Your huge learning might
have controled either their ignorance, if they kn^w it not, or their bad
conscience, and your own to, if knowing you should write the contrary, that
titles of Heathen princes were given either by a flattering (...) or by an
ironicall (...). Plutarch calls them (...), popular applauses puffed with
Plut. Demet.
a breath, and drawn back with another. As they which cried Osanna one day to
him* on whom the next they cried Matthew. 21.
out Crucisige. For those princes whom some of their subiect^ entitled (...),
as patrones in their government, other called them (...), as deuourers of their
people. As the same Antiochus Ath^n. d(...)l. l^^ 12. S^^t(...).
at one time was saluted both (...), and (...), a glorious prince, and a
furious tyrant. And the same, of Caesar, Tranquillus shows in an excellent
example. And if Plutarch, a man better read in Heathen stories then either you
or your author, had been consulted, he would, in a most learned discourse to
this purpose, have taught you that Aristides excelled all other princes, in
deserving to be saluted by the name of lust, whereas all the rest delighted to
be called (...) Plut. Ar^st.
, (...). City-spoylers, thund^^bolts, subduers, Egles, Hawks, rejoicing in
those (...)es of violence, rather then in names of mildnes and virtue. And the
Roman stories demonstrate that the posie of their Emperors was, according to
their fancy and practice, Si libet, licet. Amon. Carac.
If those other titles were given them, it came from the peoples glosing, not
their desert: as that title did from a Draper, who writing a book under your
patronage, dedicated it To the Reverend Father Hugh Broughton: as if you had
been some Bishop, whereas we know you to be an ordinary Minister, and no more
then a Master in Arts, or Bachelor of Divinity at the most. A third argument
you add, and a man would swear it is your own by the folly thereof; The
Presbytery page 57. 1. Tim. 2.
must not (...) out of 1. Tim. 2. If by the Presbytery you mean their
Clerolaicall Consistory, let them answer you, and defend their authority,
which approve and would erect that Confused bench: if our government
Episcopal, I then tell you, that S. Basil calls you (...), a counterfeiting
Basil. (...).
coyner of Scriptures. This place you might have kept till your marriage, for S.
Paul teaches husbands there to keep their wives from soueraintie, and not
suffer them (...) to take head and ouerrule: and if you will needs, by your
uncontrolled authority, understand it as the Apostle Ephe. 5. Ephesians. 5.
de sponsis spiritualibus, it makes for us in this proportion. The wife must
not (...), but submit her self to her husband as her head: so the Bishops
being husbands to their several charges, as they must love them and cherish
them, so withal to keep them under and in subjection, least they should
(...), take head against their rulers and spiritual husbands. Yet still you
add, or rather mad on, If his Grace had any Greek, or conscience, he would
have expounded (...) by other scriptures. Put on your spectacles you purblind
and proudblind Pharisee, and view his answer to T. C. p. 69. and see his
interpretation confirmed by a parallel of two Scriptures, Acts 19. 16. where
the word imports a deuilish dominion Act. 8. 19. 16. 1. Pet. 5. 3.
and preualence; and also out of the 1. Pet. 5. 3. where it signifies a
violent and fleecing government. Yea but he should (say you) have looked back
into the old Testament of the Septuag. Sis memor o mendax. In your quarrel
about Hades, you fetch us, to expound Hell in the Creed by, profane writers,
because the use of that word in Scripture chokes your fancy: but here the
Grammarians concluding against you, who Steph. Eras. and alij.
translate this place of S. Matthew, dominari in illas, not illis, expressing
the force of the preposition (...), now you fly to Septuag. and translators
must expound Christ's meaning. Is this your method (far differing from
Nazianzene and Augustine) Naz. (...). Aug. de doct.
to fetch a natural exposition from an accidental translation? even from
that, which, in many sound Divines judgment, is less to be allowed of, as
current for decision of controversy, then our vulgar English, against which
you have so virulently declaimed. Greatly you have boasted of, and In ep. ad
Nob.
much threatened these two places, (for every later paperwork of yours is but a
Tautology of the former) Et quid tanto dignum Horat.
feret hic promissor hiatu? The air thundered, the hills quaked, the earth
opened, and behold a mouse. This word (...) and the authority thereof is
granted to Adam even in his perfection. Genes. 1. and again attributed to
Christ in his soueraintie. Psalm. 110. But neither of these may be said to have
tyrannical power, and rule granted them. Papae, iugularas hominem. Give me
leave, good Master Thraso, to tickle you. Tuumne, obsecro, hoc dictum Tertul.
E^^.
erat? vetus credidi. Yea but what if these puffed sails hoisted up, overthrow
your own bark, and make for the Archbishop against you? have you not (to use
your own words) spunne a fair thread, and wouen a good cloth? For the
soueraintie given to Adam over the earth and beasts, was justly expressed in
(...), viz. in breaking ye clods of the one, by force Tertul.
and violence, in cicuring and slaying the other with blows and death. For
though flesh of beasts was not eaten till after Genesis 9
the deluge, yet man before that flood and his fall, had, by the authority
from God in the force of this word, power over the beasts both of life and
death, and so the Hebrew word radah signifies: therefore this dominion (...)*
to keep the Clergy under, as Adam kept the earth and beasts, (which is
rightly (...)) we with S. Peter deny to Ecclesiastical governors, as
forbidden by our Savior in 1. Pet. 5. ^.
detestation of Heathenish rulers, who used their subjects like beasts, both
employing them in service slauishly, and consuming them up either by executions
or exactions. As, if your malice blinded not your knowledge, you might see by
conference of 1. Sam. 8. 11. for God there describing the manner 1. Sam. 8. 11.
of their King which should reign over them, he shows a pattern of the
Heathenish tyranny, not of that lawful and princely authority prescribed by
himself, having enjoined the contrary in the law of Moses. Deuteronomy. 17. 20. And
I take it worthy the observation, that God giving prerogative and soueraintie
to Cain over his younger brother dominaberis illi, Genesis 4. 7.
changes the word he used to Adam, which the Septuag. have translated (...),
not (...), this being no fit government (...) brother over a brother so to
rule; much less for fathers (...)eir children, or Pastors over their charge.
Now for (...)er place, Psalm 110. 2. where the father says to his son Psalm.
110. 5.
(...), be thou ruler in the midst of thine enemies. (in good sooth I pity
thee) The whole Psalm describes Christ in his full power, either reigning
over his subjects, whom verse. 3. he calls populum voluntarium, a people
willingly submitting themselves unto him, ruling them (...), Psalm. 45. with a
scepter of righteousness, meekly and kindly, and the time of this reign is
called dies virtutis, the day of his power: Or subduing Vide Flamin.
his enemies, and making them his footstool, to the suppressing of whom he
has authority given him (...) to ouerrule them, and for that he has (...), a
rod of power, verse. 2. And the time of this domination is called dies* furoris,
or narium, the day of his wrathful indignation, that they which will not kiss
the son as friendly subjects, Psalm. 2. Psalm. 2.
and be ruled by his scepter, should be subdued by the son as his enemies,
and bruised in pieces with his iron rod: and this also, being rightly (...), a
power in revenge against underlings, as enemies, is forbidden the Apostles by
our Savior, Matthew. 20. For howsoever he allow them with S. Paul a rod of
authority and correction, to keep their Clergy in 1. Cor. 4.
awe, yet he permits them not his rod of iron to crush them in pieces and make
potsheards of them: because their power Psalm. 2. Galat. 6.
must not be in revenge but love, and with the spirit of meeknes; (...), in
their correction moderation, and in their punishments compassion. And so the
simplest may see, that this word (...) is used in the first place for a
dominion over beasts; and in the second for a revenging power in execution of
enemies; and generally, as the best Hebricians do Vide Brixian.
observe, the original word is always used for dominari in, or aduersum, a
domination of hostility and violence of fury. And thus being taken in your
own grin like a Woodcocke, I dismiss you for this point with advise, to look
upon your black legs hereafter, and down with your train you Peacocke, and
cease craking (crauen as thou art) of thine own unmatchable learning, or
cackling of the vnlearnednes of thy betters: for were thy grace no better in
(...), then thy skill is in expounding (...), thou might perchance prove more
humble, and write less. (...), as Plato speaks, Plato.
and now I come to your (...), which from Plato you have borrowed.

SECTIO. 10.
NAmely, to your admirable conceit how Christ descended into hell, that is, the
world of souls. Wherein you still show you are a great Rabbinist: for this is
a common proverb with them, That it is better being the head of a fox, then the
tail of a lion: that is, the author of an addle fancy, then the scholar of a
received verity. Neither the consent of Greek and Latin Fathers pleasing you,
who concluded his descent into hell locally: nor opinion of modern writers of
his descent into hell on the cross and in his passion triumphantly: nor the
judgment of a middle sort for his desce^t into the grave, that is, hell
metaphorical, corporally: but your heyfer, like a sullen beast, (because it
would not be vltimus inter boues, becomes primus inter asinos) must (...),
wander alone and chunner out an Heathenish conceit of descending into the world
of souls poetically. The chief arguments hereof, according Epist. ad Nob.
page 36. and inde
to your custom, we have seen before in your epistle to the Nobility;
although in this your last Libell you tell his Grace, that if you would handle,
to the full of your knowledge, the descent of page 3.
Christ into (...), it would be as well accepted as any thing that man's pains
ever studied. I am sure you have performed the one, for in handling it you have
stretched out your self with Aesops AEsopus.
toad, vt rumpantur ilia, till you have outstretched your self both for
modesty and sense: of your acceptance small joy you may take, and little
comfort your adherents find, and if this be the full strength of your heyfer,
she is but a suckling. For first there is nothing in this malicious pamphlet of
yours (set your railings by) but a palinody, I mean not a recantation, (you
will never have that grace) but a repetition of the very arguments which H. I.
one, as it seems, whom Hugh brought up, or, as I think, the vanity is so
semblable, one Hugh Broughton has used in a confutation of some Sermons
preached at Paul's cross, and elsewhere, by a worthy and learned Prelate of
this land, to whom both H. I. and H. you come as near for found judgment and
multiplicitie of learning, though, you say, you outstrip him, as does the
footman to the Lydian coach, as Pindarus speaks and Plutarch applies it.
Pindarus, Plut. Nic.
So that if you were the author of that confutation, he that conferres them
both will swear you play the Cuckoo; if not, then never brag of your self,
that you are the only cleerer of Divinity, for there is not any argument in
this your Libell touching Sheol and Hades out of Scripture, or out of Heathens,
but there it is. And now, res non inuenta reperta est, we Ovid.
have found a match for Master Broughton, both, as it seems, brought up near
Twatling street. Again, how your work is accepted, see to your shame and
confusion of countenance and conscience, if this be not seared and that
steeled, the discourse of that reverend father, of this point, in his
conclusion to the reader from page 357. unto the books end, where he has
killed Goliath with his own sword, and out of your own Poets and Philosophers
so learnedly and iudiciously has confuted this your foolish paradox of the
World of souls, that neither you will ever be able to answer it, unless as
Elihu speaks, you will add rebellion unto sin, and be of Tully his Job.
34. 37. Tus. quaest.
mind, cum Plaetone insanire magis quam cum alijs recte sentire, rather to be
mad with Plato, then yield to the truth of Gods spirit: nor any thing can be
added, which there is not sufficiently for this matter contained: so that I
will be the shorter herein, as being not worthy to gleane after his harvest,
and spare those infinite quotations out of all the Poets, which against this
fancy I had gathered.

SECTIO. 11.
ONly I wish the reader to observe in this your defense, as you term it,
first, your disloyal blasphemy: secondly, your Heathenish divinity: thirdly,
your absurd and opinionatiue vanity. In the first, challenging the Queens
most sacred Majesty with breach of her oath, charging the Defendour of the
faith that she adventures her state and soul upon an heresy, Epist. ad Reg.
page 12. 13.
and calling the whole Realm an Apostaticall land, for allowing this article.
It is well you carry your pardon about you, given you in patent by Mania, and
sealed with the inscription of Laesum cerebrum. Have thou forgot his counsel,
who said we must speak of Princes either (...) or (...), either briefly Plut.
^olon
or sweetly? Could the Pope of Rome have said more? Great thanks, you say, you
have even from Papists for your pains and studies: it is no marvel, for
flies delight not more in Apothecaries ointments, then they do in treasonable
speeches, Eccles. 10,
and male contented slanderous fugitives. But how has she violated her oath,
or the land forsaken her first faith? Forsooth, say you, King Edward held, to
which she is sworn, and page 12.
the Realm agreed, that Christ's soul never went to hell, or Gehenna in your
term, (we will speak English, as taking them to be all one in the new
Testament, and have as good authority to think that Hell may be as well
derived from Yell, or Matthew. 25.
Howl, as being the place of wayling and gnashing of teeth, as from Hayle or
pull, which is your conjecture.) What a member page 5.
is that tongue of thine, that is not unruly enough in reuiling men's persons,
but it must grow worse in untruly falsifying Acts of Parliament and articles of
Synod? Read the third article concluded in the Synod anno (as I take it) 1552.
Quemadmodum Art. 3. Edw. 6.
Christus pro nobis mortuus est and sepultus, ita est etiam credendum ad
Inferos descendisse, etc. adding that, which we, avoiding unwarranted
curiosity, have left out, viz. the defining And it is our third article, anno
62.
of the time of his abode, the purpose of his descent, and the persons relieved
or released thereby. Yea but P. Martyr and Martin Bucer who were the Pylots of
the Kings religion, his page 12. 13.
tongue and his heart, they show the Kings mind. It is well that you will at
sometimes name the parties by whom you thrive, and at whose trenchers you live:
for this whole tractate of yours, the marrow of your wisdom, and the full
strength of your knowledge, is but the droppings of other men's taps, which,
howsoever from them it sauoured well, yet being colored with the Turnsalue of
your Fantastical brain, it has lost both the verdure, and the virtue.
Martin Bucer, indeed, seems to distinguish between Gehenna and Infernus,
that Infernus is In Matthew. 27.
the common receptacle of good and bad, but Gehenna of the bad only: what
ground he has, let the reader judge, I mean not to rake his ashes, the
raising of whose bones, more virulently, then truly, you object to this our
Apostaticall land, and D. Perne principally, whom you call the Archbishops
tutor, as page 13.
vain a tradition, though nothing so impicus, as that of your Rabbis; who
write that Sombassar was schoolmaster unto Adam, the first man that ever was.
D. Perne being no otherwise tutor to him, choosing him, being scholar of
Pembroke Hall, to be fellow in Peter House, then D. Hawford was to you, being
fellow of Christ's College, after that Trinity College and S. John's had spued
you out from their company, for a factious, proud, malepart, mad-headed,
fantastical boy, (howsoever you have boasted otherwise most vainly in your
epistle to the Earl of Huntington.) But to return, albeit Bucer so
distinguish, Ad Sed. Olam.
yet his conclusion is, that this article He descended into Hell, is but an
explication of the former He dyed and was buried, taking Hades for the grave.
But, give it so, that Bucer his opinion is, that the body being in the grave,
his soul joined it self to the souls of the Just, and so Infernus to
signify nothing but the state of the soul separate from the body, (which
opinion I am loath, too straightly, for reverence to the dead man, to examine
and rifle) yet must we think that the religious King took him for a
Pythagoras, and would tie his faith to men's persons (which S. James forbids)?
or shall we Iam. 2.
rather believe the King himself, who, in the articles of religion concluded
in the Clergy Synod, confirmed by the States in Parliament, and established by
his Royal assent, constantly auerres credendum est, we must believe that
Christ's soul went ad Inferos, to them which were below? and this same article
is still in force, grounded upon Scriptures, concluded by Art. 3. anno 62.
the reverend Synod, and promulgated by her Majesty's authority and consent,
for the faith of the whole Realm, and to which your self have subscribed, or
else you are an Intruder, and came in at the window. And now let any reader
judge (though otherwise he knew thee not) of your brain and vain, who not
only chargest the Lords anointed with breach of her oath, in print, in a
Libell, from a foreign country, (an insolence severely punishable in an
objection of truth) but also blasphemest her most sacred Majesty in most
beastly resemblances, not to be named; and vpbraidest her page 71. lin. 7.
page 12. and Epist. ad Reg.
religious soul with perjury, in an article of faith, and a great point of
religion, and that most untruly. If you plead your Patent (above named) leave
Basil and return to Bedlem, if not, but you will needs persuade us you are in
your wits, it is pity (because you are such a Grecian) but the Greeken should
end your period.

SECTIO. 12.
THe second thing is your Heathenish Divinity, in making Hell into which our
Savior descended, to be nothing but that Platonicall and Plutonicall Hades of
the Heathen, summoning the Creed to be judged by a Consistory of Painims for
proper phrase. You will not allow Galen the prince of Physicians page 9.
to expound (...), Psalm. 88. 11. but recourse must be had to the Hebrew, even
to a false root, to cloak a slip which the Septuag. there made, but here the
prince of Poets must moderate the act, and interpret the action of the prince
of our salvation. So true a difference is that which some of the Fathers have
made between (...) and (...), a light fancy, and a settled judgment, that
this is sensus elatus e scripturis: but that is sensus allatus ad scripturas.
It was the greatest slavery that Israel felt, when they were forced to go
down to their deadly foes the Philistines to sharpen their axes, mattocks 1.
Sam. 13.
and instruments of husbandry (for they were wholly deformed of their weapons)
and a sorer vassalage must Christianity endure, if her profession must be made
good by Poets fictions. Strange fire to be offered on Gods altar was severely
Leuit. 10.
punished, * because as from heaven it came, so in the first Leuit. 9.
nature it must be preserved. Yea your own Pagans were in that point so
religious, that they counted it unlawful to refresh the Vestall fire, being by
some strange mishap extinguished, Plut. Number.
with any material fire and profane, but a devise was invented to kindle it
from heaven by the Sun. Surely less lawful is it, because more dishonorable
to Gods glory, and the dignity of Christian profession, to make the Grecians,
who account the preaching of the Gospel folly, expounders 1. Cor. 1.
of Christian oracles, and to fetch light from their Heathenish Ignis fatuus,
for the illustration of divine mysteries. The rule of the holy Ghost being, as
his method is, to compare spiritual things with spiritual things, and leave
the natural 1. Cor. 2.
man to things within his capacity, because the spirit of the Prophets is
subject to, and must be judged by Prophets. For 1. Cor. 14.
who knows not, that Christianity has used many words in several sense from
the common phrase? Is (...) in the new Testament to be measured by the
Athenians model? or fides by the Romans? who notwithstanding made so reverend
account thereof, as that they thought her a Goddess, and reputed Plut. Number.
the oath per fidem to be the greatest and most sacred? S. John's (...), one of
the most essential names of the second Ioh. 1.
person in Trinity, does it import no more, nor signify any other thing then
the Orators (...), or the Poets (...)? And though Plato and Hermes have plumbd
it deeply, must we Plato. Hermes.
reach no further, then their shallow sounding? So (...) being properly among
the Fathers and Councels used for the incarnation of our Savior, how far
differs it from that fence which in Paganish writers is rife and usual? And
if for Theodoretus in Polym.
Hades in the Creed we must be tried by Poets, why in the same Symbol are
not we to be judged by them, for him, whom both we, and they call (...), the
Father almighty? Did the Apostle, citing the half verse out of Aratus,
applying Act. 17.
it to our God, (...), refer them that heard him to their Jupiter, of whom
the Poet spoke it, and so make us the progeny of their Lascivious Stallion, of
whom Clem. Clem. (...).
writes, that which Suetonius does of Caesar, that he was every Sueton. lul.
man's woman and every woman's man? The reason is al one. For by the Poets
figments Hades was Jupiters brother both sons to Saturn: and so, by your
own judges, the penner of the Creed, when he said that Christ descended
(...), meant that he went into the house of Hades, who was governor of the
inferior parts, as Jupiter of the air, and Neptune of the sea. For Homerus,
and Hesiodus, and Pla^o.
(...) in the Poets is no name of place, but figuratively. But for this
discourse you may be referred to that conclusion of the right Reverend Father
in the place before named, to which nothing can be added for learning or
substance in this point; where he has showed both your self and H. I. to be
but questing puppies, for all your wide mouths. Yet one thing I cannot omit,
that men may see (which thy self will not perceive) how you, the sole true
calculator of times and ages, have forgot your self: for laboring to bring
all Scripture words to Poets phrase, you will needs persuade us that S. Peter,
using those words of torment (...), borrowed them all 2. Pet. 2. 4.
from Homer and his prose commentary. First, for Homer, what proof have you of
S. Peter's reading him? S. Peter could tell 2. Pet. 1.
you that no Scripture is of any private man's motion, but holy men speak as
the spirit moves them, because all Scripture 2. Tim. 3.
is (...) inspired of God. We laugh at the Canon gloss for saying that S.
Paul, Romans 7. alluded to that verse in Ovid, Odero si potero, si non, inuitus
amab^. And surely, lighting Ovid.
upon this and such like stuff in your fardle of fancies, I say with Horace,
-vt mihi saepe Bilem, saepe iocum vestri mouere tumultus? Horat. epist.
Laughter and anger have strouen within me which should prevail, laughter
verily, but that it is in such serious matter. But by as good reason you may
say that Christ our Savior had read Pindarus, because, speaking to persecuting
Saul out of heaven, he used the very words of the Poet (...) Pind. Pyth. od. 2.
(...), etc. it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. Mary that he Act.
9.
should read his prose commentary, if it be Eustathius, as it seems by your
book page 63. (unless you have got some other in a wall, as you did the
Septuag. unheard of) that is worth the observing. It is coniectured by the
works of Pythagoras and Plato, and some of the Poets, that they have read
Serranus.
the books of Moses, and that Scripture which was before their time, at least,
in their travail, had conference with such as informed them therein; but that
the Apostle should read a commentary before the author was borne, is more
then prophecy. S. Jerome out of an oration of Tully not extant, cites Tul.
pro Q. Gall.
a place where a certain Poet brings in Euripides and Menander, Socrates and
Epicurus dialoguising and conferring together, who lived in times different non
annis, sed saeculis, and therefore thinks the absurdity so ridiculous, that
it deserves Hieron.
a supplosion or an hissing: and is not this as (...) (besides the untruth)
that S. Peter should fetch his phrases from a Bishop not borne many years
after? But thus you bewray your self a notable scholar of the Rabbis, whose
property is, as Calvin well observes, vt diuinent hoc and illud sine delectu
Calu. in Hab. 2.
and pudore. And if you ask them a reason, their answer is ready, We think
so. Yet this oversight may be smiled at, but that in Nah. 1.
which follows procures detestation. David's sins, though great, did not so
hasten-on Gods judgments, as that by the^ 2. Sam. 12.
he had caused the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme; neither is it your strange
divinity that procures our indignation against you, because we know it is but
the frantic delirium of one, whose pride has made him (...), Gal. 6. but
this is Gal. 6.
it which grieves us, and should confound you, that both Papist and Pagan has
hereby just cause of scandal. Some of the first sort, already, for speeches
far more differing from Rossaeus and Reynoldus.
any vicinitie to prophanenes then this of yours, (though most slanderously)
have set out whole Libels in which they would demonstrate, that the opinions of
Protestants are more detestable then Heathens, and particularly, that
Caluinisme is worse then Paganism. What may they say now (I am sorry
Broughton, to give them this (...), but only to show, how thy proud malice, to
glorify thy self, cares not to disgrace both men and religion) when they shall
read and hear, that among us it is defended and printed, that Christ went
into the Poets Hades, that is, at the best into the Elysian fields among the
spirits of their Hector and Achilles? Besides the occasion given the Pagans to
stumble, and blasphemously to say Where is now their God? when they shall show
that more honor is by them attributed to their Idols and greater felicity,
then by some of us to our Savior: for they translate those great ones, whom
they deifie, immediately into heaven, as we may see of Romulus in Liuy, and of
Augustus in Suetonius. Sueto. Aug. (...).
And Homer presents unto Ulysses, being in Hades, (...), the force and strength
of Hercules a ghost, but Hercules himself was confessed to be in heaven with
their immortal Gods. But it pleases you to leave our Savior in Hades until
this day, a place by their own confession, as we shall see anon, at the best,
of no solace nor delight. But our Savior Matthew. 7.
his speech is true, that there is no expecting of grapes from thorns, or
figs from thistles, nor from an addle head good devise, nor sound divinity
from a giddie, brainsicke, prideswolne companion, that, to feed his own
selfe-pleasing humor, cares not to bring all religion into that old proverb,
(...). Eras. and Iun. us.


SECTIO. 13.
YOur opinionatiue vanity is the last, that Christ's descending into Hell, is
nothing else, but he ascended into heaven. It is reported of Polemo the
Sophister, that being at Smyrna a Rhod. lib. 20.
spectatour of a Tragedy, a ridiculous actor comes out upon the stage, and his
part being to pronounce O coelum, he bends his eyes and hands to the earth; and
anon crying out O terra, his hands and eyes were lifted up to heaven: away
flings the Sophister and cries out upon him, This fellow, says he, has made a
Solaecisme with his hands. It may well agree with a turbulent spirit Coelum
terra miscere, but to confound heaven and hell, and make ascending and
descending to be all one, is not only a Solaecisme in Divinity, but even in
common reason, which has concluded sursum and deorsum to be Arist. de Coelo.
Opposita. In the Poets Hades, the two passages were leuelled (as I may say)
upon one floor, the one leading into Elysium, Plato. Virgil.
the other into Tartarus: the first, the place of the best men's souls: the
last, of torment, for the worst. But as S. Luke (who must direct Christians)
describes it, Hades, the place of Diue^ torment, was below, and Abraham's
bosom, the rest of Lazarus, Luc. 16.
was above, and between them both a great huge Hiatus making them mutually
inaccessible. And Eliah being taken away 2. Reg. 2. Number. 16.
was carried up into heaven: but Core and his company went down alive into
Sheol. And Lucifer with his angels being seated in heaven, were thrown down
(says Saint Peter and 2. Pet. 2. Jude ep.
Jude) into the pit of darkness. The truth is, read whosoever will (let him
not be paradoxically preiudicious) the Scriptures and Poets, he shall never
find Sheol of the Hebrews, nor Hades of the Greeks, (one place in Plato
excepted, which the Reverend Father has notably illuded) but at the best it is
an irksome, mirksome deep place, and most-what opposite to heaven. Else,
neither would Christ, Psalm. 16. have Psalm. 16.
rejoiced that his soul should not be left in Sheol, if either he be there
still, as by your divinity he is; or if it be a place of rest and happiness,
as your fancifull opinion conceiues it: nor Achilles in Homer would have wished
to be any swains peasant ^
upon earth in the greatest want, rather then the prince of souls in Hades, as
to Ulysses he protests. But let me ask thee, good Sir Hugh, (though naturals
for the most part love not to answer questions) is Christ now in Sheol or
Hades where he was presently after his passion? he is, say you: that is, at the
right hand of his father, in whose presence are the Saints departed singing
Alleluiah? Yes, say you. Now then, show us any one place in the Bible for
Sheol, or in the Poets for Hades, where either of them are put for Heaven or
Paradise: or in any sacred or profane writer, where going down is put for
going up? The contrary of both we show. If I climb up to heaven, thou art
there; if I go down to Sheol, Psalm. 139. Matthew. 11.
thou art there also. And thou Capernaum art exalted to heaven, but shall be
brought down to Hades. Yea by your own confession, page 19. the Heavens are
high, Sheol is deep, and that which Job, say you, would have called Sheol, God
himself calls Death. So that Sheol, at the best, either is not Heaven, as you
often avouch, or else there is a third place besides Heaven and Hell called
Sheol for the Saints to rest in. But what man of sense would talk sencibly to
a Dottrell, being one of those Divines, whom Saint Paul describes, so
ignorantly rash, that they know not what they say, nor whereof they affirm? 1.
Tim. ^.


CONCLVSIO.
ANd therefore I will leave you, Master Broughton, with this counsel of
Horace, if you will vouchsafe it, - tractent fabrilia fabri, return to your
Genealogies, wherein your Horatius.
grace is best: for if you enter into points of faith, being out of your
element, you detect your ignorance: and being both a Christian and a Divine,
learn S. Paul's lesson, in meekenes of Philip. 2.
mind to esteem others better then your self. But especially, which is the
frequent comparison of the Fathers, leave that dogged humor, furiously to
run at the stone, and not regard the flinger: for howsoever you charge the
Archbishop (which jealous suspicion of yours has caused all this garboyle) as
the chief hinderer of your preferment, yet look up to God, who has a
principal stroke in all these actions. He has made beasts to excel men in
senses, but he has denied Plutarchus.
them reason. The Ostrich he has framed a goodly bird with feathers and wings,
Job. 39. 16. but he has deprived her Job. 39. 16. 2^.
of wisdom, and given her no understanding, verse. 20. Unto you he has given
great ornaments, of learning and knowledge, but he has denied you discretion,
which is as the brine that seasons learning, and the especial help in a place
of government, which you so affect. For as Sacrifices, in the law, not Leuit. 2.
salted were unacceptable; so religion, without discretion, is unsavory; and
learning, without judgment, sinister and rash; and government, without
wisdom, proud and dangerous. The aduancers of learned men are taught a
precept, by a proverb, Ne puero gladium, not to give swords to children:
Cicero. Plato.
but you Grecians, says Solon, (...), are always children. And you, Master
Broughton, that arrogate to your self the Attick Science, have showed your
self a child in all your actions, and therefore by Aristotle his rule,
(because it is (...) Arist.
not (...)) unfit to be a Divine, much more a ruler among Divines. Desire not
to be a cleerer of S. Peter rather then his hearer, who wills you to humble
your self under Gods mighty 1. Pet. 2.
hand, and submit your self to all your superiors (not as you take them, but
as God has placed them): so shall you be thankful to your creator, loyal to
your betters, charitable in your affections, temperate in your speeches,
moderate in your fury, retentiue of your slanders, and less selfe-boasting
of your great sufficiencies, remembering what both your self have written to
the Nobility of England that, to bring a page 43.
good thing to pass by persuasion in writing, should need a mild style: and
also that of S. Paul, that he which praises himself 2. Cor. 10.
is not allowed, but he whom the Lord praises. Nam lauda^do te bonu^, fis
malus, says S. Austen. But in any case take out Pythagoras Augustinus. Pythag.
precept, Piss not against the Sun: cease so fondly and sencelesly to vpbraid
with vnlearnednes and want of conscience that most Reverend Father and right
worthy Prelate of our Church, whom his place and virtues (even by Philosophy)
have made Arist. Rhet.
(...) from such an one as thy self, who may be thy master for sound learning
and humility. Of whom I would speak more, but that I know to his Grace it is a
burden, and from me it would be accounted flattery. For if I list, or it were
needful to gather (as thou have done of thy self more busily then truly) what
both strangers, and the best learned among us, have in print written of him,
both by report, and of certain knowledge, to his perpetual praise, for his
sound judgment in learning, his sincere conscience in his actions, and his
unmatchable mildnes in his deportment, I might fill a volume to thy confusion;
but as Philo says, (...). Philo (...).
Truth is the alsufficient commendation, and when envy has burst her guts,
and slander cracked her lungs, his fame shall found; they that live with him
love him, they that know him reverence him, they which hear of him admire him;
unless they be either discontedly malicious, or schismatically factious, or
paradoxically furious. It is not too late to recall your self, and to crave
pardon of his Grace, whom thus against thine own conscience, and all truth
thou have so intolerably abused, that so as Austen says, qui primas non
habuisti sapientiae, Aug Retract.
secundas habeas parts modestiae, since thou see thy self to want wisdom
in all thy actions, others may see that thou have modesty in this repentance.
Otherwise, if you continue as you have begun, you will be counted among wise
men, as now you are, the Master of absurdities; the mintmaster of fancies; a
Pharisaicall herald sounding your own praises; a sottish Pygmalion enamoured
with your own devises; an Aenigmaticall ridler writing without sense; an
opprobrious Thersites insulting without modesty, reuiling without reason,
rauing without measure. Your books but squibs, compounds of gunpowder and
p^sse, making more stink then stir, and yet more stir then hurt; the
mirror of vanity; the refuse of Divinity; the quintessence of folly;
Phoebus curtains enueloped with oracles; Egyptians cups replenished with
conjectures, embelished with slanders. And so I end with that salutation which
King Philip of M^cedon gave to mad Menecrates, as vain a Physician in the
opinion of his faculty, as you are for your Divinity, (intituling himself
Jupiter) (...) wishing you a sound mind in a healthful body: for verily
sooner you had received an answer, but that the rumor was here with us that
you were dead: but that was checked, and then it was rife that you were proved
mad: but I hope better for your souls sake, and it will be better for your
names sake, if you can be humble.

Tuus sis and ero.
Some faults escaped thus to be corrected.
affection read affectation. page 8. lin. 8. Sappho read Psappho. page 11.
lin. 19. F. put ff. marg. page 13. lin. penult. and so pa. 16. marg. lin. 4.
auering read auerring. page 17. lin. 13. Iac. 18. marg. put Luc. 18. page 21.
lin. 11. 1. Tit. 6. marg. put 1. Tim. 6. page 23. lin. 20.

A COMPARISON OF CERTAIN VAIN SPEECHES OF HVGH BROVGHTON, with those of
Pyrgopolinices Plautus his glorious Soldier.
Broughton. Miles Glor. D. Reynolds nor D. Andrews may or will encounter me.
Cum quo bellator Mars haud ausit congredi, Neque aequiparare suas virtutes ad
meas. The Jews desired to have me sent to all ye Synagogues in Constantinople,
if it were but to see my Angelical countenance. Molestae sunt, accedunt,
orant, obsecrant videre vt liceat, ad sese accersi iubent. Zurick, Denmark,
Scotland, French, Dutch, Papist, Protestant, Lutherans, Jews call for me,
being a man approved over the world. Nam itae me occursant multae, haud
meminisse omnes possum; tanta miseria est hominem esse pulchrum nimis. No
Bishop nor Baron shall be my Lord, the Queen only is fit to be my Patron. Nam
ad meam formam illa vna digna est. The LL. said that I was nulli secundus for
knowledge and learning. Magnum me faciam nunc, quoniam illi me collaudarunt. D.
R. said there was as much in Br. as could be in a man. Heus dignior fuit
quisquam homo qui esset? If the Queen will not prefer me for my pains, I
will leave the land. Nisi huic verri affertur merces, no^ hic seminio suo
quamque porculonam partituru'st. They sent a messenger for me, as though I were
a man fit to be cited by such fellows. Permirum ecastor praedicas te adisse
atque exorasse per epistolam aut nuncium; Quasi regem adiri hunc aiunt. I
requested his Grace to tell D. C. that I was his better by Heroaldie. Nescio an
tu hoc ex me audieris an non, Nepos sum Veneris. The Queen so much esteems of
me, that, she said, she would not for all the preferments in the world I should
be discontented. Nulli mortalium scio obtigisse hoc nisi duobus, mihi and
Phaoni Lesbio, Tam nimie vt amaremur. I returned answer that I would no longer
serve her Majesty, if I were not recompensed for my studies out of hand. Nam
quid ego hic asto tantisper cum hac forma and factis? sic frustror?

Plautus.
Leuiorem hoc homine si quis vnquam viderit,
Aut gloriarum pleniorem, quam illic est:
Me sibi habeto, and ego me illi mancupi dabo.
FINIS.

