AN EXPLICATION OF THE ARTICLE katlthen is idou, of our Lords souls going
from his body to Paradise; touched by the Greek generally idou, The world of
Souls; termed Hell by the old Saxon, and by all our translations: with a
defense of the Q. of Englands religion: To, and against the Archb. of
Canterbury: who is blamed for turning the Q auctority against her own faith.

Sundry Epistles are prefixed and affixed. by H. Br.

The second edition, wherein the Typographicall falts of the former are
amended.

(...) James, 2, 1.

1605.

TO THE MIGHTY PRINCE ELISABETH BY THE GRACE OF GOD QVEENE of England, France
and Ireland, defendour of the faith, etc.
YOUR M. gave intelligence unto a gentleman of Middelburgh, of a prelates
disgracing of my poor self: which thing caused him some sadness; and my self
more. He demanded of your highness no censure touching me: but thinking that he
learned more substance of divinity in a short conference, the^ in 64. years
before (as it pleased him to say,) procured me before I was vvare a great
stipend to profess if I would: and also vvrote to know whether you would
employ me in England or like that elsvvhere others should: and knevv that it
was against all Christianity and the peace of life, to censure any that seek
no preferme^t: vvherby if they requited like grief, much disgrace would be
spread, where amity should bear the sway. In his grief he replied upon the
prelate: as upon one not knovving the seasoning of his tongue in honesty: and,
by hinderance of the best pains for man's good, bent unto the ruin of the
Kingdom. Your M. best knovveth his whole heart, by his Letters. The Letter of
the prelates tongue vvhetted too sharp, he gave me: to reply for my self, as I
thought meetest. The party I knevv by the speech: and shevved him the very
syllabes: I think your M. looks that I should avvnsvver: and not suffer you
to be led amysse by him. Therefore I vvil first show what man I hold most
assured to be the reporter: next, what I avvnsvver to his particular speech:
By these arguments I gathered that the Archb. of Cant. was the man. By a man
of his, the very same speech was uttered among some that spoke in great
thankfulness for my pains; and was counted to be il affected unto the
knowledge of salvation: and he and his family alone are avvonder to the
Learned; noted the only that could not afford me good words; whose pen and
tongue (as they say) has caused the whole nation, to be better spoken of.
Your M. may remember what he said of the little book that drevv all the
Scripture unto Christ. and shevved the use of every parcel, from the beginning
to the End: and called thither all kinds of Fastern and vvestern opening still
where they erred, even by them selves: carrying half a skore of several most
hard and needful studies thither, and examining all auctours not only in their
own tongues but by their own vein and course of study. The praelat said to
your highness that it contained but the curious quirkes of an young head. where
as if he had studied 31. y* ever since he was Doctor, how in one speech to
show him self extremely void of all grounds of Lerning, and of all conscience
for the truth: and of all care whose ears to infect with Atheism, the
Tempter could hardly carry him (...) into parts more iniurions to all holy
vvriters, and to men, for the marrow of their wisdom: which hold the dignity,
though a young head with old study call them to build in England, far from
their own country: to our glory, and theyrs.

This old spech might sone tell, if any prelate misused your M. ears
extremely, who the party should be. for hardly vvil one nation bring two of
his mind and heart: confident to condemn what he knovveth by his bare Latin
studies no more the^ a babe: and extremely bent to hinder the good of his own
religion. The same prelate vvrote unto the sta^ioners to hinder a commentary of
mine upon Daniel: and caused many of them to blaspheme the truth. Unto whom I
shevved by D. Saravia that he used more auctority the^ your M. had to lend him.
The good of your own Kingdom might not be hindered by any auctority. If he
could tell me where I missed I would thank him: otherwise, if he hindered,
the work should be printed elsvvhere, and him self blamed for hindering your
common good. By D. Sarauia he (...) me his answer: that it was better the
truth of Daniel were hid, then antiquity should be disgraced for missing as
in my Epistle. Whether I be to learn mild vvriting of him, his works
pestered with disgraces compared with my Epistle to the LL. vvil show
sufficienly. This Spirit, and that, uttered to your M. will argue one and the
same soul: that I may well know what prelate your M. meaned. Daniel comes
forth by the prelates better advise, and auctorising: and my pains is
dedicated to the LL. of your M. most honorable privy counsel, to be regarded
according to the sage honor of your M. government. They all saving he sent me
several word of special favor: and some of them believed that I had made the
Bible as clear as any other book: and said that what soever I would it should
be done for me: whereupon I vvrote a request by a M. of that faculty, that
their Lordshippes would move your M. either to recompense my long pains after
great old promises, or, to give me leave to go to the King of Scotland. Thence
I had sure promise of great recompense upon bare copies not dedications of my
pains: and singular help offered to put forth the Bible in such playnnesse,
that a whole nation might soo^ understand it: and see the glory and certe^ty of
it. Thither I returned avvnsvver: that I would no lo^gerserve your M. if I
were not recompensed by five months end, by the beginning of Lent. The LL.
sent me by D. Caesar this answer: that they thought my studies not inferior
for judgment in Divinity to any in England: and they bade me tell D. Caesar
what I would have, that he might move your M. and they further advertise your
highness. I returned my mind: that your M. should be my chooser: and that I
would like best of that which you appointed for me. Thus a man would have
thought that a co^clusio^ from their LL. should not find co^tradictio^ from any
whose voice, faith, and honor must be in the message sent from the^ to me by
D. Caesar. Yet they were persuaded that the Archb. would never suffer your M,
to see the clear certenty of Divinity, because you would so little regard his
bare Latin studies. This their mind was shevved me: And vvheras they meant to
have moved your M. to bestovv on me the charge of London (which he meant for D.
Ba^croft) and this was noysed by the clarks of the counsel; it was more
talked that the Archb. would work him self any disgrace to hinder my being so
nere occasion to open the Bible to your self: thus it pleased them to say, and
think: In so much that a Bacheler of Divinity of Ripon, who knevv the Lords
purpose for me: and his, against me; and my resolution upon his next injury to
leave your government, went to Lambeth for good vvil to advise him better:
But he could not have fit talk with him; by reason that he was moved by some
other, to some heat, and before he could go again to him, he brak out as it
was expected. This shows most certainly who the prelate should be. For as
this dealing is stranger then lightly should befala man of natural reason,
though all honesty were set aside: So the same man should be the likest to
embreath into your M. the speech so deadly condemned by the Gentleman whom you
made Judge of that which you bad S. John St. write unto him. That your M. may
better mark the strange contemt of truth in the Archb. and his boldenes in
other matters, as that, which the spech mentioned, was censured: I must
briefly tell against what dealings he brake out openly.

As I vvayted, upon the LL. leisure, to move your M. for me, in sad weather of
vvinter, I was vehemently requested by Learned and Zealous Christians to
assemble the People, by my preaching, to pray for better weather. Which we
and others prayed for, and obtained: and many marked the means, and the event.
In those sermons I chose Scriptures to open, which Latin oryet Greek studies
never opened; being so very familiar to all Hebrews, that none of the
Apostles age and nation would stagger in them. S. Stephens oration Act. 7. is
of this tenor: speaking in the prophets skill usual in repetitio^s, flowing
with matter which makes England, and al universities blame the text, or
bread vnsavery expositions: and that where the speech is fullest of heavenly
vvisdome. Him I expounded to the hearers confort: that they might better like
of your government, for that in your days Scripture was more cleared then
1500. years before. And those poinctes I had printed before to your M. and found
great thanks then, from Zurick, the French, Dutch, Denmark, Scotland, and
others. And if it please your highness to try your Archb. lerning, I dare assure
you that all his latin studies will never expound S. Stephen: to tell upon
what law of Moses he was called into judgment: by what relation to
Scripture the miracle of his face was to be like an Angels: how he frames
calling of Abraham from VR. how Jacobs family can have 75. souls, and but 70.
in Moses: how the Speech of the burial in Abraham's purchase can be true: by
what ground he affirms that the Patriarchs bones were carried out of Egypt,
and buried in Sychem: and how our enemies grant this true* Likewise for
Moses age of 40. years in Pharoes court: what vvarant he had: what authors
allowable to all Jews we have for that: How Rempham can stand in Amos, a
propre name: where the text is Chiun: and Babylon for Damascus, by the like
vvarrant: and to what poinct of his accusation his oration belongs: and why
he ends in Solomon's temple: and who but he said that VR was in Mesopotamia:
or who but Philo the Greek said thad Abraham was called after his fathers
death. A Doctor that fails in any of these poincts will disgrace the first
Martyrs Apology: And amonst his defenders in Latin and Greek studies it is
almost all disgraced. Strangers thank your M. for clearing S. St. by my pen.

And herein your M. may satisfy your self; whether your high preferred Archb.
with his accusations unlawful, though they were true; or the defendour of
your faith, on his own charges, by shevving the agreement of all the Bible; in
writ, vncorrupt: in meaning, sure, by enemies grant, deserves better
acceptance for ground of study, far from fantasies. Although my travel in
this kind might have moved the Archb. to favor my pains so much as the
temporal Lords did for clearing Daniel by heathen for story: for his chief
Question, by Nathan the Prophet 2. Sam. 7. Which none of his Latins or yet
Greeks, I trow, have done: for his two tongues, by plain reasons, but never
marked, as I judge, by any, saving one levv: although my diligence might have
stirred his Love, it stirred only his envy: and daily it was noysed how he
meant to defeat the LL. purpose: so that two gentlemen conferred touching his
course: and the one said: Shall I tell the Bishop that he takes an vnhonorable
course. The other avvnsvvered: No. The Bishop will but mock. This vvil not be
strange to the Archb. for I wrote it unto him self: that he might consider
what a goodly third he had spun that having received 50000. pounds of the
Church is counted but a skopher in the greatest matters. For my self, he
knovveth that I afforded him good language: and labored to countenance him: but
still ready if he would neuerend his injuries to call him to account for all at
once. After I had expounded S. Stephen as plain to Jews, inexplicable
without them: I took a text: 1. Pet. 3. Speaking to Jews, how the Spirit of
Christ preached in the days of Noah: to them which are now Spirits in
Prison: which very phrases they them selves have: yet of us the Greek is badly
translated: and the divinity worse expounded: Saving of Maximus Monachus and
his auctours, and M. Beza: with Zegedin, and his folovvers But none without
Jews auctority can satisfy the doubting, who will be taught how the
phrase was usual.

This text was commonly cited to prove that our L. descended to Gehenna by such
who think that Hell in the Creed signifies the state of the damned. I handled
both: That S. Peter had no such meaning: nor the Greek Creed. This meaning I
made of the Greek Credet: that since Greek was first spoken until the Creed
was to be penned: as we must judge by that which we have in record: (...) is
nothing else but to go from this world: without distinction of Joy or
torment, leaving that to further consyderation: and (...) in all the old
testament, the world of Souls: and Hell in our translations, of force the
same; and so in our Creed, and so taken by K. Ed. and by your M. that unjustly
they that leave our Church quarrel herein, as though we denied our L. to go
presently to heaven. My opinion herein I printed to the Learned nobility, and
inferior gentry: Who, some of them vvrote to Basil that no humane pains would
ouermatch a full treatise in the same tenor. Against this the Archb. brake out
to open rage: with his bare commentary Latin, the plague of Divinity: and not
vvorth one years study of twenty, that the Bible vvil require. First, he gave
out word that I should be stayed from preaching. Many were sad. but I was
glad. For I knevv that God called our long difference for Divinity into the
open judgment of the world, and in this matter he had said to one M. Samford
attendant upon a noble earl, upon occasion of translating the Ps. 16. That he
would burn in this opinion that Christ descended to Gehenna. And to join in
some special article with him, I chose this text, knovving how the (...) that
to descend to hell was, true of a soul gone up to heaven, would catch the bare
Latinist. But I slayed in the realm till he would break out into some open
action: that he could not afterward deny his proceeding. He bare the high
commissioners in hand, as D. Caesar and D. Levvyn, that he Sent for me to
answer for my Doctrine: and if he had by request, I would gladly: if he had
used commandment for the article known; it had been Atheism, to turn your
auctority against your oath, and faith. He was bound to know your religion
confirmed by act of Parliament. But how far his messenger differed in his
caryage from all civility and law, I am ashamed to print: the LL. have read
it, and requested me to lay the blame upon his man: but others said that the
high shirif must answer for the vndershirfs faults. Here upon I resolved to
leave the realm: and shevved the LL. his monstrous dealing: how the bare
Latinist would be teaching me in Greek and Ebrevv general poinctes: and I
shevved how a D. his friend lamented that he could not beat into his head the
bare Conceit of my studies, and many other extreme unlearned parts, some
printed against him, as denying the Greek style, all from the LXX, in all the
new Testament. And I sent unto him self a copy: and further matter how his
vnlernednes brought your M. auctority unto manifest Atheism and most senseles,
against your own good. Then he yielded: with great promises, if I would but
acknovvledge them that would be my friends. Also he said that he sent for me
but to answer D. Andrews for the descent to Hell. He might have requested
me, and I would have satisfied him: But to betray your M. auctority to be a
slave to Heresy: that would not be good, nor semely for me. As he sent me this
word: I vvrote from Leyden in Holland that I would defend mine opinion in
Cambridge: if he would hazard his fame upon any that should reply. At that he
raged with terms that the messenger lothed to report: Lest I should pay his
vnlernednes with as good. Thereupon I vvrote an Epistle to the Learned nobility
shevving how through all the Bible (vvherin one error stayneth al) he suffered
bad notes: to bring errors a thousand at once: To make all the Credit of
Moses and the Prophets nothing vvorth: and there in I answer his heat:
VVherin he will burn in this opinion that Christ descended to Gehenna. Now my
L. treasorer S. William Cecil asked him what further matter he had to hinder
their purpose. Then this he invented: that I vvrote untruly that he determined
betwixt D. R. and my controversy, to your M. For that, I printed him a full
avvnsvver. Then came that new speech, uttered to your M. which I am sure came
from him. And this much for, who the party should be. Now for answer. Though
his speech might be held a back biting: yet I will suppose that he dealt
better to mean but our open contention: for the descent to hell. VVherof I have
written here, unto him self, a full treatise. And vvheras he ought to prove
that the Greek Creed is of his mind by the General tenor of the tongue: and
that all the Bibles ages believed that Christ should go to Gehenna, and that
your M. is of his mind: I resist, that never any Greek, heathen or Jew took
(...) in his sense: but all uniform in mine: that all the Bible utterly
refuses that his sense: and all Jews and Gentiles would take mine in one
meaning, profitable for faith and past all color of wrangling: as Articles of
religion ought to be plain: and that K. Ed. the 6. the rare noble prince your
M. brother, once the only hope of our nation, so understood the Article: and
that your M. oath is to defend that meaning. To your M. to the most noble King
of Scotland, whose M. offered me mine own desire for divinity, to the Archb.
his own heart, to all Learned nobles, and other Christianes I commend the
truth: to be tendered as ye look to find the favor of God: and to God him
self I commend his own cause: and the passage of his son from hence
whether he went for the redemption of our souls: that his holy vvisdome may
shine in this word of Salvation, from the holy directly, (...).

Your M. most careful defendour of your faith. HVGH BROVGHTON.

AN EXPLICATION OF THE CREED, FOR THE ARTICLE, (...) How that speech has been
used, of east and west since tongues were, unto Plutarchs age beyond the
Apostles, uniform in one tenor, for leaving this world: in speech of souls
departing: and not more in the wicked which went to torment known, or in the
uncertain, whither they went, then in the Godly, which went presently to loy:
with a declaration how K. Ed. 6. so held it: whose religion in the same sense
the Q. swearing to the Gospel, meant to defend: To the most reverend Ihon
whitgift D. in divinity, Archb. of Canterbury, and Metropolitan of England.
YOUR Graces zeal, how you will burn in this opinion, that Christ descended
to Gehenna, and your usage of the Q. auctority to have your conceit accepted,
has caused exceeding great harm in the Church of England, and is like to cause
more unless God give you grace to acknowledge openly how dangerously you
were deceaved. You gave great advantage to the families that refuse your
assemblies to make their cause seem good: and so far that some adventured their
Eternal state, upon their cause. For thus they reasoned. They who hold that
Christ's soul went to Hell, Gehenna Hell, make the Gospel to tell a Lie. Where,
it is certain, he went to heaven: But the Church of England (say they) does
that: Therefore, belying the Gospel it ought to be refused. Now such as dealt
with them from you denied the proposition: which religion of truth would
not have denied: and granted the assumption: as betraying the Q. religion. For
Hell in our Divinity and translations of the old testament signifies but (...)
Sheol, that which requires all to come to it: and (...), Haiden, the world
unseen. Generally, Hell is that world which haleth all hence: whether Joy of
Paradise; or Torment of Gehenna, be their lot there. Your defenders amazed at
the term hell: and not knovving the religion of the realm, missed, as I said,
to Deny the true proposition, and to grant the slander, in the assumtion:
Thereupon the adversary family, thinking that one as your G. should not be
ignorant what religion the Q. has svvorn to defend, was hardened in their
condemnation of the truth: and some, holding on to their death and shortening
of their days, ventured their Eternal state on this; that in the issue, joined
upon in disputing, they held the truth, and that you were deceived. So the
Q. subjects by your want of divinity came to their death, by holding that
which the Q. has svvorn to defend. And many fearing to be of their mind
herein, bring an heresy into the Creed and think in deed that Christ descended
to Gehenna. That is bred in them by your zeal set on flame for Gehenna. Also
your self in speech to a D. that told me, blasphemed one as being of their
family (whom they held, their deadliest enemy) for that in this syllogism he
would. grant their proposition. Y ou might better have joined your self for
agreeing in the assumtion, to slander the Q and all the religion of the realm.
Your eyes have seen by the same D. if letters in carriage perished not: how the
Learned gentry censure, that if the party blasphemed by you would handle to the
full of his knowledge that for the descent of Christ into (...) it would be as
well accepted as any thing that man's peynes ever studied. Yet you to hinder
all his recompense demanded in print (as the Q gouvernement should be thought
honorable, and promised most honorably) take occasion of exception, vvher
better desert then the former and of more daily use, was exhihited to the good
of the Church: and being in this giddines of gouvernement, you held on beyond
all loyalty and Christianity to force the party grieved, approved over the
world, and by the furthest enemies as the likest to procure the common good of
Christendom, him you compel to show his monstrous recompense by you: after
word was sent him by a M. of request that the Lords thought him second to no
scholar. The time was when you could send him word that by your faith he
deserved as good a place, as you your self had, and made him likewise a match
in lerning with the best. Gehenna marred all that good (which I hope to banish
from your Creed) In M. Barovves case and Grenevvoods. The term HELL, being
(...) Haides in Greek, and (...) Sheol in Ebrevv, Inferi in old Latins, must
be expounded as the orginal (...) in the Creed, and vvheras our old
translations use HELL for (...) sheol still through the prophets, where
properly the loss of this world only is meant: (when further sense comes,
the argument caryeth it, not the words force) HELL must be taken (as in old
Saxon when they knevv no Gehenna) for the state after this life: whether the
party is haled. Now 64. times (...) coming in the holy tongue, Hell as often
in our old translations and never directly for Gehenna, but as by the argument,
and so it may be heaven, in speech of the Godly, nether should HELL in the Creed
mean any thing else but the world to come: the world of Souls. We may not be
so simple as not to know our own language. Likewise HELL comes nine times
upon (...) in the new Testament. But never in all those places does it
signify Gehenna. As twelve times Gehenna is in the Greek: and there HELL is in
your graces meaning. But 73. times in a general meaning of separation from this
world, and such lot, as in the matter follows, comes it in both testaments.
Wherefore the common use of the term should make the Creed not strange to us.
This I delivered as a most constant truth: and shevved that our L. was to
sacrifice him self for sin here in this world: vvher we might see it: and
believe it: and that when he had povvred out his soul to death, a Sinoffring,
there was no further suffering: but all suffering was fulfilled: and that our
Lord went presently through the veyl of kis flesh to Paradise; to heaven, to
his hingdom, as the thief believed: and his own tongue taught: and as he
commended his soul to the hand of God. Now a narration in brief for the
profane world, must speak of all this but generally: HE DESCENDED INTO THE
WORLD OE SOVLES. (...) Descendit ad Inferos: HE Descended to HELL. The force of
the Greek makes the matter plain; (...) as (...), Unseen. The world unseen to
us that be here. Plato brings it pleasanter of (...) to Delight. Holding all
true happiness to be (...): In that world, into which our L in the Creed is
said to have gone: (...) shaal the Ebrevv comes to the same effect: TO
REQVIRE: as requiring all, simply, to come thither. So the tongues of both
testamen^es have a sure mark in the term, that none should be deceaved: who
had any whit above bare Latin studies. Seeing the story of our Lord (...) is
the glory, the crown, the pearl of all story, and his souls story in the
passion the chief in all the Gospel, and such as must be daily cited over all
the earth in the Abridgement of our belief, and was penned in the Creed so
sure for speech that no Jew nor Gentil, from Babels breeding of tongues, till
the Cred was penned, can be found to differ from one common meaning; it was a
pitiful thing that Sectaries should pick quarrels with the Q. vvher all the
wit of men or Angels could not find fault: and where the Q. meant no further
them the blamers knevv to be true: That Christ his immortal Humane soul left
the body fully, and all this world, and went (as all the holy are said to
have gone) into Sheol, the world of Souls It would make a man's heart to bleed
that in so plain a case, men should not be told that their mind diffred not
from the Q. how they were senseles who blamed that which they allowed, The
four Evangelistes, the Man, the Lion, the Ox, the Egle, all full of Eyes, and
penning four times the redemtion for the worthiness of the matter, these all
four will condemn us for beasts, blind, skurfy, larne, and unclean, who
would overreach them all, to bring from Satan's spirit a iourny to Satan's
Lodging, which should utterly disanul all the Holy Bible. The Bible, whence
true religion comes, and vvher the place is of all divinity. Whence, from
plain rules four times told, and told in the passion story, all that touches
our Lord for death and till the resurrection, must be fetched. All that Moses
and the prophets spoke, the old charet, on whom Christ sat, that all, all the
Evangelists touch: omitting nothing: and he that cannot find a going down to
Gehenna for Christ in the passion story, and would find it from the prophets
or the Epistles, he has little considered in what place every article should
be most fitly taught. Some places troble some, in the Epistles S. Paul
vvriteth: Say not in thy heart who shall ascend to heaven, to bring Christ
down, or who shall descend into the deep: to bring up Christ from the dead:
There the term Deep may troble some: because it is strange. He means by the
DEEP but the grave: forced to that word from Moses text alluded unto. where
he has: who shall go beyond the sea? For sea and for the grave his (...)
Elegantly serves. Again S. Paul says that Christ descended (...) David gave
him his phrase who in the 70. says in thanks for preservation from death:
(...), Ps. 86. 13. For the conjunction that the soul has with the body, to
make one person, the terms propre to the body, are spoken of the soul: or of
the whole person, as in Ephesians. 4. The Ps. 88. often clears the speech with
other terms of equal force. My life is come nere Sheol, (...). Sheol, Hell,
nere death. Again: Thou have set me in the pit (...) In darkness: and (...) by
S. Paul's term, (...), by the 70. Again vvilt thou do wonders for the dead:
Shall (...) the dead rise up and praise thee. And (...) here must be expounded.
DEAD by the Hebrew, and not as Galen uses the term: and so HELL in the Creed,
not as from Papists: but from our own translations, vvher the matter tells
what the term must mean. So I expounded S. Peter 1. 1. Ep-3. that his Godhead
and Eternal Spirit made alive his Humanity: joining the soul to his body:
which spirit preached, at the beginning, to the first spoken too for that by
God: to them who by Jobs phrase, are now but spirits, their bodies eaten by
the waters, and (by sure rules from Es. 42.) are in prison. The sum of my
exposition is in print. And if your G. cannot see that I cleared Peter more
then any before, it is because you never knevv the use of Ebrevves, according
to whose meaning the Apostles speak plainly: where ignorance bredeth
curiosity to troble all religion and all the world, under pretense of deep
study in the fathers: vvher the cause must be opened by ancienter then the
primitive Church, for any Turk or Jew. Here also served that common saying from
Epiphanius: that all the fathers were in (...) and that Christ went to them:
now they be in heaven: When the resurrection brought a new world: and a
new phrase for their place: Yet they nothing altered, their place but be yet
in (...), in paradise, in heaven, in joy. And an Ebrevv Child would soon
conceave what Epiphanius autourmeant. After 300. years when the term (...)
was left as particular to the wicked, and Christ's case known: many Credes
vvisely and lernedly left out the article: which contained but absolute death,
in a soul immortal: and without the phrase, the matter was granted. So
Eusebius in his apology medleth not with it: as containing no matter
litigious among Christians: so the Nicene Creed and Athanasius left it out.
This was the sum of my speech: In this sense I handled the article. For the
salvation of your G. desperately bent to burn for Gehenna for Ever. Your G.
has in print my mind in the Epistle to the Learned nobility. I requested your
G. as you know, when you ceazed upon that Epistle, in 400. copies, to chose
out 400. whom you would, (if you mistrusted my choice) to judge whether the
Q. and the nobility with Doctors and all sorts were not well advised when
they mea^t to have mended the breaches of the temple: and might, with small
change, have made former pains, that in the Geneva, glorious for ever. And if
you mistrusted not your opinion, both here, and for the Bible, you could not
mislike my petition. There your G. may see further my opinion. In further
opening of this cause, that you may better see your fault, after I have touched
the Q judgment (against which you turned her auctority) a fuller declaration
of the cause shall be afforded. Now for the Q. judgment, and the whole realms.
Let us consider whether I accused you justly of turning the Q. auctority
against her oath: when you used the high commissions gravity to grieve me: So
that the LL. were ashamed, and desired me not to record it: and yet I did not
tell the fourth part of those vnhonorable parts which might justly place you
lovver vvher you should offend less. Thus I reason. Edw. the sixth and his
subjects held that Christ' his soul never went to Gehenna: The Q. and her
subjects set up religion in the same sense: as all the first parliament vvil
show: Therefore the Q and all her good subjects mean to die in this faith that
Christ went presently hence to Paradise. For K. Ed. Peter Martyr his chief,
and Martin Bucer, Duo fulmina belli Scipiadae, as good divines as the world
savv these thousand years, who held the stern of religion in the realm, they
show the kings mind. They were his tongue, and his heart. I mentioned your
error, somvvhat fantastical, among the Learned of Basil: whereupon they sought
out Bucers mind and P. M. and shevved Bucers Cathechism: and preached openly
upon the article in my mind: from both those rarely Learned fathers, vvho^ God
so honored that their bones should not rot in the apostatical Land that so soon
shrank from Paradise to descend to Gehenna. Your tutor D. Pern might somvvhat
deceive you: But you should have tried the tongues your self. In this Q. time
M. Anthony Cevalerius in Cambridge schools spoke before the whole university:
that Sheol (...) never signified Gehenna: being 64. times used. D. P. heard
him. And I heard of one that left the university a little before, who held this
your mind in ansvvearing for his degree: But was generally misliked. And
beside him I never heard of any mine elder but all granted that our L. Soul
went presently to heaven: saying your G. into whose head by reason of your
bare Latin studies for Infernus, the manifold poincts of this question cannot
so soon be beaten. The (...) that to descend to Hell in the Creed is to go up
to heaven, makes you so amazed, that you rage and take against all the realm.
But I plainly accuse you. The realm knovveth the Q. oath. Now let us search the
Scripture fully: both for this phrase, and the word Sheol (...) and (...): and
for the Prophets manner of speech for the world to come. In the Scripture the
law is to be looked unto first: and therein the patriarchs tongue. Jacob says
when he thought that Joseph had been dead: (...). I vvil descend unto my son
mourning, into HELL. This one place might give your grace sufficient warning
that the heathen manner of speath Which the Patriarchs were to use, takes
descending to Hell, for all Leaving of this world, though a man goes unto the
joys of God. You shall have an other place, of the same Patriarch, speaking
unto his sons all, saving Joseph. (...). You shall cause my old age to
descend with sorrow into HELL. There your G. has it the secnd time. You may
see a third place spoken among all the Patriarchs by Judah unto Joseph for
Benjamin, of Jacob: in the former words in in Genesis 44. 31. They be in
substance the very same syllables. Thus thricevve have the same: that in the
mouth of three vvitnesses the matter may be settled to stand. And the
auctorities be the strongest: These be twelve precious stones that make the
right of judgment on Aharons breast: Whose speech for the world of Souls
while you follow: you follow twelve sure foundations to build a Jerusalem
from heaven. The Abridger of the twelve Apostles doctrine to make gates and
windows as clear as pearl, would be sure to take their phrase in their
meaning: and as they would nothing troble the heathen but use their speech as
their streates: so the holy congregation that penned the Creed would as much
tender the weakness of the world. The later Jews in Ezekiel 28. be the very
same Jewels that the Patriarchs were. Nine of the twelve he names: the very
same stones: Where the 70. supply the other three: lest the heathens should
marvel why he went so far and stayed: and the revelation has ten the Greek
terms of Ex. 28. The (...) or Chalcedon comes for Judas Ievvel to illustrat a
special scripture: Es. 54. Where the Apostles Jerusalem full of light is sent
down from heaven: with windows of Chalcedon: and gates of pearl. Also the
Sardonyx is a new name geven to zabulon: as by S. John. and Moses may surely
be gathered: though one would think Beniamins onyx should have the sardonyx.
But his Ebreu jaspe calls Iaspis from Zabulon. For Benjamin must be the first
foundation: when Jeroboam made Joseph lose dignity So Chrysoprase is new made
for Nepthali. Seeing then the Apostles the reapers of that which others sowed,
tread most carefully in their steps, even for the very syllables of the
Greek words: and that for stones names: we may be sure their disciples by
their spirit would be as careful for phrases in the height of religion: for
which men be the stones of the Sanctuary: and the Garden of Eden: nolesse then
Israel, when King Hyram was amongst them in the building of the temple. The
knowledge whether the soul commended in the last breath to the hand of God,
departs from the myrie clay that is a precious poinct: and a speech of it
sure among Christians for an heavenly meaning, and nothing offensive nor
envious in heathen ears, must be held as a treasure deeply hid in a field,
never to dear: Such is both Jacobs speech and the Speech of the Creed, the
first and last used fully in the same sense: that, when Joseph was sold by
Judah for sicles: and thought of Jacob to be rent of wicked beasts: and that
of Christ, sold by Judah sot mo sikles: and rent in hand and foot by wicked
dogs. If your G. would take leisure to think but upon this much: you would
never more think of Gehennaes HELL: to burn in defense, that Christ commending
his soul unto the father, had presently that lodging: but that his desce^ding
to Hell was in our later language, (later then Jacob: at the first use 1600.
years) going up into heavens joys unto the Kingdom of Heaven. Next Genesis,
Job is the most ancient: Who both lived before Moses, and, as may be gessed,
about twenty year after him: Living 140. years after his affliction:
afflicted when Satan most bragged of General conquest. Which when it was,
God would most punish Israel. But Israel was most punished when Moses was
born a redresser. Wherefore Satan's triumph and Jobs Patience then seem to have
shevved them selves. So Job shall be found to live before and after Moses. He for
his father Abraham and mother Ketura fastened in the house of God: and more
then his cosyns Eliphas Isakides, and Bildad, though of Ketura: This Job
disputing with four Prophets: and being nere the Leaving of this world
vvherby the world to come should fitly fall into spech, should be the fittest
to show the signification of Sheol: specially when God him self comes
moderator of the question and uses the like term. Job speaks of all men
thus: That when we descend to sheol, we come not ever up hither: and our
place knovveth us no more. And he wished that God would lay him up in Sheol:
till his change (in the resurrection) should come: and he looked that Sheol
should be his house: and that all his hopes should descend with the Beer,
(...) into Sheol. He that would ouerreach Jobs style should need vvisdome: as
high as the heavens, deeper then Sheol, longer then the earth, broader then the
sea: and should need his wisdom: before whom Sheol is naked. And in speech of
the wicked: that as heat makes a riddance of snow: So does Sheol of synnets:
He means by his open speech, but their riddance hence: as when he commends
their outvvard prosperity: for children many, and lusty; and for deliting
pleasures, how they spend their days in prosperity: and go down to Sheol in
a moment: And thus Job speaks, to four Prophets of Terahes diverse families
in Arabia. And vvher God moderateth and mentions the world to come, he
says: Have the gates of death ben revealed to thee? or can thou see the
gates of the shadovv? That which Job would have termed Sheol, the Lord
terms death. And thus by Jobs book the controversy is decided: in Jobs tongue
for Sheol a lodging to him self and to all men. Now there was never any book
written, since the pen became the tongue of a writer, of a more curious style
then Job: in verse of many sorts: and use of words more nyce then any Greek or
Latin vvriteth: and for Grammar has more tricks and difficulty then all the
Bible beside: arabizing much: but fuller of Ebrevve depth in language. God savv
it needful to honor with a style of al ornaments the particular cause of Job,
lest it should be despised or thought a feigned matter, And therefore gave that
book a more curious style then any other part of the Bible has: and such depth
of skill in the tongue as no Rabbin could be thought ever to have such in the
holy tongue. In such a style (...) would be considered in in his exact
propriety: used in such a company of the best learned princes for so many (all
having the holy Ghost) that ever were in the world: The prince of princes
coming moderatour of the disputation So again the book of Job alone might fully
satisfy your G. that you should chose a better theme for your martyrdom then
to burn for Gehenna from (...) or (...): the Hell of our old translations,
which by (...) and nere consequent, is often that which we now call Heaven.
After Job let us se vvher to descend to Hell is used, next in time. In Number. 15.
the rebellious companies descended alive to Sheol, or Hell: they and all their
Houses and substance descended to Sheol. There the matter tells, that Gehenna
cannot be meant, but a destruction from this world: as in Deuteronomy. 32. vvher
Moses prophecyeth of the nations destruction and Jeremy twice cites his
spech: How an anger kindled burns unto Sheol. The next place of descending
to Sheol is in Speech of Anna Samuels mother, how she grieved long and greatly
was avveary of her life, and at deaths door: and says of the Lord: that he
causes to descend unto sheol, and yet brings up again. The next descending
to sheol is in David's tongue, in Psalm. 55. vvishing Gods enemies a destruction
hence. Let them descend to sheol alive. The phrase shows that he looked unto
Korah and his company, of whom, that they all perished for ever, none will
soon determine. And that their bodies then went to Gehenna: that none vvil say.
In David's tongue for two more the cause is clear: in speech to Solomon for
Ioab: and in the same terms for Semei. Thou shall not suffer his old age to
descend to Sheol in peace: And, thou shall cause his old age to descend to
Sheol or Hell with blood. But nether Ioab nor Semei died out of Gods covenant:
nether could Solomon send to Eternal destruction: nether wished David that to
his sisters sonns nor yet to Semei. And these be all the places for 3000.
years: where descending to Hell is used: none signifiyng Gehenna, directly:
but oftener by consequent that which now we call Heaven. And that is most
evident in Holy Ezekias: in a speech much like: I shall go into the gates of
Hell: and so forth as I have printed in mine Epistle which you have. There
Ezekias has other Speeches which make this phrase void of all doubt. So in
Ezekiel of a mighty kingdom, vvher all were given to death: unto the lowest
earth; unto the sonns of Adam which descend unto the pit often comes the
speech of descending to Sheol, for open destruction by the K. of Babylon In
Apryes days: vvher Eternal destruction was daily on Profane Egypt: and
Ezekiel telling of descent to Sheol once, twice, thrice four times could not
Prophecy any nevves: but that which they had since the nation was. And so
again one Chapter of Ezekiel, would have resolved your G. if you read it, either
in Ebrevv or in Greek, and made you clean of an other mind. In the Babylonian,
soon after the Egyptian fall the like speeches have their event. He was the
day star: and exalted unto Heaven: but he was caused to descend, and his pride
was caused to descend to Sheol, vvher, as heaven signified not the propre
heaven, as now we speak: nether does Hell mean the propre HELL, as now we
speak. And these I trow be all the places where the Credes phrase: (...),
comes in the Scripture, saving for Capernaum Matt. 11. nothing to our
Question: where Gehenna is never in the direct meaning. So that all Scripture
refuses to vvarrant you. And if you search Scheol alone, thinking to defend a
new made phrase it vvil help you nothing. In these senses it vvil come: for
the lowest place or case in this life: in Amos: if they dig Sheol, thence my
hand shall take them: as if they go up into Heaven, thence I will cause them
to descend. In the same tenor of speech David before spoke: Ps. 139, But that
Hyperbole cannot be applied hither. Like unto that is the whales belly: a
Sheol to Jonas: or the grave. But in full privation hence it vvil signify Death.
and in the bodies case the grave, and corruption by the power of death. In the
soul the state of separation from the body: or the world unseen hence. David
does often take it for death: as in Ps. 18. and 2 Sa. 22. the snares of Sheol,
death compassed me about. There the matter tells what must be signified:
even sorrows near death. For full death, For all the good it comes it in
Psalm. 89. what man lives that shall not see death; who can deliver his soul
from the Hand of Sheol, or HELL; as generally comes it in Osee: Chap. 13. I
will redeem them from Sheol: I will deliver them from death. That S. Paul
expounds to be meant of the resurrection of the faithful bodies; delivered
from corruption. And more often by much does David use the term for the Godly
then for the wicked. So the term alone will help nothing. That in Ps. 16.
whence our contention began: thou vvilt not leave my soul to Sheol; has but
this sense plain and common: the world of Souls separated from the body. So
generally the Jews agreed in that sense: that they held in S. Peter's time,
and in the Talmud still: that David died not: thincking that David spoke of
himself. S. Peter grants that spoken of one whose soul left not the body
to see corruption; as David's did by all graunts; and shows how David spoke
of Christ his resurrection. So 3000 turned to him. If he had wrested the text
to Gehenna: he had differed from their meaning touching the word. As death in
the wicked is Eternal death: so every term of their destruction, is Eternal
destruction. So Sheol may be by a consequent. But never in speech of the Godly:
nor in the words force. The seauenty translaters considering what term in
Greek was fittest to express Sheol the Ebrevv, they considered deeply that
(...) was generally taken of Greeks, for all men's common case after this Life.
And for Sheol, vvher they translate it, they set (...) the Greek term* como^ly.
Now and the^ (...) Death. and for the Ebrevv term of death they have more then
once: (...). Dealing most suerly in the term as all Heathen would soon
conceave their meaning. So about 60 times your G. will be found ignorant of
their mind: and oftener of the Ebrevv: of all those textes: of all the matter
depending theretvpon: and of all the Septuagintaes judgment for Greek vvriters
betwixt Homer and Menander, who seemed to learn of them principles of Gods
unity: and better manners then he himself practiced. Of their age he was: and
then were infinite mo Grecians such as Clemens names, who perished before our
time: but endured beyond the birth of the Creed: vvher the Penner would Look
to the Septuaginta. So, as Esaias raises up an infinite company from Sheol to
meet the Chaldean, in Like sort the Septuagint will raise against you:

Millia quot magnis nunquam venere Mycenis.

Let us now come to the new Testament. There we shall see that Gehenna is
used for your HELL: for that which you would dravv the King of glory into: and
Hades for the common death, and state after. When the Gates of Hades shall not
hinder the building of the Church, upon the ROCK whose work is perfect, Deuteronomy.
32. whom Peter acknowledged to be the son of God: there that must be meant
which the prince of Darkness the old bloody serpent with Seven heads and ten
horns used to hinder the buylding. But death by Roman Emperors was the
instrument of his hinderance. Therefore death so far as they could send it is
meant by the Gates of Hades. And so would any of Ezechias kingdom or Achilles
soldiers understand the speech. Achilles shall speak anon in the Greeks army.
Ezechias shall not die while Esays 38. Lives: though he is now in Hades:
with all the Patriarchs: Abraham, and Lazarus, with Lazarus Marthas brother.
That (...) in 1 Cor. 15. you know is the Holy bodies Lodging. as that Apocal.
1. it. which John feared: that of ordinary death: and so the Ethiopian puts
death for it: and Sheol, for, Death. So when the black horse brought famyn:
the pale Death brought (...) In plenty: But Hell of Eternal sorrow was no
nevves for the Roman emperors: therefore not it, but hastened death in
abundance is there signified, as commonly in the old Testament in speech of the
wicked. Peter and Paul both citing the 16. Psalm: and to no further death then
that which all must feel, two such vvitnesses should setle the matter against
the best renowned D. who though he were exalted to Heaven: He should be
brought to Hell, in striving with such two champions. And thus all the new
Testament with all that follow the Lamb on mount Sion 144. thousand vvil tell
that their harpes be tuned as the Prophets: and none of them use Hell for a
Lodging, after our L: triumph against Satan here, and tells that having
performed all that was of combat, he gave up his spirit unto the father: vvher
Satan should never greve it, nor give it a lodging. And thus for the phrase
through the Scripture: your G. has as many adversaries as ever had any man:
The sons of Eber to every mothers son: as by records we may well judge of
the vnrecorded seeing all recorded be uniform. Now if your G. think good Let us
examine the whole tenor of Moses speech for the world to come: how he has
no term for heaven nor Hell: as you term Hell. Yet makes the cause more plain,
then terms would in man's speech. In Leviticus cap. 26. where he tells what
recompense shall be for Keeping the Law: and what punishment for breaking of it:
there life Eternal and heaven: there death Eternal, and Hell of late language
were to be named, if at all, in the Law. But there silence is for that tenor:
therefore it was to be, equally, at it is, in all the rest of the Law. There,
for keeping the Law store of fruicts: peace and victories, increase of Children
with all plenty is the revvard. Lastly comes the sound revvard: That Gods
tabernacle shall be amongst his people: and his soul vvil not Loath them but he
will be their God: and they shall be his people, Here is life everlasting, in that
they, being surely in the favor of God, are for ever in the favor of God. On
the contrary side: for breach of the Law: open punishments upon punishments:
and Lothing from God is propounded: such as they felt from Chuzans days unto
Bel-esh-zars death, still as they fell to idolatry. And this is the tenor of
Moses. So for the Gospel: He shows that Adam, and all his, shall die: and
that the redemer shall be pereed in his footstep, by the Serpent: and shall bruise
to powder the Serpents head. VVher we see that he shovvs how matter opened
here shall fully carry a victory, when the percing of the foot is gone so far
as it could grieve. The term (...) is repeated Ps. 89. svvetly loking back to
Genesis 3. and forevvard unto Mat. 27. that we should not look as Papists do: for
alteration after the first passage hence. By this doctrine the Jews concluded
soundly that all who died holding the covenant, still they dwelled in Gods
tabernacle: and who so dyed in contempt or ignorance of it (as all who
despised to Go into the Arck) all they perished for ever: and became Spirits in
ptison. Now the Prophets who show that the law is performed in Christ they
turn all these phrases unto the Gospel as Amos in his conclusion: and as David
Ps. 67. using the high priests blessings words: cited in Paul's salutations,
and as Jeremy, often telling of God being our God, cited syllably in the
Apocalypse. Now as the performance is in this world, and we must be victors
in Gods full favor here, that death should be but a passage unto Life, so
Christ was to perform absolute obedience through all his infinite sufferings
in his unspeakable fear, sorrow and panges, being amongst us, vvher Satan
reigns: where we might judge, and believe. And so the Ps. 22. declares his
sorrows: and triumph, at his departure from us. God providing in the best
order for us: that the work of our redemtion should not have the last act in
Gehennaes darkness: such as could never have been penned to Adams sons. Here I
may record a woeful matter of a Learned Ebrevv: who coming within a step of
Christianity fell back to Gehenna through your opinion. And also I may use a
little digression to call you to better attention: and regard of your carriage.
Isaak Ben Arama is that Jew. One of their best Learned, of all that commented
upon Moses: and who condemned all his own side, that since Jerusalem was
destroyed, they are void of all comfort in their meaning of the Prophets while
they look for a third temple: vvheras God presently despised both tabernacle
and temple to show that he would rest only in Christ: as S. Stephen
witnessed. This Learned Ebrevv seeing in Leuiticus 26. the continual curses
for breaking the Law: and the stories plain through all their ages till they
lost their kingdom and found slavery in Babylon: and no comfort touching those
times but repentance there, to come home, as Daniel shevved: and then a promise
of Christ: Ben Arama seeing this, cannot tell what to say for his own side.
Then he comes to us. And says that Christians from that text accept the
justice of Jesus. As both the Prophets before the captivity David, Hosee, Joel,
Amos and Jeremy, and after, Daniel plainly, join Christ his salvation unto
Leuiticus in that place. This being laid down of him; then, from your store
he brings a matter that overthrows all the good, thus: But, says he, the
Christians say that their Jesus vve^t to Gehe^na and fetched thence all the
fathers: and that none went to Heaven before his death. But that cannot stand
with truth, that the Prophets Abraham Isaak and Jacob and Moses should not be
with God. Thus Isaak Ben Arama, through your Gehenna found Gehenna for
himself. VVheras in truth the fathers were in Inferis, in Hades, in Sheol,
and are yet, by the old Latin, Greek and Ebrevv: and by new Ebrevv in
paradise: whether at the first they went from this world: as I touched,
before. The cursed world that sought Divinity from bare Latin, and mistaken
Greek, not knovving how Sheol, (...) and Inferi is heaven to the faithful,
brought a Cancre upon all our faith, and such roots of bitterness* that the
comonaltie is infected, and the moistened is accompanied with the dry. Now my
L. what gain can your G. have in deceaving all the realm to bring an heresy
Papisticall into the Creed? Every syn finds just recompense: and to thrust
into faith an heresy that is a great syn: wherefore all that you deceave must
feel the hand of GOD. We have been plagued enough already, in that, after
more payments for defense of the Gospel, then have been gathered in five
hundred years (as my L. treasorer was told) yet at the spittle as I shevved
your G. twelve in a company said that we were never in such pitiful days for
uncertainty in religion. I dare charg you that if you had Lerning and favor of
the truth that had been common over England which is famous in Constantinople,
that the Q* scholars for clearing the Bible more then it has been this thousand
years, might be no small Hope for benefiting all Christendom: and we should
have been far from such Lamentations. One learned man in your place might sone
make the Bible as clear as any other book. Though your bare Latin studies
unable vvhiles you live to go through the first chapter of the new Testa me^t,
would but deride such a confidence. You that could look upon the little book
of Scripture conce^t, and see in the preface Noah's families from heathen and
say that the writer troubled his head with questions trifling and
unprofitable, show that you come x x years study too short to judge of that
pains: to know how and to what infinite use the heathen were brought
vvitnesses through all the Bible. Let me advise your G. to ioyn with the
truth: to pity your own soul first, and afterward others deceaved by you:
and be not of their number which had rather (as D. Deny was known to say)
go to Gehenna and dravv the People after them, then be known how unlearned
they are. I dare tell you that you know not one letter of that study which D.
Abraham Ruben the Jew would require: not one letter, to tell whether the
Characters now, were before Ezra: in which poinct if you missed you maimed
all the cause. And full many an hundredth thousand opposition which you know
not must be vevved in mind for doing him good. Oh that a learned man were in
your place: to keep this Jew from Gehenna. and by him full many a thousand. He
is thought by the Jews of Prage to be one of the lernedst Ebrevves in the
world. A copy of his Epistle printed was sent from Basil thither by a Jew:
and they think that he is surely turned by some things of mine. But of this I
am sure that if I should handle the Descent to Sheol in your meaning, or with
M. Lively teach that the Ebrevv text is corrupt, I should hinder more then
build. Wherefore I must first dravv you from your Gehenna: and show M.
Livelies vnsetlednes before I can do any thing aright for this Jew. But my
digression may not be too long. and of M. L. at better leisure. Now I will
return to show more largely that which I touched from Leviticus: and to
resume the whole question how in all times men looked unto salvation. Let us
then consider the Bible throvgh quite, for the redemtion and the world to
come: how the Prophets spoke of it. We see that Adam was made a king on
earth: that he lost al by his careless dealing: that Christ by his infinite
fear and heedtaking destroys all Satan's works. This much Moses shows in
a sort not hid. Hereupon comes by consequent, a resurrection to Adam: and a
new world vvher he should have a new paradise. But this world is by Adams
trespass subject to vanity: that the whole mass trauelleth looking for liberty
with the sons of God. And for christ no afflictions at touched but such as
he might feel, while he could feel the sores of brusing his foots sole (...)
It signifies the whole (...). Adam knevv that Satan's seed would as well
perce his hands: repressing all his steps and works: and that Christ must be
buried and laid in the dust: and that all the victory for the world to come,
must be wrought in this world: that here the prince of this world should
leese all that he won: and in this world the kingdom of heaven should bear
open confession. Here Adam might see that Christ his unspeakable fear, had sad
heaviness according: heavynes that Adams sons so despized the king of glory:
heavines to see that they would perish for ever: heaviness that in this world
they would have his blood for ever upon them: heauynes in highest measure
that, (as Es. 53. tells) God casted on him the sin of us all: that the souls
case not the bodies, and thought, and account, and feeling for souls caused
such sorrows as Ps. 22. being most pathetical, could not utter: with Ps. 55.
and the 69. in the highest terms of sorrows that ever could be uttered. Nor
Esaias the most eloquent orator in Chapter 49. where Christ sadly lamenteth how,
to many his labor was in vain, and he should be the despised of all souls:
and the abhorred of nations: and in Chapter 50. though he had the only tongue to
season speech and silence, he must give his back to the vvhippers: his cheeks
to the buffeters: his face to the spite of spitters: and seeing that in all this
they would not consider, but lie in Eternal sorrow: He that loved man, and
every man more then all the women in the world loved their own children,
must needs have infinite pangs for their destruction. All these Prophecies
contained not more then Adam might see: nor other many: and special, Esayes
Chapter 53. An Abridgement of S. Matthew: But Adam had not one word of going to
Gehenna: but your holding of that will prove that you never examined upon
what speeches Adam held a judgment for bliss and curse, to the children of
God the bliss, and to the Serpents brood the curse in the world to come. Thus
I trow, your opinion tha Christ was to go to Gehenna, vvil be out of Adams
Divinity: and be found to flow from the Serpent the father of Lies and the
murderer. Adam knevv the Eternal love of God: bego^n here: and continued for
ever: and knevv sufferings in this world tokens of blessings for the world to
come: but for sufferings to the soul alone out of this world, to vvin justice
and victory against Satan, that Iarreth from all Ada^s Divinity: which must
fall with in words told in Genesis 3. upon which ground all further divinity
story is built: as Adam knevv that particular ages should have more several
remembrances but all to his sum of faith: So all Sacrifices, Noah's, Abraham's,
Mosehs, signified a justice wrought in this world: and none could signify a
Gehennean Lodging. Nether Abel crying after his death, nor Isaak in a
similitude received from death: nor the Scapegoat or birds loosed, nor any
thing in all Sacrifices ever could signify a going to Gehenna: seeing it
stands upon, not a phrase or any one term: but a general rule: That all are
dead in Adam; and if they hold not life by Christ, they abide still dead in
their sins: slaves of the serpent: partakers with him of infinite vvo from
God. Where Moses says; I kill and I make alive: In that one place Abenczra
would have the resurrection in open phrase to be taught. Divinity will suffer
it: But a Saducy would not so take it: for the words may be taken thus: I
keep alive some, when I kill others their equals in vigor. The tabernacle of
this world, and of the Angels world: and the high Sacrificers blessing these
contained a dwelling with God unlimited: and therefore Eternal: and life in
Gods redemtion was without limitation: as, Death, in his anger. But for Hell,
a place of Devils: that Mosehs Grammar vvil never afford you. As never Heaven
in propre term, for souls; though by consequent the Godly naming themselves
pilgrims here, import they looked for a city vvherof God was the Builder. So
a better case is collected, by consequent of matter, not by direct term of
Heaven. It will be thought strange that your G. a D. and (...) should be
ignorant of these grounds for Divinity. Now let us behold the Prophets, the
Historique, and the other, the commenters upon Law and story. For Joshua,
Judges, Samuel, and the Kings, Abigaels speech to David, that his soul should
be in the band of the Living, and Eliahs taking up: the one for phrase, the
other for action are holden the plainest for Heaven. Yet some turn Abigaels
words to a safety in Life, through great Dangers: Where Saul and his should
shorten their days. And it is sure that she spoke in that sense: that she
looked for him to become king: and would not be teaching a Prophet assurance
of Eternal Life: as bringing ovvles to Athens. The Jews of true religion
appearing thrice a year before the face of God, knevv that when this tabernacle
was dissolved, they should have a dwelling in the heavens: But so spoke that
the wrangling heathen should not stumble at their paths. In 2. Sam. 7. The
kingdom of Christ altogether taught of Life Eternal: though the Speech to this
day is taken of Jews for pomp here. When the Jews open Policy was
dissolved then Daniel in most plentiful sort opens the Spirituality of Christ
his kingdom: how his Enemies were cast into fire burning without Limitation,
that is for ever: And when he shows that Antiochus Epiphanes shall beeeaue
the Jews of Earthly comfort, then most fitly he comfort them in the better
resurrection, such as resisted him: and so S. Paul to the Ebrevves mentions
those affairs: as Daniel stood most carefully upon the story of Antiochus: to
let all understand the last affliction of Gods people, before the coming of
Christ. But Daniel has no term for souls distinction gone hence: and he
shows that Christ being killed, (...) Not letting death season upon him but
rises, so does bring in Eternal justice. Your Gehenna came never in his mind.
The Angel sent from Heaven spoke what he penned: and the Angel knevv that God
ordained a more certain course, for ease and clearnes of Salvation, then to ty
souls to believe a iourny of a soul, to work merit in Darkness among spirits,
which iourny no pen could cuer tell, nor heart conceive when it were told,
what he should do there: or how he could suffer there: or how the body should
vvin by the souls pain without the body. And thus we see how through the
Prophets they were taught of redemtion. And in the new death and resurrection
very often seen. But no going to Gehenna. If I vvrote but thus much the cause
were fully concluded against your G. Yet for all plenty of store, I vvil ioyn
vvriters not (...) but allowed for so much as I bring and much more by the
Eternal spirit: and therefore may go under the former Title, of Serching the
scriptures and the holy doctrine, for heaven: The Rabbis inuenting of new
phrases for to expound the generalty of Sheol and the profane Greeks for (...)
their Hell. Thus the cause will be so handled that futher kinds of study can
not be required. For all the new Testament is either from the old, or from the
Rabbines, or from the profane Greeks. And when it is made up from the old
Testament, either when the Apostles translate of them selves, as they do full
often, by profane Greeks Language, or cite the Septuaginta, which borovved
their words from Heathen, in both kinds the heathen must be looked unto. So
much is void of controversy, that so far Greeks must be regarded. The
Septuagint is of so great auctority that for the main poinct of Salvation
(...), to end Moses Laws, that is cited which is far of in Ebrevv: and this
could have no auctority but as from (...), holden Prophets scholars. And so for
(...) they must be thought the best for the use of the term. As for (...) from
Ps 110. (which Greek style the holy Ghost for that Ps allows at the least
in twenty parcels) Ecclesiastical discipline is cleared exceedingly. But of
the 70. I have little now to say saving for inducement to move the unlearned
and unstayed to think better of Rabbis for many things, and of profane
Greeks. The very Septuagint were of the ancient Rabbis, and others of holy
faith as Symeon the just. Luke 2. and others of great Learning: as Gamaliel,
and the Chaldy paraphrastes. None but the senseles will despise such. For the
Rabbis the most Learned Ebrevv Doctors, this much is famous; that against
Sadduces, that denied the resurrection, and relied in pretense upon Moses
words, they from Moses matter and assurance of Doctrine invented very
profitably these terms. The world to come: (...): The day of judgment (...)
Gehinnom, (...), the valley of Hinno^. The judgment of Geenna (...) all these
usual in Zohar. The second death. Onkelos Deuteronomy. 33. Ap. 20. The Garden of
Paradise. (...). The tree of Life: (...). And a feast in the world to come, in
the Chaldy of Job. And in the Law and Prophets (...) Sheol conteyneth all
these states being unfolded. And because the Sadduces admitted but the Law; as
the Doctors common places also reduced all unto the Law: The godly Doctors
termed all the holy books the Law: Saned. fol. 92. And so the the term Law is
used in S. John. 10. and Romans 3. And for the comfort of the Godly, that they die
not, but pas from death to Life, they called dying a deliverance or setting
free. as in Zeror upon Ex. 17. Iosuah (...) at the time of his deliverance
hence, etc. Phil. So S. Paul spaketh (...). And so (...). The Syriaque has the
Rabbique term (...) very Lernedly. And all this was bred for distinction of
matter about Sheol: because the Prophets commonly used common terms of the
world; that the wicked, as all be at the first, should not be trobled above
their reach. Now he that thinks that Sheol signifies Gehenna more then
Heaven, will be ignorant of all this, and in a world or Cimmerian darkness, or
Egyptian palpable myrknes. (...) in the 70. and Infernus or Hell, for it will
as well catch a D. in Babish infa^cy for Divinity. And this much for the
Ebrevv Doctors fom whom the Apostles have full many an hundredth (...) or
membre of speah plain by conference with them, otherwise inexplicable. Now
let us consider the heathen Greeks, as the heathen lend the Apostles their
words to teach them Life: and as the providence of God was vvonderfull
gracious in giving to Macedonians 300. year reign over 72. kingdoms in the
North, and in all the South; that from the west, Greek should go over all the
world by the Apostles times. And before great Alexander God gave Grecians such
sweetness and vvhitenes and vvittines of speech, that to this day, they bear
sway over the world: and. were still specially studied at the first over the
west. Such as know not their use for the tabernacle of the new Testament,
will build in quirks of Latin distinctions, being as silk worms thread
unlawful, as from unclean worms. The universal concent of a tongue spread
over many nations, and the Chiefest and most ancient next the Ebrevv, ancient
with the Eldest bred at Babel, and largest in use, such consent and concent
will be holden of force invincible: against which if the Creed had been penned
for (...) the perverting of an usual term had more hindered then any
difficulty in the Mystery of redemtion shake away the careless and
contemtuous. As to speak in a language otherwise then any that ever used the
language for an hourly matter, that must needs argue the full extremity of all
badnes and brainles folly. Amongst Greeks for (...) as for all Greek popular
Maeonides that best knevv the old Greek of all countries of Cittim, and Elisa,
and has been follovved unto the Apostles age, and of them for (...) (as I
counted) and for (...) doubtless (...), and infinitely, this old poet is
worthiest to come first. And in him old Nestor 90 y. old, who would, setting
curiosity aside, speak in simple antiquity. From his mouth flovveth an oration
sweeter then honey for this matter, for he has the very phrase of our Greek
Creed: (...). Thus he speaks before the nobles of Graecia for the common
passage of the world, in soldiers slain: Iliad. Eta:

(...)
(...).
War shed their blood: But their souls be gone down to Hell. Old Nestor
speaks as Jacob, Job, Anna, David, Ezekias, the common terms of death. And if
the Church of Pylos had used his phrase in any other meaning, young me^ and
mayds, old men and Babes, would continually have stumbled to more danger then
want of Battlements to the rooff of an house, and want of covering to a well
would have caused in Judea. And he that commanded plain matters of common
discretion under then requires greater Heed-taking for souls, that no
Pachadh, ^or Pachath as Esaias and Jeremy speak: no grin nor spring be ^ayd in
souls way: nor any thing spoken in corners of speech vvher the simple would
trip and be entrapped. I commend not our doubtful usage of Hell: but seeing a
thing don cannot be undone, I show that the trap must be looked unto. Your G.
who say the Q. will not have the translation amended, as though the Realm had
given her authority for Atheism, your G. must ansvvear, who your self being
entrapped will burn to Entrap others, you must answer for the continuance of
the stumbling block. And but that you hold back from the learned nobility 400
Epistles, as though your bare Latin were comparable to all their Lerning, or
your care for the Realm comparable to theirs, so many nobles had removed the
blocks much away by this time: and they all with all their attendants would
have persuaded or suaded at the least not to sindge any more for Love of
Gehenna to be a Lodging after a soul is commended to the faithful Creator,
then Ananias, Azarias and Misael, lost of their hayr for the Idol of Chaldy
religion, against which not for which they gave their bodies to the fire. And
thus if you will try Lerning by Antiquity Old Nestor will tell in what Sense
Argiui would understand the Creed even at the first sight: and befool the
penner if by any other sense he laid a snare under terms of a known and
solenne meaning. Now that one swallow make not a summer: you shall have more
not svvallovvs, but souls svvallovved of death in this phrase. Andromache
Hectors wife and S. Paul's country -- woman of Cilicia, she speaking of her
seven brethren killed in one day by Achilles says:

(...).
As Tarsus spoke Greek so did the rest of Cilicia, or at the least Fomer
knovving all their manners of tongues would bring for a Q. the chief Dialect:
and if S. Paul had sent thither (...) in any other sense, the university of
Tarsus (great Lernd thence arose) would have said: Athens had not so great
occasion to say that for the resurrection you brought strange things into their
ears: as we have for your article of Going to Liuels Lodging: we speak (...)
of all that die. Are you appointed to teach us new Greek; and to build a new
Babylon. Our minds may admit new Laws; but not new Languages. To this
absurdity your G. should bring the Holy Apostle; who yet knevv tongues better
then all Corinth, and Greek, excellent well of a Child. And he that knevv how
milk is for Babes, would never give an article of plain words for a meaning
never heard, and impossible to be proved: and never disputed in Scripture. Now
for Tro as or Tiras, Hector to his wife speaks of the phrase more fully,
when she desired him not to hazard his Life:

(...)
(...)
(...)
Here Tiras nation speak, that all once come to the world, must be sent or go
to Hell in the Creed term. And Maeonides him self, he spoke in the same sort of
Hectors soul: when Achilles kills him:

(...).
His soul fleeing out of the body went to Hell. And this comes in Homers
own phrase: vvherin he co^teyneth the manner of the Dialect of Smyrna, Rhodos,
Colophon, Salamis, Chios, Argos, Athenae, which all Challenge him to be their
countreyman. Now the Revelation had made Smyrna astonished, if (...) had been
in any other senses then Homer and their countrymen spoke: as the placing of
(...) later, shows also that (...) conteyneth not a more grievous state, but
the later term expounds the former: and in your G. Greek Smyrna had been at
the vvittes end. But in Homers Language and the Apocalypse style they would
assure them selves of a fixed sense, for a souls leaving of this Life, and
having a continuance in the other world: even as Orpheus has it:

(...). And Archilles in Phthia speaks in the same tenor, a patron of
playnness, who hated a man Like the Gates of Hell, who would have one thing
ready on his tongue, and an other closed in his breast: thus he speaks, as for
S. Matthew and Ezekias. I did glance at the matter before. Thus Tethys son
utters his plain heart:

(...)
(...)
In comparing Homer with the Bible, we may see that to be most true which
the Talmud and Talmudists cite infinitely, thus: (...) The Law speaks
according to the tongue of the sons of Adam. Now if the penner of the Creed
had gone from the manner of all the Bible and of Adams sons, it has been a
cursed work. And thus Homer tells us of a great part of he world: what
they would say ought to be meant by (...) if the teachers meant plainly: as
they must do if they came from God. We may here a little digress to other
nations, and the ground of Divinity, and after come fresh again to Homer, and
his folovvers. The Aethiopians meaning I shevved from their translation that
they put Death for (...) and Sheol for death. And so did the 70. in Es. 28. So
all the South about the Apostles age (of such great antiquity they hold their
translation, and part to be the APOstles own work) all the South, all of the
old will be against you. As for the Syriaque they take Sheol still as the Ebrevv,
and in their tongue our L. spoke, and it is the tongue only which the new
Testament calls Ebrevv. Though Academiques call the Prophets tongue by that
term. So our Lords example, using Syriaque as the world then did use it,
shows that his Apostles would use Greek as the world then did use it. As
we see not only for words but also for matter that they never give any Law
for manners but agreeable to the Heathens native light planted in their hearts at
their coming to the world: kindling that which corruption had quenched; and
so their terms for virtues and vices they take them from Euripides, Plato,
Aristotle, Demosthenes and such, and not a little from Homer. And for faith, S.
Paul tells touching his difference from his nation that it stood then only
in this, that Christ was to suffer: and being the first that rises from the
dead, should show light unto the world. This he makes his difference from
the nation. All other poincts of Divinity and the Ecclesiastical Discipline
terms, I dare undertake to show from Maymony and the two Talmudes: even the
phrase of Loosing and Binding, in the making of a D. absolute by the Sanedrin,
with Imposition of Hands. So the term (...) is their ordinary for the Bishops
of every congregation, infinitely used. As the term (...) in S. Paul is just as
in the 70. in Moses, the Kings, the Prophets and Nehemias, and in Ester in some
editions: whence your G. should have fetched the signification of it. And as
our L. repressing the sons of Zebedy, deeming that his kingdom should be
worldly, tells the difference, that Kings of the world command with
absolute authority: dealing in plain matters known to the natural man for
common profit: but they his scholars to teach divinity should be servants:
dealing in matters beyond common affection or the natural man's reach, and hardly
taught without infinite service and patience: vvherin as Moses and Paul
compare themselves to nurses cherishing the children, so all Divines must be
servants carrying by Doctrine unto Christ, and not by Cerberus Iaylourship make
themselves slaves of Satan, Pharaohs over Israel: and not the Horses and
Charets, in Eliahs sense; so also the Ebrevves have the same very phrase of
service, in all that governed in Divinity; and namely of Moses: how he spent
40. years in Pharaohs court: 40. years in sheepheardy; and was a servant to
Israel 40. years: Shemoth Rabba, In like sort D. Kimchi upon 1 Chronicles. 24.
shows that David might not appoint one of the Sacrificers above an other:
not so much as to appoint who should be first; but committed the Lots to God.
And the high Sacrificer had no auctority over others by his place: not so much
as to be of the Sanedrin for his office, unless further lerning did commend
him. And as S. Peter commands (...) so there is an expressed Law for the
(...), the Seniors in these words, in Maymony Tom. 4. Haleca Sanedrin Per. 15
fol. 247. of the later editio^ and Lesser vol. (...)

So if your Grace would know what (...) signified and with conscience have
handled the matter, you might best have known if you had framed your study at
the first to the Ebrevves manner: to have known Moses languages, and the
Hebrew Doctors calling of him to common places: and how all the new Testament
is framed to those common places: and will be never otherwise so clearly
understood as by that course: being bent to allow the former good and to dash
the traditions Popelike of the Pharisees. The Greek tongue would have told
you, even in the first Chapter of Genesis in Adam before his fall, that (...)
signified not a tyranny but a most Lavvfull and synles government: and again,
the Ps. 110. the (...) vvherof are cited above 20. times of the holy Ghost in
the new Testament, uses (...) of Christ. The Greek tongue would have kept
you aright for (...) and (...) 20. Mat. 25. that they are all one with (...)
and (...) Luk 22. 25. in the greatest benefactours and enrichers of the
kingdoms called for their desert (...), of the People, rejoicing in their
government: and the Rule or Canon that Sanedrin or (...) might not (...) (as S.
Paul 1. Tim. 2. translateth (...) from Ester) this would have kept you from
perverting the tongue, and marring all Divinity and discipline. You feign that
our L. condemned heathen Rulers. Mark vvhither you rush. So the Zebedeans
should have no represment: but all might hold the Iudaisme of Rambam Tom. 1.
fol. 50. that Messiah Kingdom shall be pompous in Israel: So our L. might by
Heathen Laws have been blamed fully: which God forbid. So the Iudaisme that
Israel might obey no King but of Israel, had been confirmed by the Gospel,
against Romans 13. So all Kings should need a Pope to overrule them: So our L.
should have made a Law against common experience: which has Gods auctority.
See then how you run: missing of the ground: not knovving the Greek tongue by
which the new Testament must be expounded: (as all Jews will grant and
require for the words) and for matter may in no case bring any new article:
but as Paul has (...) from (...) Dan. 9. most exactly translated, in his
article of difference having the exact propriety on his side: so still articles
of the Creed must have such exact playnes that all wicked may know what they
mean no less then the godly: and all godly children seven years old, may
clearly take them in the right meaning. Your G. is blamed in print, as I wrote
unto you, in this case which I will show briefly. A certain learned man,
better learned then yourself, as it seems by his overreaching of you, was
greatly grieved, that you played the Rex in taunting of him, and yet not the
Rex properly: fatherly mildnes should be in a King, and all modesty: you were
to sharp with him without reason in checks as he thought from your own
auctority. The^ he told you that you ought not (...), then you replied that
(...) signified a tyrannical government: the^ he rejoyned that of Christ it
was spoken in the Ps. 110. and he hoped that you held him to be no Tyrant.
Your Rebutter was (...), thus. And do you allow the 70. Greek? Good my L.
dare you dissalovv that Psalm for Greek, whose very syllables the holy Ghost
cites to the Ebrevves to dravv all unto Christ, and in the Gospel in parcels
and times above 20. at the least? Besides my L. many an hundredth thousand times
does the Apostles style express Ebrevv in the 70. peculiar manner: that you
can hardly find five words together vvherof four be not in the 70. And if the
70. Greek be not (...), whence will you expound the new Testament. Thus your
Grace befooled the very rock of our salvation, and were accused to the Lords
for vvorking the Eternal shame of our nation. If the Papists charge us that the
Chiefest preferred scholar in England knovveth not one line of the New
Testament, nor one word from what auctority to vvarrant a translation, we
may be thought the most brutish and senseles of any nation under the cope of
Heaven. And dare you burn for (...), that Gehenna is meant by it: not knovving
the Sepuuagint: and less Heathen Greek? It is no marvayl that you accused my
studies to the Q. of (...), seeing you have no fansy to any Greek in the world:
that for Greek or Ebrevv can not speak to one word of either Testament, by
former Greeks, and auctours authentical to Jews, what may constantly be
affirmed These four words (...) my Lord vvhe^ce would you expound them. The
general Greek by Peculiarity of matter makes (...) a propre tenor of meaning,
so that general Greek must be known, and if in Heathen sense it can not
stand, then the 70. and imitation of the Ebrevv phrase must be considered. And
the Grace of a vvitty writer handling matters of diverse kinds, stands, (in
plain matrers) in Equivocation of a term serving all his purposes. So in (...)
whether Generation, or Kindred, or story ought to be meant, the matter will
tell. Neither the house of Solomon nor the house of Abiud belongs to the
generation of Christ. Neither was that S. Matthew's purpose but he shows
from what old promise from God to Abraham to give him Canaan David was a
King there, and Salomons House: and the Enheritance came to Christ; whom Herod
therein feared: and therefore sought to kill him. And to that end he shevved the
roll of the kindred, not of the Generation of Jesus Christ. The speech serves
most vvittily also as a proposition to all the Gospel, as (...) Genesis 25. (...)
signifies story. Without the 70. these four first words could never be
understood. So your G. would make our nation a vvonder of the world,
despising the 70. whose skill for applying heathen Greek first to Ebrevv true
divinity all the world admired: and the holy Ghost through the new Testament
continually celebrateth: that we have a threefold thread, the new Testament,
the 70. and the heathen. And he that cannot handle all these three is not fit
to be (...). And here I appeal unto all the realm how fit you were to
repressmine Epistle for translating the Bible; who your self know not so much
as one word of the Greek Testament, from what auctours it has certenty and
less in the old. But I will now leave both Testaments, and regress to the
Creed, penned for the simple Heathen in the very phrase vvherin they nourished
the immortality of souls in mention of death, that men should not be thought
to die as horses: but to have an other world: how (...) the Creeds phrase was
infinitely in speech among Heathen in the Septuagintaes sense, and the rulers
of divinity: and (...) signifies but the world of the dead, vvher immortal
souls continued. In Homers Odyssea in Lambda we have a whole book for the
world of Souls vntorme^ted, but continuing together. In the fable the
substance of truth must be embraced, that Iapetionidae rightly taught the
souls immortality in an other world called (...), and termed death, to the
Soul immortal: a Descending to (...) Hell. Thus of Tiresias Ulysses who went
thither speaks;

(...)
His soul went into a Chamber within Hell. And the mother of Laertiades geveth
him a general rule that when bodies die, then (...)

(...). And of Oedipus mother he says, how when she died (...)

So Agamemnon complayneth that Clytemnestra (...)

(...), would not so much as shut his eyes when he went to Hell, to the
world of souls. In the same sort Aeacides spirit asks Vlissen how he
durst come to the world of souls, to Hell.

(...)
(...)
This distichon stands as a Dictionary for Hades, what place it is, against
which if the (...) had gone, it has been a skoph to Hellas, and had hindered
all the proceeding of the Gospel. But the Creed was penned with all
circumspection: that when some Arian objected baseness that Christ went to
(...) Gregory Nazianzen ansvveared that thence he brought souls to the body:
but they were just souls: therefore by him (...) is the common lodgment of all
souls, unjust and just. And so Eustathius Bishop of Thessalonice expounds
(...) to be the Lot of all that die, admitting Homers phrase; on whom he
commenteth how all Greeks after him speak in his kind. And this much for
Homer: of others the rarer may be cited: the common are in all Hands. Anacreon
has not much, yet he has in common ra^e:

(...).
(...).
Simonides the vvittiest despising life's shortness and vanity tells among
other sundry vanities what riddance war makes, (...). And as in Melanippide
God is (...), the Bishop of the immortal soul: so Ibycus of the soul says
(...). (...). For Love of painful virtue Achilles and Ajax went to Hell. Little
of Sappho and Ibycus, as of the Last cited, came to our age: a fevv Lines: yet
both make (...) their end: both vvorst and least fearing punishment. Tragiques
are infinite in this: and Euripides begins here: defining (...), in his very
first words:

(...)
(...).
And Lycophron that of purpose studied for hard Langage, yet here in he could
fayn non, but must take for the world to come, the common: and in one Tragedy
ten times runs on Hades how (...). For Athenaeans como^ly, their Epigram of
4000 slain vvil serve, for Isaeus, Aesch. Them. etc. (...), They made Hell their
common game. By Hippocrat. Cous (...). And for the Septuagintaes age Menander
tells how Greek went then: who thus speaks of the dead to comfort one
mourning.

(...). And for (...) in one sense Plutarch fitly joins Aeschylus with an
other. Aeschylus says:

(...),
(...).
Men are not well advised that hate death:
which is the best medicine of all euels.
In Plutarch one ansvveareth:

(...).
(...).
(...).
that is,

O Death D of Physique come.
For Hell is the only haven of the earth.
Having Haiden my helper I fear not shadows.
For further auctors extant in Plutarchs time all of one mind, Plutarch
comforting his friend upon a Godly sons death, that he was in Hell, and
therefore in good case, and citing Pindarus, Plato, and others many, and as to
one of his mind, for the term Hades he may be as an whole Library. And for
plain sayings that they meant joys of high degree to be in death Pythagoraes
Golden verses conclude that:

(...)
(...).
And the same was their General opinion, and not propre to the Samian
Philosopher our old Cantabrigia^. Sophocles who says in (...)

(...).
He is better at case that is in Hell, then sick past help. The same elsvvher
tells that they be (...) that are dead. And so spoke Latins. Scipio went by
Tully, as all, to Inferos: Yet had his place in Heaven. Leonidas in Herodotus
harting 300. against Xerxes Army, told that they should sup (...) apud Inferos,
by Tully. The argument aimed at a better case. Now how did the heathen term
the place of Torment? For that, Plutarch cites Plato: and He, Homer. (...) is
the Iayl. Homer is vvonderfull herein: and teaches that our old father Iapetus
very carefully delivered to his posterity the true religion, of the creation
and of Angels fall and (...) Sin deceauing Man. And it is no Less marueyl that
the Holy Ghost by S. Peter calls Homers words from the fable unto Iaphets
truth. Thus Iuppiter threateneth his Angels disobeying, to cast each into
(...), by the comment ry and prose term, Black Tartarus,

(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
I will the disobedient into black Tartarus cast
where there is a black Dungeon under the earth.
where be steel gates: and a floor of Brass.
As far beneath (...) Hades as heaven is from the earth.

So the Prison is Tartarus: The rest of all escaping prison is (...). Moreover
(...) the Chain that can hold all nature fast, is in Homer, in the same speech.
When S. Peter tells how God condemned the Angels (...), he takes all the
words from Homer and his prose commentary, calling the fable to an old truth.
And seeing the highest so comes down to the capacity of Greeks dravving them
even by their fables phrases unto the truth: we may be sure he would never
thrust into the Creed, a speech against their universal judgment. None may say
that the H. Gh. knevv not Homers phrase: and reason tells that profitably his
place is touched, and nothing falls out by chance. Therefore S. Peter was
directed by Gods vvisdome to temper his style to the Heathen capacities even in
their fable: as, (...), in Plutarch: Fables touch the truth. So for (...) Syn:
she is (...):

Sin, the Eldest Daughter of the Spirit, makes all men sin. And in this speech
Agamemnon confessing his sin to Achilles, says that not he but sin wrought
Achilles injury. In Lydia the Poet learned Ebrevvish Greek: and much matter
harping upon truth. The heathen would soon believe that it passes man's
capacity to know vvher souls be tormented: but that God keeps them in
Chains of Darkness by his power, their own speech would soon make them
understand that. The Rabbis from the creation-story speeches before all
ornaments came to be made, when yet Darkness was upon the deep, call the Place
of Torment (...). The grave is also called by that, once in Paul. But in speech
of the damned and of souls, it signifies the place of torment. As in Zohar.
Genesis 1. v. 2. the Jews so spoke, the Deuels used the same term Luc. 8. 31.
who desired the Lord that he would not command them to go into the pit,
(...) by the Syriaque following the Rabbique term. And in Papistry dravving to
the Lake burning with fire and Brimston, as David Ps. 11. closly noted from
Genesis 19. Eternal destruction, the KEYS of (...) is a speech allowed by God
from the common manner. VVher this Abyssos or deep Pit lies, (that they Lie in a
deep dark fiery dungeon, and yet are seen of the holy) vvisdome forbids to
search. The Jews from Esays last verse, place it in the High, in Cether
Malcuth, Page 11. with astonishment at Gods counsel, that joy and Torment
should be so near in Place. The phrases of Abraham's bosom and the Epicures
flames are in the same tenor: Luke 16. And so in Ap. 14. All that have the
mark of the beast that pretends the horns and auctority of Christ they
shall be tormented in fire and Brimston before the Holy Angels and the Lamb. Now
whosoever will burn in defense of this position. The humane soul of Christ
went to Gehenna, he therein has the mark of Papistry: therefore, if he burn
for Gehenna he shall burn in Gehenna, and before the throne of the Lamb for
ever and ever. Where torment shall be, I determine not, nor your G. I trow. And
that is no part of our difference. But I now dispute only of the speech. Your
G. sees how God speaks, as Greeks and Ebrevv schoolmen, that no (...) could
ever have taken place: if none might deal with ruling for Divinity but such
as had spent their age in the tongues of both testaments: whose pains when
bare Latin can persuade Princes and counselors that they be but fancies, and
curious quirks, it is no marueyle if such turn auctority against the faith
undertaken to be defended. And now I will make an End. I have shevved how
for your G. good, that you should not burn for Gehenna, lest you burn in
Gehenna, I handled this cause: being certefied that your tongue, which could
say, (as you know how I accused you to the LL.) that if I were so highly
preferred as you all the Kings of Christendom could not rule me, this tongue
would embreath matter into the Q. ears that the LL. promess to stay me from
going to the King of Scotland should be no better then if it had been written
in the water. This I did know full well: and was nothing amazed at your
most monstrous injuries. Such good experience I had of your G. I defended your
opinion for the certenty of Daniels 490. years, the common opinions which you
daily allow in your Bibles. The matter was most needful to be taught every
Child. And your auctority was a defendour of the truth, though your Lerning
savv nothing what you defended. D. R. and I chose you vmpier: I shevved you
arguments whereupon a Child vvovld determine aright. M. Mulcaster, the best
Learned in the world in his own conceit, reasonably in Heathen Greeks in deed,
he instructed you, and returns after IX. monethsa full discourse of your
determination: And most high speeches in commendation of my poor self. Two
good scholars more from your g. told that you had determined. Yet you could
condemn your self, the Q. and all the realm to work the hinderance of my
employment. M. Kuph skophing me, you the Q. and him self if he be of any
religion, the Merchant told certain Mercha^ts how your G. vvrote to D. R. that
you would tell my narrand to the Q. that you were not of my mind: and that I
die belly you. All this was told me, my L. yet to do you good, and to keep your
G. from Topheth, (Es. 30. which speech spoken of wicked perishing deuotels
for ever, the Rabbis Lernedly turn to Eternal flames name, though outvvard
destruction was only then in the prophets argument) to keep your G. from
Topherh, from Gehenna, from the Keys (...), to do you good after M. Kuph played
the koph with you and the Q. to condemn the allowed religion true, 40. y.
current now, in the Geneua Bible, and thence dravve^ to your Bible which the
Q. uses in her Chapel, I undertook in London the opening of the Q. religion
for our L. his soul going down to Hell, by heathen phrase to the world of
souls; by Hebrew schools to paradise; by their distinct speech, up to
Heaven; Nostri sic rure loquuntur. Yet you in speech to the old L. Treasorer
made this a bar, to hinder the high counsel of the realm to cause any one
farthing of recompense for clearing Daniel for both his tongues, and for
Heathen comm enting on him whom they never savv, to make the hardest book in
the world as clear as any in the world. Word was sent me to be mine own
choser: I Leave the choice to the Q. she by your grace choseth me never a penny:
and aduentureth her Eternal state on this that she who gave full many an
hundred thousand pounds for court service that required no great art, ought not
to give one farthing to him that shevved in fevv sheets the whole frame of
Scripture, with heathen and twelve the hardest kind of studies: and again
particulerly opened Daniel, shevved, for his tongues east Dialects the hardest
and for his Prophecies heathen plainly recording most propre events of his
words. When I pleaded with my old L. treasorer, why the LL. would stay me
from going to the King of Scotland and not perform promises at home: he sent
ansvvear, that he was sorry: and said that your G. hindered: for that I vvrote
that you had determined, as I taught, that the time when Christ's should die
and end Mosehs policy was certain in Daniel in words past reply, That is
because I defended the Q. religion, and words sold to the People in copies
infinite and daily open in the Church, the most reverend father the Archb. of
Canterbury for defending the Q M and his G. hinders all the Temporal Lords
to procure any farthing recompense to one to whom they sent word, that they
held him inferior in Divinity to none, upon expounding Daniel to their
contentment. And who would ever believe that an Archb. should ever be caught
in such dealings known over an whole kingdom: that you cannot deny one whit
of all this. M. Lively now confuteth me: As one Ieninges of Vlissing a bad
Linguist bragged: Whom I am sure your self will condemn of extreem badnes
for a Doeg: and a slanderer most impudent. To spare him I will write what I
blame in his dealings, that you may reprove him openly: that I need not to
work him Eternal disgrace. And for M. Lively, determine now whether he
confuteth the Q. and you, or me. By the G. of God he shall find my pen the
tongue of a swift writer, if he meddle with me in any mayn poinct vvher the
Q. and ye most RR. FF. be disseu oured from my opinion. But no wit will
suffer me any more to defend your G. who are co^victed past all denial, to
turn against your self to do me mischief. Yet, though such dealings were
foretold, after M. Samford told me that you told him you would burn in this
opinion that Christ descended to Gehenna, I endeavored to save our Archb. from
dravving the Realm after him to (...) though I knevv how: Inuitum qui seruat
idem facit occidenti. Yet (...) The best counsel is still to defend the Church.
Now your G. turns the Q. auctority against her own oath: in the most savage
sort that ever I heard of. What man of common modesty would stir against a
scholar bidden to chose his own preferment, before his full answer, when he
demanded either Leave to leave the Q. or employment? Leave was denied.
Employment was promised. When of a Di le^ma a Trilemma is made, the maker
uses not reason. I am sure you never read of such monstrous dealings. And in
all this when I charged your G. in a private Letter that you manyfoldly turned
the Q. auctority to Atheism: and Left it unto your choice whit her you would
rest or stir: you sent me word that you would do any thing for me, if I
would but acknovvledge those that would be my friends. And will you rush to
Gehe^na because I will not rely upon you? and will you use the Q. authority to
Atheism to force me to rely upon you? B. Elmer told you that some thought your
Title and revenues might be used to singular good use for the Church: without
auctority of ambition to be relied upon. I could have Lived next you all my
life: and never begin injury: yielding honor in reverence, that you could have
no cause to complain. The meanest should never have said, that in stead of
Learning I pressed him with auctority: for a square cap to a round head: or
for not vvearing white Linen before God and his Angels vvher black cloth by
custom is more sage* nor for not crossing in Baptism most heavenly in plainnest
sort. D. Abraham Rubens case tells that the Church needs great revenues: as
now to put forth in Ebrevv an Abridgement of all the Bible: which thing the
B. of London might have done, but for you, bent I cannot tell how. Who but
you would have resisted the LL. promise upon a poinct of no sense: that I
sought not to you? I sought to none of them all. All saving you shevved them
selves singular honorably affected. Yet your G. durst resist the decree of the
Sanedrin, as not knovving Deuteronomy 17. And you resist in the strangest sort that
ever I heard: sending one to counterfeit his name, as to catch a Jesuit, then
to rush into other men's houses: then a Constable and a Pursiuant; and to offer
forty marks to tell vvher I was: and all this to come to keep your cold
Empedoclean G. from Leaping into burning Aetna. How did you use Rich Codder
Mastres Hiddes man: to make the Q. authority as a dotage? You cite him before
the high commissioners: and when he appears you have nothing to say to him.
Then at your hall fire he says: My Lords G. should be ashamed to misuse M. Br.
thus: he is better Learned then he. Thus it pleased the poor servingman to
speak: He heard a D. in my Lady of VVarvvicks chamber report D. R. Censure
thus. There is so much in N. as can be in a man. That made him so speak. I
report not this as glad that men so speak of me. For as none of your house can
affoard me a good word, and your self exceed against me even to the Q. in
badnes of Language, geving them a patron and M. Hutton your Can. Ta^ man
vvondred what one vvillia^: And: meant to have my commentations upon Daniel,
seeing they contained nothing but Rabbinical Toys: as your gracious tongue and
others make me not shrink: so neither does the contrary stir any desire to
deal any further in Divinity vvher you reign. But by what divinity did your
G. put R. Codder to his oath to tell vvher I was? Will you have the Q. to be a
dog in her government? Ca^ she svvear any for any but in some offense? Are you
all together sold into syn? is it an offense to clear an article by 20. years
study, more then you have taken, in vvriters current among all men? Is the
enforcing of an unlawful oath a small matter with your G? To him whose most
holy and sacred name you so profanely contemned, who sees how in your
whole course you are bent to oppress the light, whose knowledge I hoped to
have made flovven over the nation, I commend the ending of our strife: and as
he dallyeth not so I assure my self that the world shall see you or me pay the
price of misvsing the Majesty of the whole Kingdom.

Finis.
Anno 1605.
TO ALL THE LEARNED nobility of England.
This contention (R. H.) which I have with the Metropolitan touches all the
realm: as the Creed is used in all houses: wherein I labor to show the right
meaning of our Lords soul passing hence. As my pains, all that I have
bestovved in England has been recompensed with extremity of badnes, by the
Archb. his causing: so I look that this pains shall find no better
interteynement. Only from your honors and the plain hearted I look for
approbation. I believe that I have handled the matter more clearly then any who
before me wrote of it. All may well here consider a question in Aggei, whether
holy flesh if it touch unclean sanctifies it, or polluteth it self: and
whether one heresy in the Creed be tolerable for the goodness of the rest, or
rather corrupts the dignity of the whole: as one dead fly marreth an whole
box of precious oinctment. How far the Metropolitans dealing has been from
Learning, faith and common humanity that will appear in my Epistle to him self:
and to what pas he has brought the Q. honor* and how he began this coil to
defeat my recompense for comentations upon Daniel, that will be made known by
some of your honors to the rest, without my declaration. I seek no further
revenge but this that I may have the Q. quiet Leave to forsake her kingdom: to
take a course among strangers for passage of my years few and sorrowful that
are to come: which I hope shall be more to mine own comfort, then those which I
have spent under the Q. of whom I had great promises twenty years together:
to hinder me from using other kingdoms benefit: But the strangest recompense
(when I was bid be mine own chooser, and referred the choice again to her
highness) that ever has been heard of. I will make no pleading: but refer all
to him whom she took to witness as she Looked to be saved, that she would
bestow all the commodityes of Divinity to best desert. She relied upon the
Metropolitan: but regards not how God will regard such a post. How I accuse
him you may read: and more for hindering the good of the Bible according to the
tenor shevved to your Honors. Therein he may soon win a victory: Seeing the
matter is of so great difficulty that it requires as great study as any has
undertaken this 1000 years for the text of both testame^ts, and besides the
help of all the Learned of a Kingdom: all being directed to grounds manifest;
Here a Metropolita^ may soon hinder: but I am affrayd while the nation bears
souls to be saved the like offer will not be again. His G. will not fi^d many in
the world that se^sibly defend (...) of the Ebrew text. While some of his
advanced teach that the text is corrupted, the Pope is sure of the other part
of the Dilemma: That the Church not the word must rule. A sensible reason of
848 Margent readings had been worth thanks: how they note exactnes not
corruptions. So the showing how this: Adam Lived 230. and begot Seth: VVherin
Moses omitted 100. y. this note being admitted, disanulleth all Moses authority
36. several hu^dreths. And any one marreth all: this also had been worth
thanks. His G. never read two that yielded a plain reason whence that difference
from the Ebrevv sprang: VVhe^ce Graecia, Aethiopia, Arabia, Moscouia utterly de
spise the Ebrew text: and some Papists too. Also our Bishops missing for
600000, years 215. make Moses Mother 257. years old at the Least when she bare
him: and infinitely corrupt all the Bible. This should be amended and not
concealed. These amendements and other full rare poincts deserved some thanks.
But I co^me^d the^ to your honors care. My poor good will was ready: to have
wrought so much that the Bibles in English should have been the glory of all
Divinity of the west. Now I deem I shall never deal that way: but for some
small parcel: as time flees and cannot be revoked. Your honors and the whole
nation I commend to God: not minding ever to meddle where stre^gthening of the
present religion is an heinous Crime, and saving from Gehenna, is persecuted as
an haeresy. As your honors vvil be sorry that this has fallen out: so in the
next Parliament ye may take order: that no Bishop shall have auctority but for
receiving of his revenues: unless he can read and translate both Testaments. How
great hinderance his G. has wrought it would make any heart sick to bethink:
and it is better to be buried then to be told. Least further harm proceed from
such: I wish preue^tion for the nations good: though I look for Little to my
self.

Your honors most willing to have been employed for the Churches good: HVGH
BROVGHTON.

Errata, in some Copies.
In the preface.
Page 2. a. line 20 read. speech. Ibide^ line 23 read first. page 3. a line 2
read this. Ibid. line 4. read. which. so else where. page 4. a. line 13 read. a
calling.

In the treatise,
Page 2. line 1. read haleth. page 4 line 1 read his. and kingdom. Ibid. line
25 read. then. page 5. line 23 and 29 read (...) Ibid. line 30. read (...) page
8 line 26. read (...) page 9 line 29 read. (...). Ibid. L. 33 after (Clay) add
that is here, and from this earthly tabernacle, page 10. line 18 read a going.
page 11 line 2 read Bear. Ibid. line 16 read shadovv of death? page 12. line 8
read 16. page 14 line 32 read (...) page 15 line 33. after (as) add that Apoc.
20, the common to all dead, page 17 line 11 read redemer. page 20 line 2 after
(truth) add, to aba^don your errors. Ibid. line 10 read proposition. Ibid.
line 19 after (Jew) add and that answer was returned. Ibid. line 21 after
(meaning) add or Daniels 490 years in M Livelies meaning. page 21 line 4 read.
(...) page 24 line 10 read is seen. Ibid. line 18 read further. page 25 line 28
read philip. 1. page 26 line 1. read of Cim-* ibid. line 2 read (...) ibid.
line 5 read speech ibid. line 31 read contend. page 29 line 12 read later,
shows Ibid. line 29 read (...) page 32 line 33 read (...) page 33 line 8
read his page 35 line 15 read to (...) ibid. line 31 read (...) Page 37 line 6
read (...) Ibid. line 11 read (...) Ibid. line 16 read having (...) page 38
line 11 read commentary page 39. line 2. read (...) page 40 line 7. read (...)
page 43 line 22 read life.


