CERTAIN. Brief Questions and Answers, concerning chief points of Christian
religion Gathered for the use of the young people of the parish of S. Andrews
in Eastcheape: and may serve generally for all places. By N. A.

At London printed for T. P.

CERTAIN Brief Questions and Answers, concerning chief points of Christian
Religion.
Question.

Who created you?

A. GOD the Father.

Q. Who redeemed you?

A. Jesus Christ the Son.

Q. Who sanctified you?

A. God the holy Ghost.

Q. Wherefore did he create the world?

A. For his own glory.

Q. Wherefore did he create man?

A. To serve him.

Q. In what do we serve God?

A. In 5. things: 1. In praying to him, 2. Praising him. 3. Hearing his word.
4. Using his Sacraments 5. Keeping his Commandments.


Q. Which are his Commandments?

A. Those ten which God gave.

Q. Are there but ten Commandments for us to keep?

A. No more, for all other Commandments, either in the old Testament, or in
the new, do in their substance belong to some of these.

Q. What is the sum or drift of these Commandments.

A. The sum of the first four, is to love God above all. And the sum of
the last six, is to love our neighbor as our self.

Q. Who is our neighbor?

A. Not only our friends and acquaintance, but even strangers, and enemies;
and whosoever stands in need of mercy: As Christ shows by the example of
the wounded man

Q. Are you, or any man, able to keep this law?

A. No, we are not able.

Q. How know you that you are not able?

A. 1. My Conscience does accuse me of my sins. 2. The Scripture has
testified that all have offended, and have need of Gods grace.

Q. Is the law then impossible to be kept?

A. It is.

Q. How is God righteous, to give a law impossible?

A. 1. Because it was not impossible to Adam in his first estate. 2. Because
God of his mercy provided that the impossible righteousness of the Law,
should be fulfilled in Christ.

Q. How comes it then to pass, that we are not able to keep this Law?

A. Because we all do from our Parents in our very conception, draw
corruption, that makes us unable to keep the Law.

Q. What is this corruption of nature in us?

A. 1. Blindness in our understanding.

2. Crookedness in our hearts, to know good and evil.

3. Not to desire good, and hate evil.

4. Perverseness in our imagination and memory, to remember and think of
good things badly and of evil and vain things easily, and with delight.
Genesis 6.

Q. What is the punishment, of the breach of the Law?

A. Labor and misery in our bodies, and death and everlasting damnation.

Q What means is there to be delivered.

A. Only by Jesus Christ.

Q. What was Jesus Christ.

A. The second person in Trinity: God and man.

Q. Why was he man.

A. That he might suffer such punishment as was due to man,

Q. Why was he God?

A. That he might overcome it, and that the punishment might be a sufficient
price; which could not be, but by such a person.

Q. How did he redeem us?

A. By bearing the punishment of our sins, dying upon the Cross, and by
performing a perfect righteousness for us.

Q. How are these to be accepted for us?

A. Because they were not needful, for Christ himself who never deserved any
punishment, because he was without sin nor was bound to perform any Law,
being God.

Q. How shall we be pertakers of this redemption?

A. In feeling and grieuing for our sins, we believe that Christ dyed for
our sins, and rose for our Justification.

Q. How shall we come to have a feeling of our Sin?

A, By looking into the Commandments. By examining our lives. By considering
Gods blessings and judgments,

Q. How shall we come to Faith?

A. Faith is the gift of GOD: but wrought in us by the Word, Sacraments, and
Prayer.

Q, How does the Word beget Faith?

A. The Precepts do let us see the number of our sins.

The Judgment does make us feel them heavy, and so to seek for ease

The Promises make us to hope: and so both Precepts and Threatenings; or
Judgments and Promises, make us to beget Faith.

Q. How do the Sacraments beget Faith,

A. As Seals do serve to confirm Writings: and tokens, and pledges, between
men and men, do confirm promises.

Q. How many Sacraments are there?

A, Two and no more: Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord,

Q. How can the taking of a little Water or Wine, seal up my Faith?

A. Because God is so true and powerful, and whatsoever sign he gives, it is
an assurance, be the means never so simple.

Q. What be the outward things to be seen in Baptism?

A. Water: which signifies the Blood of Christ.

Q. What things are done in Baptism?

A. Dipping into the Water, Washing, and rising out.

Q. What do these signify and declare unto me

A. The washing, does betoken the washing of my sins, the putting into the
Water, representes a burial, as it were into Christ's death to die to sin:
and the rising out does signify my ingraffing into Christ's resurrection to
rise to newness of life, as he did rise from death.

Q. What are the outward things in the Supper?

A. Bread and Wine.

Q. What are the visible things done?

A. Receiving, and eating.

Breaking the Bread.

Distributing both to the people,

Q. What do these signify?

A. the first signifies Christ's passion.

The distributing signifies that it was done, that others [not himselfe] might
have the benefit.

The receiving and eating, betokens and assures that every one that receives,
is knit to the body and blood of Christ, as he does unite the Bread and Wine to
himself.

Q. What comfort have we by this?

A. I am assured that all the virtue of the Bread and Wine being received,
becomes mine: and so being spiritually, by faith, joined to Christ, I shall be
made partaker of all the benefits of his death and resurrection.

Q. shall every one that comes to this Sacrament, have this comfort?

A. None but they that come worthily: otherwise they eat their own damnation.

Q. Can any come worthily to it?

A. Not as deserving to come: but by faith accepted, through the merit and
worthiness of Jesus Christ imputed and applied.

Q. How shall we come to it worthily?

A. By means. First to come, to it, as a Supper made by GOD, of great price
and delight. Secondly as unto a Supper wherein is presented the bitter death of
Christ the Son of GOD, and our uniting to him, as to our head.

Q. What affections do become it, as it is Gods Supper?

A. First, thankfulness to him that has prepared so great a Supper and
called us unto it.

Secondly, a hunger and thirsting after the meat.

Thirdly, an humility in heart in regard of our unworthiness, to take the
lowest place.

Q. What affections become it, as there is a representation of Christ's death?

A. Four. 1. Sorrow for sin. 2. Persuasion of forgiveness. 3. A purpose of a
holy life. 4. Love and charity.


Thus being furnished, we shall come (as Christians) to receive fully
Christ's benefits: GOD which grant we may.

FINIS.
A Prayer, wherein is contained the substance of all the Catechism.
O Most mighty God merciful and loving Father, who have given us our life in
this world for this purpose, that our greatest care above all other things
might be, that our most precious souls might be saved for ever in the day of
Judgment and for the same end have appointed the ministry and preaching of
the word, as the only powerful means to bring us to thy everlasting kingdom
of glory: we beseech thee for thine own name sake, and for Jesus Christ thy
dear Sons sake, give us grace with humble and careful hearts to learn and
know so much out of thy blessed and holy word, as may be for the salvation of
our souls from hell and condemnation, and to bring us to the joy of thy
kingdom. Grant that now in time we may from the true understanding of thy
blessed Law, both see and feel the greatness of all our sins, and of that
punishment which we have deserved therefore, that we being laden with the
heavy burden of our sins, may with broken and sad hearts seek for ease and
help now in this time of our life, while ease and help may be obtained: for
after this life there is no mercy, but judgment and vengeance to be looked
for. And when as by thy spirit thou have cast us down with unfeigned
repentance, and hearty sorrow for all our sins past either known or unknown
unto us: then we pray thee comfort and lift up our poor distressed
consciences, with the strength of a lively faith grounded upon thy promise made
unto us in the Gospel, which may in Christ his death persuade our hearts of
the full pardon of all our sins, and of every part of that punishment which
we have deserved with good assurance in his perfect obedience, wrought in our
nature, in his own person for us, to come to ye inheritance of everlasting
life, in thy most blessed kingdom. And we heartily beseech thee, that this
faith of ours may be fruitful in every part of our inward and outward
behavior to our own comfort, and the good example of all other, among whom
we shall have our conversation. Grant further, that this faith may daily be
underpropped and vpholden against all the violent assaults of Satan, and
doubting weakness of our corrupt nature, by those plain pledges and love
tokens (I mean the Sacraments) which thou have mercifully provided to put us
out of doubt of thine everlasting love toward us in Jesus Christ. Lastly that
we may from time to time, from day to day, and from hour in hour, have good
experience, and true trial of thy good will; give us grace with upright hearts
to call upon thee in the name of thy Son our aloone Savior for all good
graces and blessings needful for our souls and bodies for this life present,
and for the life to come, both for our selves, and for all the Church and
children, that thus we may glorify thee so long as we shall live here upon
the face of the earth, and may hereafter be made pertakers of everlasting
glory in thy kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

Grace before meat.
MOst gracious Father, who feedest all creatures which depend upon thy divine
providence, we beseech thee sanctify these creatures, which thou have
ordained to us, give them virtue to nourish our bodies, in life and health, and
give us grace to receive them soberly and thankefully as from thy hands: that
so in the strength of these, and other thy blessings we may walk in the
vprightnes of our hearts, before thy face, this day and all the days of our
lives, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior.

Or thus.
Most gracious God and merciful Father, we beseech thee sanctify thy
creatures to our use, make them healthful for our nurrishment, and us
thankful for all thy blessings, through Christ our Lord and only Savior:
Amen.

Grace after meat.
Blessed be thy holy name O Lord our God for these thy good benefits, wherewith
thou have so plentifully at this time refreshed our bodies, O Lord vouchsafe
likewise to feed our souls, with the spiritual food of thy holy word and
spirit unto life everlasting: O Lord defend and save thy whole Church, our
gracious King and Queen, our noble Prince the Duke of Yoarke, and Lady
Elizabeth: forgive us our sins and vnthankefullnes, pass by our manifold
infermities, make us all mindful of our lives ends, and of the reckonings we
are to mke to thee therein, and in the mean time grant unto us health, peace
and truth, in Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

Or thus.
Blessed be thy holy name O Lord for these thy good benefits wherewith thou
have refreshed us at this time: Lord forgive us all our sins and frailetyes,
save thy Church, King and Queen, and royal prosterity, and grant us health,
peace and truth, in Christ our only Savior Amen.

Before meat.
Sanctify unto us O Lord the use of these thy creatures, of which by our
sins we have made our selves unworthy, make us sober and thankful receivers
of them, grant that the end of our eatings and drinkings, may be to be better
enabled to serve thee in our several places, through Jesus Christ Amen.

Another.
Take from us O gracious Father all glotony and excess, all carnal feeding
without fear, all minding of none but earthly things, all serving our bellies
without providing for our souls, make us mindful of thy presence, and
careful for to behave our selves in receiving these creatures set before us,
that all that we do, may be to thy glory, and to the comfort of our souls,
through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

Another grace.
Humble our souls before thee O Lord, and cause us to see the smalnes of our
desert even in respect of ye least of thy mercies: make us to hunger after
Christ by whom only the free use of thy creatures is restored to us: and give
us so to enjoy these blessings hear provided for us, with that reverence and
sobriety as in thy presence, that our bodies being refreshed our souls may
praise thee who art the giver of all good, and that in Jesus Christ the
righteous. Amen.

Another.
O Lord, it is not bread that we live by, but by the word that proceeded from
thy mouth, lift up our hearts to look unto thee for a blessing upon our
meats, and vouchsafe us the gracious assurance of thy love in Christ, that we
may comfortably use thy creatures as pledges of thy favor, and be provoked by
them to give up our selves to thy glory, to serve thee insinceryty all our
days, through Jesus Christ our Savior. Amen.

Another Grace before meat.
Teach us to remember O merciful God, that it is thou, which to us and all thy
Creatures give food in due season, that so we may take heed of all
unthankful and brutish using of these good things, which in thy providence
thou have ordained for us: raise up our affections to long for thy food which
indureth to eternal life, which Jesus has promised to give us, who is thy
only son and our only savior Amen.

Another Grace after meat.
We magnify thy name O Lord for all thy mercies, for the comfortable
refreshings which thou have now vouchsafed us: pardon we beseech thee our great
vnthankefullnes, in the duties of obedience to thy blessed will: save all thy
Church, protect and bless our gracious King, and his Realms, the Queen, the
Prince, and all their royal progeny, grant passage to thy Gospel, comfort to
thy servants, and peace of conscience to us all in Jesus Christ: Amen.

Another Grace after meat.
As thou have filled our bodies, O Lord, with thy good creatures, far above
our best deserving, so be pleased, we pray thee, to season our souls, and to
endue us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things, that in all our
life, that yet remaynes, we may be means of glory to thy Name, of credit to
thy Gospel, and of much comfort to thy servants: preserve thy Church, protect
this whole State, and the Chiefe-head thereof, King James, his Queen, his
Heir, and whole posterity, the Counsel, the Nobles, the Maiestrates, the
Ministers of thy word, comfort the hearts of all thy servants, stablish us all
in thy truth, and keep us for ever to thy self, Amen.

Grace before meat.
Blessed be thou, O Lord, for these, and for all thy gifts: let thy mercy to
our bodies stir up thankefulnes in our souls, and let our care to please
thee in our lives, be a witness of the feeling we have of thy rich and abundant
mercies toward us: be gracious to all thy people through the world, forget not
these Realms, nor thine anointed, our Sovereign King, the Queen, the
hopeful Prince, and the Royal Progeny: disapoynt the enemies of thy Gospel,
and make it to grow in despite of Satan, to the glory of thy Name, and to the
rejoicing of the souls of all thy servants, for Jesus sake, Amen.

Another Grace before meat.
Accept, we pray thee, (most loving Father) this our sacrifice of praise, which
for these, and all thy favors, we here offer up unto thy Majesty, look upon
it in the worthynesse of thy Son, and for his sake enable us to a cheerful
serving thee in singlenes of heart, and in uprightness of conversation all our
days: and look mercyfully upon the whole body of thine elect, living upon
this earth wheresoever, multiply thy mercyes upon the several Churches united
under the government of our gracious King, power out thy graces upon him and
his, continue the truth of Religion to us and our posterity, enlarge the
Kingdom of grace, and hasten the Kingdom of glory, and preserve us by thy
power thereunto, through Jesus Christ our only Savior, Amen.

Grace after meat.
We return unto thee, with the humbling of our hearts, all possible thanks O
gracious God for thy love and bounty toward us thy unworthy servants, for
electing us for sending thy son to die for us, for calling us to a lively
hope by thy precious Gospel, for creating, for preserving, for feeding us at
this present: O stir us up to give our selves unto thee, and to consecrate
our whole spirits, souls and bodies to thy glory all our days.

O Lord, save thy Church, our King, etc.

A prayer before meat.
Gracious God, and merciful Father, we pray thee for Jesus Christ's sake to
forgive us the sins of all our life past, and present, and together with the
full forgiveness thereof, bless these good creatures set before us at this
time, that they may feed our bodies: and bless us with grace so to receive
them before thee with reverence that we may be the better able to go forward
with our business in our calling to thy glory, and our everlasting comfort in
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

A Thanksgiving after meat.
WE thank thee most merciful Father, for the good comfort and strength which
thou have given us at this time, by these thy good blessings of meat and
drink: we pray thee in like manner, comfort our poor souls with the
everlasting food of thy word preached unto us, that by the working of thy
blessed spirit, we may practice it in the whole course of our life, to thy
glory, and our salvation in Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior, Amen.

An other Prayer before meat.
MOst loving and merciful Father, who have given us our life and breath, with
all good blessings, for our souls and bodies, grant thy good blessings to
these meats and drinks now set before us, that from thee, they may receive
strength to feed us, and give us such grace to receive and use them, that we
may be the better able with comfort of heart to serve thee so in this life that
we may have the comfort of thy kingdom, there to live for ever, by Jesus
Christ our Savior.

An other Thanksgiving after meat.
WE confess our selves for ever bound unto thee most merciful Father, for all
good blessings, and namely for these which now we have so bountifully received
to our great comfort mercifully pardon we pray thee all our profanenes and
unthankfulness past and present, and strengthen us for ever hereafter with
greater grace to show our selves more thankful unto thee, and more careful
to serve thee in all true holiness and righteousness all the days of our life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

An other Prayer before meat.
HOly Father. we, confess our selves most unworthy of our life, or any other
blessings, which may do us good in soul or body, by reason of our sins,
which are both great and grievous: we pray thee therefore in Christ his death
forgive them all, and in his obedience so receive us to favor, as that for his
sake these good blessings may be blessed to our good use, to feed us in our
bodies, and to further us in all godliness toward heaven and everlasting life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

An other Thanksgiving.
WE confess thy great goodness toward us most loving Father, that
notwithstanding all our sins, thou have fed us at this time more plentifully
then many thousands of our brethren, who are more thankful for any blessings
received, and a thousand times more careful to serve thee then we be we
beseech thee call us not to account for that which is past but strengthen us
with a rich portion of thy grace to bind our selves for ever hereafter to our
better behavior, to serve thee with better thankefulnes, and more careful
obedience all the days of our life, to thy glory, and our everlasting comfort
in Jesus Christ our Lord.

Good Lord bless the Church, preserve our Kings majesty defend this whole
land, comfort the comfortles, give good success to thy Gospel against all the
foes of thy truth, forgive us our sins in Christ Jesus, increase our faith,
grant peace to this Church and common wealth, and to every one of us in our
conscience, we most humbly entreat thee good Lord.

A Thanks giving before dinner.
O Heavenly Father, which art the fountain, and full treasure of all goodness,
we beseech thee to show thy mercies upon us thy Children, and sanctify these
gifts, which we receive of thy merciful liberality, granting us grace to
use them soberly, and purely according to thy blessed will: so that thereby we
may acknowledge thee to be the Author and giver of all good things, and above
all that we may remember continually to seek the spiritual food of thy
word, wherewith our souls may be nourished everlastingly through our Savior
Christ who is the true bread of life which came down from heaven, of whom,
whosoever eats shall live for ever. So be it.

Thanks after Dinner.
Glory, praise and honor be unto thee most merciful, and omnipotent Father,
who of thine infinite goodness have created man to thine own Image and
similtude, who also have fed, and daily feedest of thy most bountiful hand all
living creatures, grant unto us, that as thou have nourished these our mortal
bodies with corporal food, so thou would replenish our souls with the
perfect knowledge of the lively word of thy beloved son Jesus Christ, to whom
be praise, glory, and honor for ever and ever, Amen.

God save the Church universal: GOD comfort them that be comfortless: Lord
increase our faith: O Lord for Christ thy sons sake, be merciful to all the
Common wealths where thy Gospel is truly preached, and harbor granted to
the afflicted members of Christ's body: and illuminate according to thy good
pleasure, all nations, with the brightness of thy word, So be it.

Thanksgiving after Supper.
Eternal and everlasting God Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who of thy most
singular love, which thou bear to menkind, and have appointed to his
sustenance, not only the fruits of the earth, but also the Fowls of the air,
and Beasts, of the earth, and Fishes of the Sea, and have commanded thy
benefits to be received, as from thine hand, with thanksgiving, assuring
thy children, by the mouth of thine Appostle, that to the clean, all things
are clean, as the creatures which be sanctified by thy word, and by prayer:
grant unto us so moderately to use these thy gifts present, that the bodies
being refreshed, the souls may be more able to proceed in all good works, to
the praise of thy holy name, So be it.

Thanksgiving after supper.
THe GOD of all power, who has called from death, the great Pastor of ye
sheep, our Lord Jesus, comfort and defend the flock, which he has redeemed by
the blood of the eternal Testament: increase the number of true preachers:
repress the rage of obstinate tyrants: mitigate, and lighten the hearts of
the ignorant: relieve the pain of such as be afflicted: but especially of
those that suffer for the testimony of his truth, and finally confound
Satan, by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen.

A prayer before the hearing or reading of the word, or any other exercise
thereof
BLessed Lord God most merciful and heavenly Father, for as much as thou have
very straightly charged us in thy holy word, before all other things in this
world, most chiefly and carefully to seek thy kingdom and the righteousness
thereof, where only is true happiness, which will last for ever: Grant us
grace that the care and love of this world, (whereto our earthly minds are too
much wedded) being set aside, we may henceforth most diligently study how to
live for ever in thy blessed kingdom. And because we have learned from thine
own wisdom, that the sincere preaching of thy word is the plain path and
beaten hye way which leads to the joy of thy kingdom: we beseech thee give
us grace at all times, and upon all occasions, withal reverence and readiness
of heart, to hear, read, muse, and study thereon, that our souls may daily
grow rich and wealthy in the increase of true repentance, faith, holiness of
life, meekenes, patience, love, and every other sweet fruit, of thy holy
spirit, which may prepare us to be always ready when it shall please thee to
call us out of this life, to live most blessedly with thee for ever in thine
everlasting Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A Thanksgiving after any exercise. of the Word of God.
WE thank thee most merciful Fafather, for all good blessings whatsoever,
confessing our selves altogether unworthy of any one of them from the first
unto the last, and from the greatest unto the smallest: most chiefly we thank
thee for the great blessing and precious jewel of thy holy Word, and for the
sweet comfort thou bring to our consciences by the continual hearing,
reading, study, and exercise thereof. we pray the increase our zeal and love
thereunto every day more and more, that the power thereof may fo work in every
one of our souls, that we may daily prosper and thrive in all the ways of
Godliness to thy glory, and our everlasting comfort in thy kingdom, by Jesus
Christ our Lord and Savior.

A prayer for the Evening.
Bless Lord God, most merciful and heavenly Father, all we thy servants whom
thou have joined together in this household, do altogether confess thy
marvelous great mercy which thou have showed to every one of us all the days
of our life, and by name, this day, which now is at an end, We all thank thee
from the very ground and bottom of our hearts, that thou have preserved us
from all the dangers of our bodies, and from every judgment of our souls. We
thank thee that every way thou have dealt so kindly and mercifully with us,
showing thy self a most tender father, as well in the blessings, of this
present life, as also in the most excellent graces of a far better life. Thou
have provided for us (according to our calling) whatsoever thou in wisdom
know needful for our bodily maintenance. As for our souls, thy love has
appeared most wonderful, because thou have not suffered us to run headlong
to hell in blindness and ignorance, with many thousands, [whom thou have in thy
fearful, yet most just judgment, appointed unto condemnation) but have by
the blessed preaching of thy word which thou have brought among'st us, showed
us the way how to escape everlasting vengeance, and to live for ever in thy
kingdom. To this purpose thou have prolonged every one of our lives unto this
present hour, and this day blessed us with health and strength of our bodies
to walk in our calling so that we have with good success happily ended the
business of this day, and therefore now this night we may betake our selves to
comfortable rest, whereby we may with better courage and strength return again
to our business the next day following. For these and all other mercies
whatsoever we most humbly thank thee, praying thee most humbly to forgive and
forget the sins of this day, and of all our life past, howsoever we have
committed them by thought, word, or deed, wittingly or willingly through
ignorance, or for want of good heed. Give us the sight and sorrow of heart for
them all, with a full purpose for ever hereafter to be more watchful over all
our ways and more heedefull in all our behavior, then ever heretofore we
have been. To this end, vouchsafe upon us a rich portion of thy grace so to
profit by the hearing of thy word preached, that we may more carefully avoid
that which is evil, and more constantly follow that which is good. And now we
pray thee receive, us all this night into thine own safe keeping: be a good
God to every one of us. Guard us in our bodies by the defense of thy holy Angels
from all outward dangers and judgments whatsoever: and above all, keep us by
thy blessed spirit from every enticement of Satan, which might hurt us in our
souls. Give our bodies sweet rest and comfortable sleep, and grant unto our
Souls the sweet peace of conscience, which may prepare us against the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ, in whose holy name we pray further for all good
graces needful for the whole Church this of England our Kings Majesty the
Council, Magistrates, Ministers the comfortles, and all the rest of the
faithful in any place of the world, saying the same prayer which himself has
taught us in his holy Gospel after this manner.

O our Father which art in heaven, etc. THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
love of God the Father, and the most sweet and comfortable fellowship of God
the holy Ghost be with us, bless, preserve, keep, comfort, and defend eury
one of us here present, together with all the rest of ye Faithful which in
any other place belong unto Jesus Christ his kingdom, both this night, and for
ever hereafter to the end of the world, Amen.

A prayer for the Morning.
WC thy humble servants thank thee most merciful Father, that thou have kept
so good and careful a watch over every one of us this last night past, that
thou have so mercifully delivered us from the darkness and dangers thereof, and
have freed us from every judgment which might not only have seized upon us in
our bodies, but swollowed us up both in our bodies and souls. Our bed wherein
we have taken so good rest and comfortable sleep, might have been our grave
to have stopped our breath that we should never again have seen the light of
this day if thou had not been our good God, mercifully to watch over us by
thy special providence. We therefore in the humblenes of our souls most
unfeignedly thank thee for this thy defense, and for all the rest of thy
kindness, either this night, or any time heretofore. And now we further pray
thee that as thou have reskued us from the dangers of this night, and renewed
the light of this present day: even so it would please thee to renew the light
of thy favorable and loving countenance toward every one of us, in the face
and favor of Jesus Christ, to bless us with thy spirit, whereby we may be
guided in all our actions, dealings, and business, as thy blessed name may be
glorified, thy Church and children profited, and our own consciences comforted
in the assured hope of everlasting life. Prosper the works of our hands, and
make thy fear so to prosper in our hearts, that in every part of our
behavior, we may set thee before us, and make thee judge, not only of our
outward doings, but of our inward and secret thoughts, that the same may be
upright in thy presence, to set thee before us in every thing we take in hand,
calling upon thee in all our business, that thy blessing may give us good
success. Grant, we beseech thee, that the words of our mouths, the works of
our hands, and all the thoughts of our hearts, may be acceptable unto thee,
both this day and for ever, through Jesus Christ our Savior, in whose name we
pray further unto thee for these and all other good graces, which thou know
to be most needful for us and for thy whole Church, saying as he has taught
us in his blessed Gospel:

O our Father, etc. A prayer to be strengthened against fear which oppresses
the conscience.
O Lord, heavenly Father, I thine unworthy servant, and a poor wretched
sinner, overwhelmed with great fear, by reason of my manyfold and grievous
sins whereby I have offended thee, my most loving and merciful Father, do
here bow the knees of my heart unto thee, beseeching thee most humbly to
forgive all those my sins and heinous trensgressions which make my conscience
so sore afraid, that I neither can feel such comfort in mine own soul, as
may bring peace unto mine own conscience, neither am I able to be comfortable
unto such as thou have humbled by affliction, for the exercise of their faith
and patience to thy great glory, and their special comfort in the end, though
for a time thou seem to turn thy loving countenance from them. Good Lord, I
confess my want of zeal, and love to thee and thy word, I acknowledge my
profaneness, and ouer-great looseness of life, I keep not back my slacknes
in hearing, reading, praying, and practizing such duties, as by thy blessed
word I am bound to perform. Now in the riches of thy mercy work in my heart
unfeigned repentance, for these and all the rest of my sins past and present:
and of thy goodness, power such plenty of thy gracious spirit into my sinful
soul, that my manners being amended, and my behavior both outward and inward
being changed, I may both have comfort in mine own conscience, and also,
without fear, with grace and good courage of heart speak comfortably to such
as are in any kind of distress, especially in any trouble of mind, so as
they may receive some special comfort by those gracious words which shall
proceed from me: Grant this, most merciful Father, for thy dear Sons sake,
Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

A Prayer made at the first assembly of the Church, when the confession of our
faith, and whole orders were there read, and approved.
OH Lord God Almighty, and Father most merciful, there is none like thee in
heaven nor in earth, which workest all things for the glory of thy Name, and
the comfort of thine elect. Thou did once make Man ruler over all thy
creatures, and placed him in the Garden of all pleasures, but how soon (alas)
did he in his felicity forget thy goodness? Thy people Israel also in their
wealth, did evermore run affray, abusing thy manifold mercies, like as all
flesh continually rages when it has gotten liberty and external prosperity.
But such is thy wisdom, adjoined to thy mercies (dear Father) that thou
seek all means possible to bring thy children to the true sense and lively
feeling of thy fatherly favor. And therefore, when prosperity will not serve,
then sendest thou adversity, graciously correctting al thy children whom thou
receiuest into thine household: Wherefore, we wretched and miserable sinners,
render unto thee most humble and hearty thanks, that it has pleased thee to
call us home to thy fold, by thy fatherly correction at this present, whereas
in our prosperity and liberty, we did neglect thy graces offered unto us: For
the which negligence, and many other grievous sinnnes, whereof we now accuse
our selves before thee, thou might most justly have given us up to reprobate
minds, and induration of our hearts, as thou have done other. Oh Lord God,
what are we, upon whom thou should show this great mercy? O most loving
Lord, forgive us our unthankfulness, and all our sins, for Jesus Christ's
sake. O heavenly Father, increase thine holy Spirit in us, to teach our hearts
to cry, Abba, dear Father, to assure us of our eternal election in Christ, to
reveal thy will more and more toward us, to confirm us so in thy truth,
that we may live and dye therein: and that by the power of the same spirit, we
may boldly give accounts of our faith to al men, with humbleness and
meekness, that whereas they backebite and slander us as evil doers, they may
be ashamed, and once stop their mouths, seeing our good conversation. Be
merciful good Lord, unto thy Church universal, scattered abroad upon the face
of the whole earth: send help and comfort to al our brethren wheresoever,
which are in need, affliction, or misery: beat down the fury and rage of
Antichrist and his Kingdom, and daily more and more increase the number of thy
faithful flock.

And forasmuch as it has pleased thee in mercy, above al other Nations of the
earth, to power down the sweet stream of thy blessings upon this little
Island in which we live, by provoking of thy Gospel, and overthrowing of
Idolatry, we beseech thee to continue toward the same, and to establish in
this thy Church a pure perfect, and sincere regiment thereot, that in the same
thy glorious Majesty may be exalted in sincere, pure, and holy worship; and
that this thy Church may floorish and increase, being through thy safe
protection aided supported, and miraculously defended, guide and rule, we
beseech thee, with thy holy spirit every part and member thereof, especially
thy gracious servant, our dear Sovereign Lord and King, grant unto him [O
Lord] a pure and perfect zeal, above al things, to promote thy glory, give
unto him the spirit of wisdom, discreation, and government, that with equity
and Justice he may see this whole Realm peaceably and quietly governed.
Deliver him, O Lord, as hitherto, most wonderfully, thou have done, from all
forrayne and homebred Traitors, and grant unto him (if it be thy will) a long
and quiet reign over us, to the benefit of thy Church, and the advancement of
thy glory: bless also, we beseech thee, with abundance of blessings, both
Spiritual and Temporal, the Queens Majesty, the young Prince with the rest of
the King and Queens Royal Issue, and make them worthy Instruments of thy
glory, when time and occasion shall serve thee unto: bless, O Lord, the
Nobility, the Gentry, the Commonalty, and all the Estates of this Land: comfort
al them that be comfortless, and remove thy heavy Judgments from those places
on which they are fallen: lastly, for our selves we become humble petitioners
unto thy divine Majesty: bless us [O Lord] with thy grace and peace, make us
thankeful for all thy blessings from time to time bestowed upon us, forgive us
the sins which we have committed, watch our souls, good Lord, and keep them
from all sin and vncleanensse, from all evil motions and idle fantasies, and
prepare us more and more against the coming of thy Son, Christ Jesus. And
more. O Lord, we have commended our selves unto thee, our understanding is
weak, our memory is frail, and we are not worthy to pray unto thee, more
unworthy to receive the things we pray for; and therefore we commend our
selves and our prayers unto thee, in the name and mediation of thy Son and
Savior, humbly begging and craving both these our former petitions, and all
things else needeful for us in that form of prayer which he has taught us,
saying: Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

A prayer for true repentance.
MOst gracious God. and merciful Father, of our Savior Jesus Christ, because I
have sinned and done wickedly, and through thy goodness have received a desire
of repentance, whereunto this thy long suffering does draw my hard heart, I
beseech thee, for thy great mercies sake, in Christ, to work the same
repentance in me, and by thy spirit, power and grace, so to humble, mortify
and fear my conscience for my sins, to salvation, that in thy good time thou
may comfort and quicken me again, through Jesus Christ thy dearly beloved
Son, So be it.

A prayer for the strength and increase of faith.
O Merciful God, and dear Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ (in
whom, as thou art well pleased, so have thou commanded us to hear him) for as
much as he often bids us to ask of thee, and also promises that thou will
hear us and grant us that which in his name we shall ask of thee: lo,
gracious Father, we are bold to beg of thy mercy, through thy Son Jesus
Christ, one sparkle of true faith and certain persuasion of thy goodness and
love toward us in Christ, where through, I being assured of the pardon of all
my sins by the great mercyes of Christ thy Son, may be thankful to thee,
love thee, and serve thee in holiness and righteousness all the days of my
life, Amen.

FINIS.

