A PETITION TO THE LORDS, TO examine the religion and carriage of D. Ban. Archb.

By Hugh Broughton.

Ano 1608.

I Wrote a reply (right honorable) upon a Jew in defense of all Christendom:
as many of your Lordships have seen the book. The Jew being subtle had caught
D. Brancroft, as an allower of our works in Iudaisme with him. Wherein art could
give no better answer then that our old notes were long ago revoked. The
scholars of Geneva were also in Iudaisme: But the Senators gave me leave to
confute them: and swear that they would bridle them for ever. Then they went
about to have me killed for denying that Q. E. ever meant to defeat K. I. In
contradictio^ Beza wrote to Basil to D. Polanus. I said all was but a dream:
and I would have printed an Ebrewes Ebrew commendation of the Q. for her royal
purpose in sending me word by Sir Julius Caesar that I should chose my
ecclesiastical preferment for my commentaries upon Daniel. But Bancroft by
3000. well given to a courtier and a Lady, procured grief to Q. Elisabet and
defeatance. This commendation allowed by the Senate: One Grinetus and Pinot now
dead, and another now dead hindered with disturbance strange: that the Senate
sent me word of danger by soldiers stirring. That I record. Bancroft seeing
himself in Iudaisme: and as I heard in his allowed Libel equal scoffer as of a
mist soon scattered, raved against me, for pearls to such, and holy things to
such. Now seeing the Law of God which may not pass contemned bids reprove
openly them that sin openly, I require from God that your Lordships hear with
justice my articles against Richard Bancroft.

Iudaisme. Article 1.

Bancrofts Iudaisme.

Therefore

Article II.

Therefore

Article III. Rabbi Farar urged this true proposition, that by Bancrofts
assumption he might ban all the holy croft of our Gospel.

If the Romans be the legs of Daniels Image, or be the fourth beast, whom
Daniel brings to perish before the redeemer comes into the world, our
Gospel has missed of the true redeemer. For Christ our L. came into the world
the first day that in Bethleem tax over the world argued the Romans a full
destruction of the double Macedonians (who in deed are the two legs and
fourth beast).

Bancrofts treason to the Gospel.

Therefore

Article IV. prophesied in Levit. 26. has history Dan. 9. the covenant of God
remembranced and expounded: that the holy Angel telled the most gracious
Prophet how the 70. years captivity space seven times, 490 years, are from
Daniels prayer to our Lords death, ending Moses Ceremonies. And all the New
testament is disturbed by the disturbance of this.

Rabbi Farar and Barbinel. Math. 1.
that both testame^ts should be nothing worth:

And Bancroft in the libel allowing Lively, as Bar-Lo, denies sacrifice ended
at our Lords death, or time of his Birth Baptism Death
told in the law

Therefore

Article V.

Ba^croft as Bar-Lo allowing Lively damning the old testament in 848 readings
of text as corrupted would persuade that we blaspheme the old testament justly:
and accuse in notes and translation Act. 7. the N. T. to be corrupt,

Therefore

Article VI.

They who said Jesus their Savior went to Hell cannot holding that, hold
Salvation.

Proof from Law and Gospel. Levit. 26. and all Rabbines upon him, and in all
their writings: and our Gospel and S. Paul and Luke Act. 7. show that all
faithful go only to heaven.

Therefore

The place which received our Lords soul gone from the body and this world is
haides of the Creed: and the descending is the passage thither: Whitgift and
all Grecians.

Paradise is the place unto which our Lords soul, or all holy souls went
hence. Doctor Bilson and both testaments all Jews for the just: and the best
Christian Graecians and heathen then in their kind.

Therefore to descend to Hell in the Creed is to go up to Paradise.

Conclusion.

How the Creed should be translated:

(...) means, To go hence to God: and because Gods throne is on high, and
there the godly have heaven, and the wicked, Hell: in the holy it is: a going
to Heaven: in the other, to Hell. The unlearned wight that seeing this matter so
explaned would mainteyn a daily Lie, that our Lords soul, went down, where al
ascend to God, and went to Hell, not (by the Gospel) to heaven, this unlearned
wight should be removed from his place. And D. Whitgift well held that al who
deny our Lords soul to have removed to Haides ar in Atheism: as denyers of
souls immortality. And this much for Iudaisme. The Machmadean absurdities
sold as with the Bible, told to the K. for some part: if B. Ban not all the
croft of the^, I will give him in Greek Epistles quiet advertriseme^t: Although
his G. understands Greek as I do Persian: yet for the simple I would not
openly show his errors and others may turn all to English for his Grek.
Touching harm to me for the K. I blame none but four scholars of Geneva,
Bancroft and Bar-Lo. Bancroft brent these words as treason: The K. of our
Language. He can render no other reason, why he brent the book under Q. E. and
K. I. your Lordships may ask him. For the doctrine the D. cannot blame one
syllable. Therefore his first hatred to the K. bred the second. D. Vahan saw his
danger: and went about to calm al. Now Bar-Lo would not have scoffed the
Bishops syllogism and me, befooling himself, but to set his country as Nero
on a flame. So for the K. the Bishops and I were scoffed. Further neither
nation nor person do I accuse for any harm, to any. My Petition for the Jews
unto the K. is not for my self, but for the Bishops if they be able: and I
could wish D. Bancr. all grace of sufficiency in Thalmudiques and Greek: to
honor Christendom in this sort for the gayn with the Pain. And all the world
must bear me record how friendly D. Bilson is honored: whose words I take to
prove against Jews by scripture and Greeks that our Lords soul ascended from
the cross alone into heaven: as the second time in the body. So I would honor
all the rest: and give good leave to each one to step before me: to the gain and
Pain. It is well known that the Jew meant to foil all Christendom: as that
none should match him in elegancy of Talmudiques: and propounded such a scope
to have the N. Test: compared with Moses 613 laws, as sufficient without the
Thalmud, that he little looked for any to be found ever in the world, that would
show the Apostles to be the best Thalmudiques. Now none that know the greatness
of this pains: and how hard it is to find translaters from Ebrew into other
tongues, that all nations; may see how the matter is carried: and what pain
will be to find ebrew written works: and Greeks to be translated into Ebrew: as
all Polychronius upon Daniel none of skill will here show will with desire to
preve^t others. And it would be an honor to our nation, if an Archbishop or
Bishop should pass Rabbines and match Greeks in their kind: as Cra^mer by
Martyrdom and Jewel by fathers are an eternal honor to our Island. And if the
Bishops will not move the K. the P. and your honors will: and wish the Bishops
far sager and quieter carriage.

Your Lordships most humble Hugh Broughton


