A Defense of the Book entitled A Co^cent of Scripture, for amendment of
former Athean most gross, and Iudaique errors, which our translations and
notes had:

Against the libel, scoffing a Scottish mist: and slaundering that the Jews
Epistle sent from Byzantian Rome, was a forged work, and not in deed sent
thence.

By HVGH BROVGHTON.

1609.

To the Mighty Prince JAMES, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defendour of the Faith, etc.
ABout the mids of Q. Elizabeth's reign, gracious Sovereign, some Courtiers
took occasion, by our corruptions in translation of the Bible and Notes, to
plead that our religion was but man's invention. To restrain their course, I
wrote A Concent of Scripture, contriving a douzen kinds of hard studies
Thalmudique and Attique to one scope: couching large matters in so many
several words. That pains was of esteem, till I dealt with certain Scotts
concerning preventing Neroes, hoping for Priamus happiness: and M. James Melvin
sent from Edenburg a letter by post, of your Majesty's favor, which letter
came to me opened. Then my Lord Peregrin Willoughby warned me to look to my
self: and soon a Sumner cou^terfaiteth an other man, and the same day a
Constable and pursuivant offered 40. marks to tell where I was: And I made over to
Middelburg, and print how your Majesty would be King of our language. A Drifat
of those copies D. B. brent, noysing that I wrote treason: twice he brent them,
under Q. E. and under your Majesty, and conspiring to scoff the Scottish mist
under cover of confuting me, allows a libell raving against Archb. Wh. and
D. Bilson for the Creed: (teaching that our Lord went hence to Paradise.) And
highly extolling Master Lively for a most unlearned Iudaique and Ethnique
exposition of Daniel: dashing all the frame of Scripture Concent. At the same
time a Jew wrote from to city of Constantine, your Majesty's ancestor, a
supplication to have our Gospel opened in Ebrew. The Queens Agent, Barton,
sent the Letters: two several copies. B. D. conspired to Libell that I forged
the Epistle printed: And when I compiled lately a treatise upon our Lo.
family, clearing our Nation from Iudaique errors, and touching four Genevean
Scholars of his bent to Albion flames, the thankful wight receyving a book,
showed as much grace as a Bargulus Illyricus, and threatened to stay your
Majesty from Ebrew manifestation of our glorious Gospel. For these parts I
accuse him to your Highness, upon this Commandment, 1. Cor. 16. If any love
not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maran Atha. I hope your Highness
that has placed him high, will not suffer a Babylonian Lucifer to lift him
self above God and your State. And for his endeavor to hinder the Jews
salvation, your Highness will take heed, that you hazard not your Family by
Gods anger, but will tender every work bent to salvation.

Articles of errors allowed by Archb. B. to go with the Bible as good
Divinity.
Article I. The Scripture says, Adam lived ^^0. years and begat Seth.
Bancroftes croft of Bane in the notes fol. 6. Col. 2.
Adam at 230. begat Seth: where Moses omitted 100. years, wherein Adam and Eve
lamented their son Abell so slain.

The manifold croft of Bane.
If Moses omitted any year, he spared a truth: none but giddie headed smithes
would forge years to be more or less, for joy or sorrow: and the holy Angels
that were created the first day: the Devils that fell presently after Adam was
proclaimed ruler of the world, they that kept their joy, and they that fell
into eternal sorrow, were not an hour distant in years, nor from Adam but
five days and a night. Now it is Atheism to say that Moses lied.

Therefore Bancroft allows an Athean note, and must hear the blame.
Abell died as in Christ's place, and his parents were both Prophets, and
were not comfortles as the profane, and would teach their other children, whom
they had many before Seth, to look unto the redemption of Christ, and to
rejoice in his days.

So D. Bancroft by his note should be much deceaved, and a slender D.
The error of 100. years difference came from mistaking the (...) II.
Translatours: who dallying with skoffing heathen, altered the Ebrew. Genesis 5.
and xi. to 1000. years difference and many hundred.

That alteration I handled in a Treatise of Melchisedeke: which some about your
Grace will show your Highness. Now the allowance of an Atheism after
discovery, should tell Archb. Bancroft, that there is but a step betwixt him
and eternal destruction: where the bare title of Grace will be no defense for
him.

Of an Atheism allowed by Rich. Bancroft, buring Moses 40. years before he
received the Law.
These words unlearned Bancroft allows as well translated from the Ebrew,
Exodus 12.40.

The dwelling of the children of Israel while they dwelt in Egypt, was 430.
years, Moses Hebrew has infinite wisdom to dally with foolish Heathen, by
equivocation, that they should not scoff how 215. in Chanaan, bred Abraham for
Egypt but 70. souls, and 215. in Egypt bred to go for Chanaan six hundred
thousand warriers, that heathen should not mock Moses, used words that one
unlearned as Bancroft, might turn to dwelling of 430. years.

Thus stands the truth.
The peregrination of the children of Israel: When they had ended their
staying in Egypt, was 430. years. so the LXXII. so Thalmud Ierusalemy show
that since Abraham left his country, Genesis 1.2. and since he received the
promise Gal. 3.17. Saint Paul shows the times account: yet Bancroft a D.
(...), would cross Saint Paul, Ierusalemy, and the Lxx. to bury Moses before
the Law. Proof.

Cohath came with Jacob into Egypt, Genesis 46. Lived 133. years, Exodus 6. all
133.390. Amram. 137. Exodus 6. all 137.390. Moses 120. Deuteronomy. 33. all 120.390.
So by Bancroftes Grammar and Arithmetique two courtiers that would persuade
now twenty years ago, that the Bible was a forged work, had probability,
and wann many to Atheism. When my Concent came forth, them selves yielded:
But the unlearned and ungrateful D. had rather conspire to the libell, mocking
Archb. Wh. and L. Winton, then learn the truth in whole 20. years.

Article II.
AN Atheism denying that Iehu ever conquered Chanaan, or that David ever was.

The space since Israel left Egypt unto the building of Salomons Temple, is
480. 1 King. 6.1. against this by D. Bancroftes allowed divinity, for his
graces graceles skill in translating, Saint Paul's most wise Greek, is, God
gave Judges about the space of 450. years, Act. 13. Therefore about 30. of the
wilderness, will make with the Judges times, the 480. And about the last ten
of Moses, and all Iosuahs, and David's not borne till ten after Ellis death,
shall have no time in the world. Bancroft his Doctorship for learning, his
grace, for divinity, sho^^d be taken from him, for such Athean divinity.

Article III.
He denies the New Testament, in feigning that it should disagree with the
Old.

Article IV.
SAint Paul spoke with infinite admiration, to make all the world admire the
new Testament, as I showed in my advertisement, and in a Disputation in the
Martialcie against the Rhemistes, who translated the new Testament from the
Latin, saying that the Greek was corrupted.

Bancroftes unthankfulness.
Bar. Lo. in his Libell against the Scottish mist and British Nation, forged
with a Giddie headed slander, a most senseles lie, that I disputed in defense
of the Lxx. which none ever defended to be well copied, yet Bancroft conspired
with the unlearned, ungrateful, shameless Libeller, to allow the traitorous
Athean work, of a most impudent slaunderer, foming out his own shame, as the
raging waves of the sea, preparing him self a lodging in gloomie darkness.

Article V.
A fayning that Baasa King of Israel fought against Asa ten years after he
was dead.
IN the third year of Asa, Baasa began his reign of 24. years, 1. King.
15.33. Now he must die in the 26. of Asa, by this true scripture.

Bancroft his croft of bane by barbarous rudenes, that knew not Malc^th to
mean there a kingdom not reign, 1. Chron. 16.1.
Thus goes Bancrofts allowed learning in the 36. year of Asa, came Baasa King
of Israel against Judah, 2. Chron. 10.1. It was the 36. since the kingdom of
Asa was divided from Israel: twenty years before Asa reigned, as my Concent
noted with an evident title, Judah or Asaes Kingdom D. Bancroft was rude that
knew not the general name.

Sequel.
So Baasa came ten years dead to fight by Bancroftes allowed divinity, by as
good Machmad the foul spirit may be hoped to return to his deceaved Knights.
It is strange that a D. and bearing G. in title, should after warning, suffer
such stuff to be sold under the name of the Bible.

Article VI.
Far greater Atheismes are allowed by the learned D. and most Reverend F.
about Ochozias son to King Ioram.
IOram was thirty and two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
eight years in Jerusalem: so he died aged 40. years. And Ochozias his son
reigned in his stead: two and twenty years old was Ochozias when he began to
reign, and he reigned one year in Jerusalem, and his mothers name was
Athalia, the grand daughter of Omry. so when he reigned he fell into the year
42. of Omries house, rooted out by Iehu, And perished. Ben of that 42. years,
falling into their Lot, as oftentimes means Gods judgment showed in time to
be termed, Time. Apoc. 11.12.

How Bancroftes unskillfulness for Ben, usual for any Lot: taking it for age:
allows Ochozias to be elder then his father by two years: and twenty years
elder then him self.
Bancroft allows this translation as having Gods authority from the Ebrew.
forty and two years old was Achozias, when he began to reign, 2. Chro.
22.2. Now his Father died at 40. 2. Chro. 20.20. and 2. King. 8.17. and he
reigned at 22. 2. Kin. 8. 26. and reigned but one year, for he was killed: so by
D. Bancroft his divinity, he was two years elder then his father, and twenty
elder then himself: and reigned, when he had been dead twenty years. M.
Iacks told D. still at Hadley of this above 22. years ago.

Another allowance of as Giddiheaded a Smitherie, in the margent note, upon 2.
Chro. 22.2. It is to be noted that he reigned 20. years with his father yet
living.
His Father reigned but eight years in all: so by Bancrofts Arithmetique, he
should reign twelve years before his father. Besides this nothing helps to
show how he is not two years elder then his Father. All this the book of
Concent opened of old: but hogs care not for pearls: Grunting in a reuting
libell will be their grace.

Of a most wicked note allowed by D. Bancroft, to the overthrow of the Gospel:
the note is prefixed to Saint Mathewes Gospel. Thus it stands.
The posterity of Sollomon left in Ochozias: whereby the kingdom was
transported to the line of Ioas son to Judah.

The bane of this banned croft.
Jews swear that Bancroft and all that would teach against their native
judgment for the story of the Kings, that Ioas was not the son of Ochozias,
and all to Iechonias, were of Solomon, such were shameless Atheistes, and no
Grecian ever denied that. And all ages have allowed Josephus in this, that
Salomons house held on to Iechonias. The Giddiheadines of this forged smithery,
is so more contemptuous of God in that Ioas is six times termed the son to
Ochozias in as plain tokens of property, as ever any was called son to his
father. A D. of grace should not allow the Kings story to be so contemned.
And twenty years ago I wrote in my Concent enough to have taught any man of
grace the truth of this poinct. But D. Bancroftes libeller against Archb.
Whitg. and Bishop Wintons Syllogism (for the Creed to mean a going up to
Paradise in the Godly) thought that book to be atorme^t for his unlearned
soul: and Bancroft allowed the Lunatique libell against the British nation,
from the slyme of a Fishemongers spawne, that God reserved him to a most just
reproof, for most detestable dotage, not so much from old years, as from
old contempt of truth. God does nothing but he tells his servantes the
Prophets: as when he meant to end Salomons house in Iechonias, he swear to
Jeremy it should so fall out: and bad him proclaim it to all the earth. But
he told no ending in Ochozia, but clean contrary six times a continuance.
There a D. of any grace besides his title, should not allow such graceless
Divinity, to the overthrow of Saint Matthew and Jeremy in the Kings story,
and Ezra for the Chronicles and of Saint Luke as giving wicked Ioas a name
never given him* without any token of being otherwise called: But I have
written sufficiently of this in the treatise of our L. Family, whereof I have
sent 250. copies to Archbish. Bancroft, with 50. commentaries upon the
Lamentations, to bestow on what Preachers he will: at his own price.

Article VII.
Of his breeding the Gospel high contempt, touching Governors.
In the table of David's house touched before, this also is allowed.

RHesa governed 66. years. Iohanna. fifty years, and others in their
portions. No Jew ever heard that any of these governed one hour. So should
these set before the Gospel, make Jews think the Gospel is not true: Now
that Jews desire to be taught, such trappes should be remooved, and not
allowed by a D. of Grace.

Article VIII.
Of a Iudaisme invented by wicked Jews to overthrow the Gospel, and confusion
of the Kings story.
Thus the Jews reason: The true Redeemer of the world redeemeth in a Iubilae:
that they gather most learnedly from Levit. 25. as in Zohar upon that place:
and Rimchi affirms it upon Ezekiel. 4. where he would have the 25. year of his
captivity, and 14. after the city was stricken to be the Jubilee: and to
contain a vision of Messiah that should redeem in a Iubilee. The latter is
true:

That Messiah redeemed in a Iubilee: but the (...) of Ezekiels vision was but
the xxv. toward a Iubilee, and 25. years before was the xvii. Iubilee: and the
Pascha of Josias the middle of a Iubilee xxv. years in it, yet our notes upon
Ezekiel. 1. make Kimchi true, that Josias Pascha was in a Iubilee: so it were
impossible to show from any sensible beginning f^^ the first Iubilee, parted by
fifties should fall out with our Lords death. D. Bancroft was herein so simple
allowing this note as when he allowed Master Livelies Iudaismes in more high
extremity, then Aben Ezra would wish, or any.

How the Jubilees end with our redemption, openly showed in my Concent.
The Land was parted the VII. year of entering into it the next year they were
to reckon seven times seven years that is 49. years, and the fifty should
be a Iubilee year, an^ by the Chronicle the xxviii. Iubilee 1400. years
falls out just with our Lords death, in a wonderful pleasant distinction, as
I have often showed. It cost me infinite pains to find out the Jubilees
agreement with the Chronicle to fall by most noble stories, upon the redemption
(...) AD. of learning and grace, should not allow bane so maliciously invented
Iudaisme to disturb both Testamentes.

Master Andrew Melvin expounded my book in Scotland: D. Bancroft could allow
it with the Scottish mist, al villainy of scoffing from his and the libellers
carriage. your Grace may require him to answer quietly to all this: and
afterward I will charge him with Tobias Athean fable, and Syrasides the
breeder of Arius, Master Livelies disturbance of all the Bible: and heathen
truth for times. And your G. may Bishop D. Bancroft, catechizing him to allow
no more such croftes of bane: but to look when his soul shall ascend to
Haides, to Gods throne: to find Gehemather for raving against truth, and
allowing leasing: whom in time your Grace shall be hold from Abraham's bosom
in Haides. Amen.

Article IX.
Of fifteen score idle words in fifteen verses, and not only idle but
perverting the sense.
D. Farar a Jew thus disputed against our Gospel: If the Gospel show not how
Christ comes of David, it is all in vain. For that is the maine.

But Matthew and Luke both handle Joseph's house, and Joseph was not Father to
Jesus: and other Evangelistes pass over the matter: Therefore your Gospel is
in vain. He fled to our common translation, which D. Bancroft allows.

I answered in this manner: The Greek is plain. Jesus was filius Iosephi, as
men thought, filius Elii, and filius Dei. and all there, from Elii have
relation to Jesus, as Fathers after the flesh, to him who in the spirit the
holiness is God, to be blessed for ever: and the relation is not to there next
natural son. Whereby our uncircumspect translation helps the Athean
vilanie of Iudaisme, obscuring the honor of these 75. just men, as
Thalmudiques speak of just, higher then the Angels created to serve them. And
the words be idle, which was the son: these four words seaventie-five
times, are idle, that is three hundred times: and obscure and make tedious a
most heavenly matter: where Jesus is most plainly showed to be the son of
David, and he not Adam the son of God.

Article X.
I Sent to the learned and grateful Doctor these three books bound together,
Our Lords Family, honoring the K. Coheleth, and Lamentations, given to P. H.
and I thought he had so much wit as to give sage thanks, as they that be
made Lords without giving money to friends, to come by their title: but I was
far deceaved. He raved and said, the Kings Knight was a lying flatterer. And
that the K. gave no promise, that he might give the lie to the K. too, and
threatened that he would stay the King.

But if I can prove he chirpeth one syllable to hinder the opening of our
glorious Gospel to the Jews, and driving off all Christians to their desired
consent of agreement for story: as Papists, Lutherans, Genvaees sage
Preachers, and our BB. all but two silver Speared, wish: Franckfurt Mart
shall bear me witness I will give in Ebrew and Greek to D. Bancroft that
knows neither, the good Doctor, the Anathema. Maran, Atha, that as wicked
Ioakim was buried like an Ass for burning the infinite pleasant witty sixfold
Alphabeted Lamentations of Jeremy, which matter I touched above. So that
Richard Bancroft may be with all Christians wish, an other Vladislaus for
toying with the glorious Gospel of our salvation. If Heathen could see
Salmoneus tormented in tartarus of Haides, for counterfaiting Jupiters
thunderboltes, and the flames of heavens: all Christians will heartily wish
that Worms and Vermins badd do die quickly as a Moth, that will be thundering
and lightning against Christ, who by gentleness allureth the vnrepenting heart
unto amendment. But I hope all will be well.

Article XI.
SAint Luke again is most unlearnedly injured, in wresting his most witty
speech into most gross leasing. This translation the unlearned D. allows to
be read for Gods word, Act. 7.8.15. and 16. And Jacob descended into Egypt and
died: he and our Fathers, and were carried over to Sychem: and were laid in
the Sepulcher that Abraham bought for money, of the sons of Emor, the son
of Sychem. Here a Doctor should see error: Jacob was not carried to Sychem.
Abraham bought no burial there: the burial there was not bought for money,
but for sheep.

And our margent expressly damneth the text: saying, Here appears an error.
That is true. But in the Bishops translaslation not in Saint Lukes work. So
where Saint Luke has Haides for Abraham's Lodge, and katelthein eleven times
for passages, without regard of inferioritie, they who rave against the true
meaning of the Greek, upon their own barbarous translation, being for the
original as black to white, rave from their own weak heads against God the
Author of witty speeches. S. Stephen had, as the Angels face, so a Prophets
tongue. Doctor Bancroft should not allow corruption for their heavenly speech.
Care herein would make an Archb. soonest find Grace, to make sound his title.
If it please you that some of your Gentlemen Catechize or Bishop D. Bancrofte
in these poinctes, he shall be far more worthy the title of a D. and G. then
he is continuing in these errors.

Article XII.
THis argument Jews of old used against us and the Turks still, as Arias
Montanus notes against Erostratus, and the Pope against Zuitserland: by D.
Pistorius 1598. and Rabbi Farrar, yet urges the same at Amstelredam. A
Testament corrupt in part loses authority for the whole: That will I
grant: and I taught D. Pistorius that I safely might.

The Assumption.
Arias Montanus makes a great work of the double Ebrew readings in 848.
places, that the margent checketh the text as corrupt in Babylon: and for
Geneveans, Rob. Stepha. praefac. ad Nov. Test. says, they were notes of
differing copies, and Edward Lively checketh the Bishops for translating the
text, Daniell ninth, as checked by the margent: and wise D. Banecroft conspired
to commend him, for checking the Bishopps deserving best, and he allows
against the Bishopps, the corrupt Geneva, Josias begat Iacim, Iacim begat
Iechonias: where the Bishops have, Josias begat Iechonias.

Conclusion.
Therefore he betrayeth the Gospel to Jew, Turk and Pope.

A^sw^^e.
D. Bancroft seeing he would aspire by wisdom to be guilty of all errors,
committed in his charge, shall be left now: as the Bishops with Master
Lively for Dan. 9. and with the Geneva for Michals children, 2. Sam. And again
Math. 1. for adding Iacim full badly: whom the Bishopps sagely omitted. Now I
will defend them for Iakim rejected: and that by the reasons following.

Reasons why the copyes must be holden corrupt that have Iacim, Math. 1.
1. None who know the Ebrew to be Iehoiakim, would soon believe, being
learned, that the one half, the latter half should be the Apostles Greek:
that ^ should be swallowed up. So Jews would say, that Levy was a Publican not
a Grammarian, and the honorer of the Gospel must be a singular Grammarian.
Where though vnebrewed Greeks in Eusebius bring Iacim, the Lxx. still have
Iehoiakim. This argues that Beza and the Geneveans had little Ebrew, as their
Ebrew Professor bragged: that he would sell the great Bomberg for fourteen
French crowns (sold for 33. at Leidon) because they little esteemed Ebrew,
because Mercerus was deceaved by them.

2. Saint Matthew had three sorts of men to speak off:

Fourteen all Fathers to our Lord (...) earthly kingdom.

Fourteen of idolatrous house: and none without blemishe.

Fourteen of another house of Natha^, poor in this world: but Kings of an
eternal kingdom, Dan. 7.

Now if Ioakim were in the second company, then it had fifteen: and wicked
Iechonias must sit at table with the most holy: and the Virgin Marie must be
cast out: without consideration of whom Jesus could not be known Joseph's son,
for the right of the kingdom. Therefore the Geneveans little knew Saint
Mathewes purpose: As. Calvin and Beza missed as the Jews concerning the
Romans: falsely holden the fourth Kingdom.

3. Ioiakim King of Judah, was so hateful, as destroyer of all, Temple, City,
Kingdom, that after the return the Jews enacted that in their Thalmudiques
they should either name Zedekias to be King in his steed: as in the Misna or
Babylonian Thalmud: where the Comment notes that Zedechias reigned not before
his brothers son, and his brothers death: but for hatred to Ioakim his Name
was lothed: Solom. Iarchi handles the same.

4. In Ierusalemy and the Babylonian when they dispute what men of Israel may
be determined to have perished for ever, many be named, as Jeroboam, Achab,
Iechesai, Manasses, Ioakim: But some hoped of all saving Ioakim: all damned him
as sure of destruction. And although Jesus the high Sacrificer honored the
name, calling his son Ioakim, yet that prospered not: for Eliasib his son
joined with Sanballat, Nehem. 13. to make a chamber for him about the Temple,
that in Zacharies vision Jesus had unclean apparel, for his sons faults:
and none amongst all the other returned, are called Ioakim, Nor any among all
the Jews named in the New Test. Whereby it appears that the communaltie
hated the name: and scoffed it in the Fable Susannas.

5. I showed one Rabbi Elias at Basil, how learnedly Saint Matthew discarded
wicked Ioakim: not as a Publican but as a Thalmudique: and how Saint Luke
brought Cainan son to Arphaxad as the Lxx. and 75. souls, Act. 7. for 70. And
S. Paul brought years 450. after a sort. for 339. as Thalmudique and Josephus:
and how John placed the xii. stones Lawlier like by the Tribes desert, Apoc.
21. Then he admired Saint Matthew and the rest, and requested me to handle
their Gospel in such Ebrew as I spoke, and said I should turn all their
nation. And now the Jews of Hanaw have chosen that very Rabbi to deal with
me: that if I persuade him, they will all be Christians. I told I wished they
knew our grounds first, and saw Christ through all the Law. It had been a
great glory to the West, that our Archb. and Bishops, could in Ebrew show
Jews, that we have Bishops in their sense, as our Apostle requires. So, I
would yield as I have done, twelve years, the Place and Pay unto them for
opening the Bible in Ebrew. Their zeal at the least should be ready* and will
to glory of Christ, the morning starr, Psa. 22. as Kimchi does expound it: an
enemy to Christ, yet serving Christ, for Apoc. 2. and 21. Their zeal should
be ready, that we should not be as Babylonian Lucifer: in opinion a light
giver, in truth darkness of confusion. I do not know how they can look to be
saved careless to show Jews the great salvation first spoken by the Lord
himself, and left by the Apostles for all holy to declare. The like occasion
was never offered us to celebrate the glory of our Gospel, to show how fair it
passes the Thalmudicq. in their own kind, and has no speech heard, but in
their vein all is spoken: though they could never believe how God was in
Christ. The faithles Jews Apocrypha never meddle with Christ: and Jews hold
us to be estranged from God, by thinking fables to be sadd matter. For that let
Iochim be marked in the fable of Susanna, to the purpose of discerning text.

The fable of Susanna.
6. The fable of Susanna, contains in a play the canon against Ioakim* any
skillful in Iudaiques would soon see the jest: that Daniell should be but
twelve years old in Babylon, for 90 at Cyrus reign: that captives should have
courts for life and death: and stately houses: and great riches without known
desert, and Judges to loose their wits in seeing of a Diana: to conspire her
death, with a Lucian story: these might teach all whom to much want of
learning with conceit of some wit, makes not madd with Festus, that the
speech is a Iudaique dalliance to trappe an ass, like the Athean fable of
Toby: that dares give Angels names, and feign a story which the Thalmudiques
never heard, nor the Prophets of latter times.

And the Fable is of purpose a fable, as much as any part of Ovid or Lucian: So
Susanna in this tenor.

The Jews holy People are called Shusan of Solomon, Cant 2 when they were a
Lilly among thorns in Babylon, and the Persian city Susan, named of Lillies
plentiful in their fields, bare swaye, then they might play upon their hope,
and turn their Tragedy into a Comoedie.

Now in the Lame^tations, God is to Judah Helki, my portion: So Judah was
daughter to Helkiah: Ioakim the King was man to the common weal, and Husband
to Susannas, and aucthour of the carriadge to Babell, the Caldeans were the
Judges that desired to stayne the Religion of the Church: But Daniell in high
place, was a defense: so that he told Chapter 5. that the K. should be killed: and
then Darius reigned, Astyages in the fable. This fable might have taught the
Geneveans to have hated Ioakim, as they well hate the Apocripha, whereof not one
syllable speaks of Christ, though Galatinus would wrest a word of foolish
Barue that way: That God would be seen on earth: to bring a spiders web for
the incarnation.

7. Robert Stephen, had sixteen several old Greek copies: of them fifteen
had not Ioakim, only one had it. Now what judgment would bring one against
fifteen, without rare strong argument?

8. Translatours take the greatest care to follow true copies: and they that
will translate, unable to judge of copies, are unadvised.

But the translation Syriaque, Arabiques, Diverse, the old Latin, the
Ethiopian, whether truly old, or forged at Rome, the Persian these heard not of
Iacim:
Therefore Beza did not well to fill Europe now fifty years with Millions of
Testament copies, which God never allowed.

Beza lately called back his error, in his notes, and in some Greek and
Latin: So he convicteth all of wicked blindness that followed him to corrupt
millions of Bibles over Europe. Now while the world stands, all will not cast
off the wicked error. Our Archb. and Printers should begin, and give warning
of Genevean deceit. Franciscus Lucas, a very learned Papist, whippeth Beza for
choosing one corrupt copy against fifteen good, he takes no notice of his
revocation. And one man should not trust his own wit against millions not his
inferiors, to alter Gods word. And the French printed at Geneva, and again at
Rochel, follows the corrupt copy, to deny still our maine hold.

That the Scripture is this maine hold sure in text: These harms would have
stirred an Archbishopp of learning, to have looked to his duty, and not to
conspire to a Libell against all Christianity, and civil honesty, and common
wit, that the Jews Epistle was forged. When he can answer to these blames,
he shall be the Archbishop, and all Grace shall dye with him, And the small book
of Scriptures Concent shall abide skoffes.

Of our Lords time to ordeyne the Supper: gross errors allowed by D.
Bancroft, after sufficient advertisement.
THe Pascha was to be killed the fourteenth day of Nisan in the Temple, the
place that God would choose. And it was death not to observe the day and place,
but by the exceptions contained in the Law: Both the Pascha of hocke-beast,
Lamb, or kidde which stood upon express commandment, Exodus 12. and Pascha of
Ox and Ram, Deuteronomy. 16. which was a permissio^. The whole story is in 2. Chr.
in Josias, these were killed both in one day. The Lamb was eaten al at one
meal, or the remnant was burnt: the other might continewe for two days as the
peace-offring, but not unto the second morning: and for that, they that kept
it, kept the whole day festine with their brave apparel, and good cheer, as
Thalmud Ierusalemy in Pasach notes. That is noted of S. John 18. The ignorance
of Rabbines for that Pascha, made some feign that our Lord prevented the Jews
a day: that zeal wa^ted knowledge: For so he had not eaten the Lamb killed in
the Temple, and so he had broken the Law: But he saw his Lamb killed in the
Temple, and his own sad case, the Lamb flead, as him self crucified naked:
the Lambs blood poured on the Altar, as his own blood on the altar of the
Cross, the Lamb made a sacrifice, as him self a sacrifice: the Lamb ending
sacrifice, as his death then ending all sacrifice.

Now Bezaes note followed of us, would make our Gospel wicked, as teaching
that our Lord kept not the Law. Saint Mark taught the truth plainly: That
the day on which they sacrifized the Lamb, the Disciples asked where he would
they prepared.

May money in C^rbaan Pascha shows that the Lamb was carried from the Temple
to the private houses: when the fatt was brent in the fire, and the blood by
sacrificers brought in golden cups, from the first by the rest unto him that
stood at the Altars foot. Now the Altars foot had spoutes, and the sacrifices
blood was reserved for use of Gardens.

The Gospel needed not to handle this which all the Nation knew: and reason
would tell that so much blood must have an end. The Libeller that skoffed
Rabbique studies, and D Bancroft the allower, show to al Learned, that they
come short 40. years studies of fit learning to see how the Apostles alike
speak plainly to the Jews known affairs: and when they profanely skoffe
openers of Gods truth, The Anathenian Maran Atha must be noted to be near
them.

Of the time of our Lords ending sacrifice.
This saving action was told by the Angel Gabriell exactly 490. years before
the performance, as the holy Athanasius noted. The notes upon the Bishopps used
Bible end the 490. years at the coming of Christ. Another Table prefixed to
Esdras, ends rightly the 490. years at our Lords death: But by old Greeks,
deceavers and deceaved, begins not from the Angels speech as truth
requires: But long after, to make all of Messiah a lie.

Of the name CHRIST, Dan. 9 denied by Master Lively, Bancroft^s allowed, to
signify our Redeemer.
I showed in my Advertsement, how haynouslie Master Lively offended in denying
the term Messiah, Dan. 9. to be our Lord. Now I may be shorter. First of all
let Students mark this, The learned in Ebrew, that Messiah never comes in
Ebrew, as John 1. and 4. but only in Dan. chapter the ninth, in all other
places it is, anointed. And in Daniel our Bishops very fagely and most soundly
translate, both places Messiah: and the saying of his redemption in perfection
of Ebrew skill: Messiah shall be slain, and not for him self: Saint Paul
makes that the sum of his doctrine: how he taught nothing but that which
Moses and the Propetes taught, that Christ was to suffer, and being the first
from the dead should show light unto the world. So S. Paul translated in Act.
Iicareth, to suffer, as in other places often, and Saint 1. Peter 3. Master
Lively trrnslated partly against his purpose, partly against Ebrew. and
atheanly, against all wit, Messiah shall have no being. He takes Messiah
collectivelie for the governor. None ever took Messiah so. Now to say, that
Messiah should have no being. D. Bancroft will grant that to be Epicurean
denial of souls immortality. Now it is a wonder how Bancroft should so
disgrace all our Bishops christianity celebrated from the Angels words,
through the new Testament, and allow Master Lively in most unlearned, foolish
and senseles Iudaisme Whereas our Bishopps so soundly handled the matter, that
the sharpest enemy of Jews yields unto the^. His words I have printed in
many thousand copies: and I wish all Jews over the world, and all Christians
had them, they be the band of all the holy Chronicle, and confirm our old
Athanasius, and our Bishops best notes. Mark well.

Of Aben Ezra the Jew, most envious, more Christian then our D.D.D.
Aben Ezra Commenter upon Daniell in the I Will Rhodes, above five hundred years
ago, a great Astronomer, and regarding Greek Records of Eclipses, as the
fables and prating of our Apocrypha: thus he writes upon Dan. 9. The 490.
years reach from Daniells prayer to sealing of Messiah the holiness of all
holiness. I cited to Master Livelies hand Aben Ezra, Christ his enemy, for
Christ: He and Barrabas and Ananias, should not admit the enemy against
Christ: that may be heavily blamed: that the enemy speaking for Christ, the
best: should be reiectected, and cited in Athean malice.

Of Olympiades.
Games in Graecia kept in Olympia every fifth year, held full sower years.
Many kind of games they had: and some writers reckoned now from one, now from
another, so does Thucidides: as Yorkesheire from the horses of Gaterley race:
and before Alexander son to Olympias, they regarded them as we would dates
from horse races. Afterward Greek^ Histories for the Macedonians honor in
Asia conspired to cast Alexanders war, to Olympiade an hundred and eleven.
But at Babells no certainly had they. For men then alive saw Olympiad. 6. or
25. or 55. or 80. The old Greeks in Clement strom. 1. differ vnspeakeablie
from allowance of those trifles that Lively cites as a child, to check the
Angel of God: and to seigne that Ezra son to Saraias lived two hundred and
four score years: as I charged Bancroft. He that professed Greek, from 18.
and read and practiced it to high old age, will teach Bancroft that Lively
might have seen Olympiades cast Cyrus surprising of Babell to Olympiad 80. as
Beroaldus casts them: and Cyrus brought 100. years nearer our Lord: as Ezraes
lives teach, then Bancroftes barbarous Greekeship dreameth: And so Bancrofte
shall be convicted to have more errors in head then titles in Lambeth: as Archb.
Wh. was told he should if he disturbed the Angels limits: which speech set
Livelie on work hoping for reward. But as he complained Archb. Wh showed him
no countenance. These Olympiades might have wised, by Master Joseph Scaliger,
the years from Cyrus taking of Babell three years before his death in 27. of
his reign, unto the Consulship of Brutus were but 16. for by his count of
Olympiades Ca^byses reigned Olympiad 65. and, year the first Brutus 68 year,
the first. Now if I prove, that Brutus was Consul Olympiad 85. the first
year then Cyrus took Babylon in the 80. Seeing 17. before Brutus Consulship so
that our Lord suffering in the 202. should, as his holy Angels told, be
seven seaventies, after the seaventie of Babell: And thus I make my syllogism.

If Brutus Consulship fell to Olympiad 85. and to 16. or 17. yea^es after Cyrus
took Babell, Cyrus took Babell at Olympiad 80. and but seaventie seavens
before our Lords death.

But a most highly commended old work in Greek and Latin titled, Fastis
Siculis, found in a Library of Sicilie printed by Comelin at Heydelberge,
brings Brutus to Olympiad 85. the first year, and so Consuls 70. less then
Onuphrius of late gathered from marbles: and that 70. is the difference of
Master Scaliger from Beroald.

So by Olympiad and by Consuls, Beroald overcommeth the Grand Scaliger, much
more Caiphas, with Barabas. And so all Churches, Albion in our Geneua: France
in in Genebrard: Portugals in Hector Pintius: Heydelbergh in Tremelius: Zurich
in Wolphius: the millions of the companies shall be judged to follow God and
his Angel: as the captivity prophets, teach infinitlie, and all the new
Testament. And Barabbas and Caiphas, allowing Master Ed. Lively, will be found
as unlearned and as brassen faced wightes, as ever were stricken with Anathema
Maran Atha. I showed more search of Greeks for Daniel, then all that ever were
before me, for the common clearing of the Gospel: and the builders of Jericho,
the profane contemners of truth, the railers against their own good, shall
feel they buy eternal flames, denying our Lords death to be in time according
to the prophecy, as they denied his coming into the world, to be in due estate
of time, when the double Macedonians were argued to fall: and denied his
passage from the cross to the Father, against the Gospel and the Greek sum
of faith: honoring Hell with their Athean Lies, that they, in the course they
hold, may be sure to have it their eternal lodging. But all who love the
truth, will hold all the former poinctes aright, to make a pleasant Scripture
Concent.

Of General contempt of all the Bible.
WHereas Rabbi Abraham Ruben stirred up by the Agent, M. Edw. Barton, of godly
memory, sent an Epistle to England, requesting an explication of our Gospel
to his Ebrewes: and against this cause D. Bancroft conspired a libell, that the
Epistle was forged: his blames herein be many and great. Jews would think
him diverslie enemy to Christendom. First, that he envied their honoring of
Christians, as better in Ebrewes then them selves. They say, they did never so
before: and think they shall never do so again. Secondly, that he labored to
hinder the glory of the Gospel: where they heard that one brought all the
Bible into frame, eve^ by Thalmudiques. Thirdly, that he envied Jews
salvation: which doing argues that he never knew God: nor has for him self
any sure hope of life. As the Jews would compass sea and land to make one
proselyts, so they would require equal zeal in us, if we be of God. Besides
Jews all men would hold this dealing bad. The Agent endorced the Jews
Epistle to me, and it came to London and to Croydon, and Bancroft might have
read it, if he could: and should be sure what it contained before he would
conspire to libell that when it was sent to Basil, another was printed in
steed of it. Besides Archb. Wh. sent me word that he would give me allowance
to answer, if I would request that. But I said, I could not defend England.
Which denied the story of salvation for our Lords passage hence to the Father,
through the veil of his flesh into the most holy. Bancroft libelling that I
forged the Epistle, that the people should require no answer, little pleased
God, or any sage men. Moreover, all learned will swear he was unlearned, that
would think any of Christian study in Ebrew and Rhetorique could follow the
Rabbin for style: and perpetuity of speech: with contempt of periodes.
Besides, none would nor could counterfeit the whole matter: over and besides, a
Jew in London translated that into Latin: and D. Bancroft might have enquired
how that differed nothing from that Printed at Basil. Moreover, sagenes would
not soon believe that the University of Basil would allow a thing to be
printed, which might in any sort be thought forged. Jews from Prage received
from a Jew of Basil fields one copye: they write to him, that the Byzantian
Jew was their best Rabbin, and was drawn to favor Christianity by one of
England: and would cause other Jews much disturba^ce. The Jew spoke this to
Sir John Payton and his tutor at Basil: and our Merchants from Thrace report
that the Jew does acknowledge his Epistle Printed as he sent it: and daily
testified to Graecians, that he never hoped to see so much for our Gospel as
he read from one of England. Hence all may see what D Bancroft is: void of
Religion, conscience, judgment and reverence of men: as when he conspired to
execute Barrow and Greenwood for believing as Archb. Wh. and D. Bilson prove
most substantially, that the Greek Creed taught. Such dealing has not lightly
been heard, that men should die for believing as their accusers believed.
Though they were condemned for disturbance of the State, that was pardoned if
they would come to Church. And they pleaded the addition unlawful: to join
with them that believed falsely our Lords soul went to Hell. And well they
might: as Archb. Wh. and D. Bilson agreed with them: yet D. Bancroft still
urges honor for Hell: as telling of his bent thither: even as endeavoring to
hinder clearing of the Gospel for Jews. So he raved at blame of Geneveans,
bragging, as he libelled that, Armiferam Thracen qui regat alter erit, and
raved against opening of our Lords Family, and threatened to stay the K. from
allowance to clear our Gospel to Jews: All these dealings warn that he be
not a Maran Atha. Sharp warninge may save him, if he have any G. besides his
title. This twelve years injuries call for vengeance. When Q. E. sent me word
that I should chose my preferment, and meant a special place: he by learning
prevented that. And that nothing greeved me. But where he brent my books for
these words, as treason: The King of our language: and brent them twice: once
under Q. Eliz. again under K. I. I have merveiled how he is in favor after
such dealing. Also he brent an Epistle to Archb, Wh. which he allowed, for the
true meaning of the Creed: as though that pranke served not satan in high
diligence. Besides, he conspireth to a libell, Blaspheming that our Lord should
say: The Kings of the nations tyrannically rule over them. This blasphemy is
Athean Barbarous. And when I at Basil fought against the Popes Chalenger for
Bancroftes faith, then the thankful Papas or Father (the name is not bad) was
content that a libell should kome against God, against all learning, against
the K. and Bretanes all: Pretending to deal but with one. And in that he
gives me the term Ass, He, or Bar Lo gives the Name. But I hope all that
mark my pen, will bid them take their own term to them selves: And I
humbly require leave to plead with Doctor Bancroft, with as much freedom for
my books to be read, as he had for the Libell, most Athean against God and
man. I might do good teaching Doctor Bancroft how his faith and proceeding
agree with the word of God: though not so much as in opening all the Bible in
Ebrew to all the world: I might do good: but not the most good. But whereas he
threatened he would hinder your Majesty from the most glorious argument, that
can be offered to honor your Kingdom: if he have prevailed that your
Majesty will despise that cause, I humbly request leave to complain of his
proceedinges so, as Francfurt Mart, may quietly try between us. I would
gladly keep Peace with all men, and if your Archb. could be quiet: I could
otherwise have spent my time, and not meddle with your Ecclesiastical men. But
when shalow Scholars cannot be quiet, your Majesty will not be angry at a
pen of Pacification.

FINIS.

