CERTAIN QVESTIONS Concerning 1. Silk, or wool, in the High Priests Ephod. 2.
Idol temples, commonly called Churches* 3. The form of Prayer, commonly called
the Lords prayer. 4. Excommunication, etc.


Handled betvveen Mr Hugh Broughton remaining of late at Amsterdam in the Low
countries.

And Mr Henry Ainsvvorth Teacher of the exiled English Church at Amsterdam
aforesaid.

1. These. 5.21. Try all things: keep that which is good.

1605.

To the Christian reader, grace and peace from Jesus Christ our Lord.
THere came lately to my hands diverse writings, controverting sundry points of
religion. The occasion of writing them, was, the co^tradicting and spreading
abroad as erroneous some doctrine taught by Mr Ainsvvorth one of the Ministers
of the English church at Amsterdam: The exception arising, as it seems, from
Mr Broughton or a book of his lately set out touching corruption in handling of
religion. Now of these writings, there were some, both from the one and the
other that wrote them committed unto me for the delivering of them, and (if I
would) to take a copy. By reason whereof, as also considering that this
controversy concerns diverse points of Religion profitable to be observed;
and both parties (I take it) being willing to have them seen and duly weighed
of any: I have thought it good to publish in print all the writings that
hitherto have passed from one to another, not doubting but it may much further
the truth And bring glory unto God. And now I desire both the Authors to take
this my doing in good part, and thee (good Reader) indifferently to read and
equally to judge of the matters here controverted, as thou shall see the truth
by either of them to be proved unto thee. Farewell.

Thine in Christ, F. B.

Mr Hugh Broughton, in a book of his to the King, lately set out, concerning
corruption in handling of Religion, vvriteth thus: Of Aharons Ephod.
Our translation gives to the Ephod blew silk, purple, and scarlat, and white
twined silk. The Jews universally hold that wool thread bleew and purple and
scarlat, and white linen, and golden plates cut as thread, made the cope: not
the unclean worm: and they will and may well hold us Battes and Moulwates
that cannot see that, for the tongue and ceremony, by their so plentiful and
agreeable vvritings. And of touching a worm, thus they write: Ierusalemy
Thalmud, fol. 65. col. 1.v. antep.
If a worm be in a man's hand, though he wash himself in the waters of Siloam,
or in all the waters that God made, he shall not find absolute cleannes. Now
the worm, unclean, by Ceremony, might not be in Ceremony figuring holiness.
This error our reverend Fathers will amend.

Mr HENRY AINSVVORTH HIS vvriting concerning this question: VVHither the High
sacrificers attire were made of silk or of wool.
THat they were not made of silk, this reason is alleged: Because the worm
(whereof silk comes) was unclean by ceremony, and therefore might not be in
ceremony figuring holiness.

And to prove they were of wool, it is said; That the Jews universally hold,
that wool thread blew and purple and scarlet, and white linen, and golden
plates cut as thread, was the matter whereof those garments were made.

But unto the former it may be ansvvered;

That though it were granted to be worm-wrought silk, yet it need not be counted
unclean because the worm was vnclea^: for unclean creatures whiles they were
alive defiled not a man; but the eating of their flesh, or touching of their
carkesses being dead. Levit. 11.8.11.24, 31.41. Deuteronomy. 14.8. And the Jews used
the service of unclean beasts continually, as of horses, asses, camels etc,
without pollutio^. Now seeing Gods law limiteth their vnclea^nes in these two
points; how may we extend it further?

Again, the Be was by ceremony unclean, Deuteronomy. 14.19. yet the honey which she
gathered and wrought was not unclean, either to touch or to eat.

But if it be granted, that the silk as it is first taken from the worm, is
vnclea^; yet it follows nor, that after it is washed wound and woven by art of
man, that it should continue unclean still: seeing that the hayr of unclean
beasts when it was wrought into cloth had no uncleanness. The camel was unclean,
Deuteronomy. 14.7. yet Ioh. Baptist wore a garment of the hayr. Also the Eliphant, yet
Solomon made a throne of the tooth, 1. king. 10.18. And it is holde^ of the
Jews, (...)
that the bones, teeth, skins, hayr etc. of unclean beasts ar in such use
excepted, and pollute not a man. Why then should the work of the silk-worme be
always unclean?

If the silk which the worm makes be unclean, then the flesh blood and humors
of worms and other like creatures, must needs be holden vnclea^ likewise, and
so the use of them forbidden about the sanctuary as well as the silk. But the
Jews do some of them hold those colors mentioned Exodus 25. to be died in the
blood of worms. as (...) Techeleth, which is translated Blew, they say was
wool died in the blood of a worm called (...) Hhalazon. And it is known that
purple is usually made and named of the liquor of the Plin. lib. 9.^.36.
Purpure and Murex, which are shelfishes, and therefore by the law vnclea^. Deuteronomy.
14.9.10. and scarlet of the grain called Dioscorid.
(...) which is more then any subject to breed worms, and is therefore named
(...) ( skol^kion) and in French Vermillon, of (...) ( skolex) and Vermis a
worm.

But it may be further answered, that it might be silk, though not such as the
worm works, for as al wool grows not on the sheeps back, but some is
gathered from plants, as cotton wool: so is there some kind of silk that
grows, as the Bysse of Ezekiel 27.7.
Aegipt, finer then linen, and silk grass in Persia and other countries. And
if it were such that was used about the tabernacle, then was there not that
impuritie in the stuff which is affirmed.

Unto the later point it may be said,
That the Jews which with so general consent make wolle^ thread died into
those colors, and fine line^, and gold, the matter of those ornaments, seem
herin to go against the plain law of God, which forbad that a man should wear
any garments of diverse sorts, as of linen and woollen together, Deuteronomy. 22.11. and
how is it like that God would then have the High priests garments made of such
mixture. If it be answered, God might dispense with that law: it may be
replied; first let it be showed that God would and did so dispe^se, which
will be hard to show from scripture, which mentions the die and color only,
blew, purple and scarlet, and not the stuff. Secondly as he might dispense for
linsey woolsey, so might he do the like for silk, even of the worm; and then
the translation of silk is no more absurd or erroneous then that of woollen.
Thirdly if we consider, the end of those ornaments, which were Exodus 28.2.
for glory and beauty, and the commandment afterward expressed by Ezekiel,
forbidding the priests to wear wool in their administration, ( Ezekiel. 44.17.) it
may seem probable, the garments were silken, or of such like stuff, rather then
woollen.

Moreover, touching the opinion of the Jews, of pollution by a worm, it
seems rather to savor of the Rabbines superstition, then of sound religion,
and to be without approbatio^ of scripture, of other learned men, or of
themselves. For whereas this positio^ of theirs is alleged out of the Thalmud.
If a worm be in a ma^s hand, though he wash himself in the waters of Siloa^, or
in all the waters that God made, (...)
he shall not find absolute cleannes: First, Gods law makes no other
uncleanness, then by eating the flesh, or touching the dead carkesse* as before
is showed. Again of worms, the Jews them (...) that their R^bbi^^ s^y the
(...) that a^ found in dates etc. are not forbidden (to wit, to be eaten)
because they creep not upon the earth. If this be true (which I affirm not) how
should the worm in a man's hand, which creeps not on the earth any more then the
other, cause so vnclensible pollution, and that by touching only?

As for other learned men* they seem not to discern any such vnclea^nes in the
silk of worms. Tremellius being himself a learned Jew, together with Iunius,
constantly translate (...) (Shesh) Exodus 25. (which we call fine linen) linum
xylinum. And this xylinum* Lib. 19. c.
Pliny (from whom they take it) writes to be sponn of the Bombyx Bomby^
properly is the silkworm, but may be here taken for silk, the efficient cause
for the m^ter.
or of the worm, in the fruit as it grows. Note also that the said Iunius
takes the silk worm to be a clea^ creature, and therefore the ((...))
Solghnam, which we call Solean, and God permitted the Jews to eat, he
translateth bombycem, the silk worm, Levit. 11.22.

Marcus Marinus in Arca Noe, of the word (...) tolaghnath (translated scarlet)
which signifies properly a worm, says, because that of the threeds of the
bombyces which be worms, silk is made, therefore is this name elegantly used for
silk.

Munsterus upon the word (...) techeleth says, that the Jews expound it to be
( sericum) silk.

Vatablus upon Exodus 25. caleth the scarlet sericum coccineum siv^ ^occo
tinctum, scarlet died silk. Of like judgment ar Pelicanus, Lyra, and others.

Arias Montanus In sacr. appar. in* A^ron.
says tha^ (...) tolaghnath is the same that the Ancients call Murex, and that
of the blood of that shelfish, and other things mixed, clothes were died.

Forsterus on (...) techeleth says, men write of it to be a worm whose humor
is of yelow color.

To conclude, it may seem as probable to be but one stuff, even the same (...)
shesh, that is fine white linen (or If with Tremellius we take this (...)
shes^^ to be xylinum, of it was a very white and soft stuff, whereof the priests
of Egypt used to make their garments. Plin. ^. 19. c. 1.
like thing) died into the foresaid colors, as to be linen and woollen, and
more agreeable to the law of God, which forbad linsey wolsey* Or, we may
understand by wool, such stuff as grows upon plants etc. as Pliny caleth
that xylinum aforesaid by the Lib. 19 c. 1
name of lanugo, a fine mossy wool, and the trade which the silk men S^res
used, he calls Lib. 6 c. 17
lanicium, vvoolvvork or cloth making.

Also the hebrew (...) ( tsemer) is a commune name of al wool, even such
Avenariu^ on (...).
as grows on trees.

This for the present, til better assurance of the contrary.

Henr: Ainsworth.

Mr Broughtons Reply.
MR Ainsworth, a tedious writing I saw: and senseles. If you check a thing in
print: wit would bid you do it in print. 3000 years Ebrevves you will teach
Ebrevv: Arias alone might teach you. and you confute your self: Silk you were
said to defend. from that you flee: and babble by-matter from your own head:
and dream of (...) to help your turn: as though all Jews 3000 years should
be overraught by Mr Ainsworth. The text might alone have taught you: in naming
3. colors: without the stuff: and linen: as an other kind. white is our
addition. But Egyptian linen is white of it self: and that addition is more of
our selves then of the style. And wholy you show unspeakable vnlernedship
that guess against 3000 years study of an whole nation for matters used 1400
years openly in their common weal. Your vvriting shall be shevved to many that
many may tell how far you are from all judgment: and how you cross and weary
your self. And when you number the commandments: you should have told whom
you followed: (...) or Maimony. But belike you never saw them: only Munster.
Know now all agree not in the particulars: though they make the same sum. If
you mean to confute my book: put a style promising so much: and follow it
logically: without idle citing of men to by-purposes: and I will print your
words and a reply.

Broughton.

Mr Ainsvvorths Answer. To Mr Broughton, Grace and truth.
IF my writing, Mr Br. seemed so tedious and found so little favor in your eyes,
I marveil not: that which is read with ill will and prejudice, both of cause
and person, is ever ungrateful. Good cause I had to do as I did: for whereas
heretofore when I opened the book of Exodus, and spoke of the stuff of the
curtains, and high priests garments, I showed the Shesh or Bysse to be a thing
they had in Egypt (from whence Israel came) finer then our line^, which we
might call silk or fine linen as our translations go: And finding no cause to
alter the name, I followed still our wonted English* This now of late has been
imputed to me for error, and it was bruited far and near that I had taught
false doctrine, touching this matter of silk. Neither was the reproach upon me
alone (which I could have borne in silence,) but upon all this poor church of
Christ with me. Further when I met you at the printers, and had by occasion
some little speech hereof, it was after reported I had yielded and revoked mine
error. Hereupon I thought it needful (for staying of false tumors) to giv out
that writing. In it, I only sought after the truth, minding what might be both
objected and answered. I found the state of the question to consist of two
branches, 1. That it might not be silk, because that was unclean by ceremony.
2. That it was linen and woollen, because the Jewish Rabbines say so. Of these
points I wrote what I saw, not inveighing against any man's person, though I
was not ignorant from what fountanie those waters flowed. For this writing
you reproach me, who rather should have instructed me with 2 Timothy ^ 25.
meeknes if I had missed. Touching the controversy, notwithstanding that which
you have written, this now I say.

1. That I am still of judgment, it is neither error nor corruption in
religion, to keep the common name of silk: seeing that we in English, name
linen of linum flax, and silk of seri^um; and Egyptian bysse, (for which we
have no proper name) we call both fine linen and silk, and have so been taught
from our infancy in schools and dictionaries; and therefore whither we follow
the old translation white silk, or the later Geneua, fine linen, it skilleth
not. And to conclude because it was silk that it was silk of worms, has no
better ground then their assertion which say the fathers were in Hell, because
they were in Hudes, seeing silk is a general name as well for that which naturally
grows, as for that which the worms make.

2. Moreover* that worm-wrought silk was unclean, or might not be in the
tabernacle, I yet see not, for the reasons alleged: if by the law of God it can
be showed, I am willing to yield.

3. Or that the high priests garments were of linen and woollen (taking these
names properly as we English me^ understand them) I dare not yet assent; until
it be proved God did dispense with his law, as you in speech said he might do,
which we al grant, if he would. And I chose rather to rel^ upon (...)
Linsey-^sey. ^ut. 22. ^.
or any one word of God, then a thousand of men: and hope I have chosen the
better part, which shall not be taken from me.

Length of time, will not prevail against truth, yet that these things were so
holden and used of the Jewish nation 1400. years in their common weal, I will
beleev when I see it proved; and unto any just proof I am* willing to yield,
but by great words will not be moved.

The text you grant, names 3 colors only, not the stuff. So then wool is not
in the text. But linen you say is named as an other kind; and white is an
addition more of our selves then of the style. But that white is a necessary
addition is very probable unto me, seeing that the same word Shesh is the name
also of white Parius or Alabaster, which agrees nothing with Bysse save in
color only; and it is thought they both had the name of white shining
brightness, such as the scripture Rev. 19. ^ith cha. 18. and 6.^.
shows bysse to have.

And in the first place that God specifieth the things to be made hereof, he
commands ten curtains of [(...)] shesh [that is, fine white-linen] twined,
and blew and purple and scarlet. where that one stuff Shesh is first named,
which was naturally white, and three died colors after, which though they be
substa^tives at used for adiectives, as elsewhere ^xo. 26.1. He^t. 1. and 8.15.
whitenes is put for white, and may well be referred to the first named stuff.
Neither herein take I upon me to teach al Ebrewes Ebrew, but do learn of a
learned Ebrevv Tremellius, of whom others (if they will) may learn also. But
about such matters and names of things to us not well known, men vvil always
differ in judgment, neither vvil I contend.

Though I named not Munster, which set forth that Jews book of the
commandments, yet seeing you perceiv I followed him, you might as well have
meddled with the matter, as with such a circumstance.

The answer of your book belongs not to me; with the thing which concerns me,
I deal as is meet, according to my measure. As for printing, you may publish
what you see cause, and so shall I. Show my writing to as many as you will, I
fear no indifferent reader, and others I regard not. Your censure both of it
and me, I shall suffer with patience. This comfort I have in my self, that in
this and al other things I seek after truth and peace, which God grant me to
find.

He that wishes you well Henr: Ainsworth.

Mr Brough. his Reply.
IF you were mistaken for the Equivocation of silk, wit Aharo^s ephod, have the
silk of the worm.

Touching the worms silk, and for uncleanness in Ceremonies, and yet the same
lefull in civil life: as Musk, for which Rambam is taxed in handling Aarons
oinctment* I would advise you rather to read Ebrew treatises, then to hope for
men of leisure to show your vvandringes. Specially being so vnthankfill as you
are* and so far from hope of truth. Your Iudaisme, that condemn all our
Christian churches as godles buildings, has lost al right of disputing. So
your befooling of saying the Lords prayer, according to the express
commandment: and making phrases of words: to mean matter of such effect:
and your exco^municating for Baptizing in the Dutch church: these desperate
Athean parts tell others, that you are not a church but a synagoge of Satan.

The 1400. years experience you would have proved. O wise Chronicler. If you
can prove any one year to have diverse thread in the Ephod: then M. Ainswoorth
shall be the man, and vvisdome shall dye with him. Rabbines since Ezra have
records uniform. Your threatening what you will not beleve, is a ridiculous
confuting. I know you beleve little aright.

Your distinction for (...) the stone, argues a stony understanding who would
think of the marble here.

For the Curtine stuff, Tremellius would not refuse the Rabbines. He knew Moses
spoke short: as being present to open his mind: and the records in a learned
common wealth should still continue. But he that cannot examine Tremellius when
he misseth, or hitteth, should be quick to hear and slow to speak. Rancorous
biting besemeth none but the synagoge of Satan.

In the end you will not contend. Why began you then? How idle are you?

Seeing I had not Munster by me, how senseles are you that think I might hitte
rightly with ease, upon the matter: or soon teach one as you are: or honor a
wicked excommunicatour, and blasphemer of the Christians, and their Church? And
your thankles heart that knows that the best glory of your studies has been a
theft from my books: without mentioning the auctour, should not seek my help.

If you sought truth you had long ago followed a better study. Your own heart
can tell you that in differing copies you cannot tell what the Bible is. And
for Tremel. whom Iunius checketh, thrice, and himself, and would have yet once,
but for prevention by death, you that vvil send others to him, show your
simplicity. The LXX allowed by the Apostles for much as for Ex. 28. are better.
For Greek, tell why Beza 7. times or thereaboutes checketh himself, and then
adventure to dispute. Now your blyndnes bredeth saucy malepertship.

Peace you hate most deadly: that revile our holy buildinges: and befoole all
Christendom for 1500. years. and so for the Lords prayer: and give your self
over to Satan: by wicked excommunication.

Mr Ainsvv. his Answer. To Mr Broughton, Grace and sobriety.
HOw well you have justified either the unjust reproach of me, or your blame of
our English translations, touching the question of Silk; and how soundly you
have prooved linen and woollen to be the matter of Aarons garments, or
worm-wrought silk to be unclean and unlawful; I leav it to the judgment of the
discreet reader that shall see your writings. As for my self, I rely not upon
any man's authority, though I reverence and regard their help as is meet. The
word of God (how short soever it be written) gives sufficient light to the
eyes, and understanding to the simple. By it I learn, that there grew Exo. 9.3.
flax in Aegipt, of which linen properly is made; and that Shesh was an other
stuff, which the nobility of Aegipt Genesis 41.42.
wore in honor; whereupon I gather, it excelled our linen. (...) Techeleth
which with us is blew silk, with you blew woollen, I find was the attire of then
Eze. 23.6.
Princes of Assyria and other nations; and with it and Purple, the hethens Ier.
10.9*
adorned their images of gold: Scarlet also was matched with Ier. 4.30*
golden ornaments, which argues these things to be neither commune nor base,
but rather as the scripture calls them Hest. 8.15*
royal attire. In the Lords Tabernacle I see the broydered curtains to be made
of this Shesh, which was naturally white; and 3. other colors, which reason
will teach were suitable to the same. Now what likelihood there is that the Exodus
26* 6.4.
golden taches should be fastened in loops of blew woollen thread; or the
glorious brestplate, should be tied to the Ephod with Exodus 28.27.28.
golden chains and rings, and with blew wool; or that the ver. 36.37.
pure golden plate with the holy graving upon it, should be fastened to the
miter of Shesh with blew woollen thread rather then with silk, (unless it be
meant the wool of the xylon tree, or some such like silken wool, and so the
strife be but about words,) I refer to be judged of them that read this
controversy.

It is your self that fayl in the Aequivocatio^, though you will not acknowledge
it; for when the translation gives Silk, you conclude it to be of the worm:
and now, to help your self flee to the Copes, as if the Bible had been
translated out of the Popes wardrobe; and the interpretours had not looked to
Moses text, to express it in English, so near as they could, by terms
familiar to our English nation. Neither yet show you by the law of God, the
silk of worms to be unclean, but refer to the reading of the Rabbines for
proof of it and other your assertions.

If it be granted worms silk was lawful in civil use, why may it not with as
good reason be held lawful in ceremony, as linen and woolle^, which in civil
use was Deuteronomy. 2^.11.
unlawful? or why should the worm, more then the purple fish which was unclean
seeing it had not ^^v. (...)
sins and scales, be shut out of the tabernacle? Or why excepted you against
Silk, more then against our Englishing of Tachas the Badger, whose skin covered
the Sanctuary, though the flesh was never Lev. 1. etc
used in sacrifice, neither is it reckned among the clean beasts, (Deuteronomy. 14
4.5.) for civil use, nor will easily be proved to be clean, if it were such as
our Badger, howsoever the Rabbines hold it to be a clean beast, and I vvil not
deny it.

And now that I have seen your proofs, and we ar come to this issue, I vvil
freely confess what is the greatest thing that has moved scruple in me,
concerning this matter of wool. The Apostle Hebr. 9.19. speaking of sprinckling
of the blood of the covenant Exodus 24. mentions scarlet wool and hyssoppe;
which though they be not named in that place of Exodus, yet he might well
gather from the like sprinckling otherwhere, as in Lev. 14.4.6. vvher the
hebrew being only Scarlet, we ar taught by the Apostle to understand in that
place, Scarlet wool, from whence it may be conjectured that all the Scarlet
about the Sanctuary was wool also. But vvithal I have minded, that Scarlet is
general, and may be applied to all stuff so colored, vvhither wool, as in
this place; or other thing, as is like of that scarlet cord, Josh. 2.15.18.21.
and that wool being fittest to sprinkle with, was here used. Again it is
uncertain what wool it was, seeing that beside the wool of the sheep, the
fruit of the Xylon and other Lanigorae, and laniferae a^ bores. Plin l 12. c.
10. and l. 13. c. 14.
wool-bearing trees, as Pliny caleth them, is wool also; and is so named of
Theophra. l. 4. hist. pla^. c. 9. Pliny. Calapinus on Sericu^ and on Gossipiu^
where he caleth it both lana and linum. wool and line^: having himself seen the
thing grow.
Greek and Latin writers, yea ( Sericu^) silk it self is so caled. Now
Tremellius makes al in the Sanctuary Xylinum, and so, in this understanding
the blew purple and scarlet might be wool, and Josephus with other Jews that
call it wool may be defended: and the rather seeing the stuff was died before it
was spoonn as appears Exodus 35.25. And this is all the probability for wool
that I know in the Bible; which yet is far from proving the points before
handled; that such a diverse mixture was in the Priests garments, or that worms
silk was unclean; and much less vvil it condemn the translation of silk in
general.

From the matter of Silk, you turn to other contumely and reproch-charging
this congregation of which I am, to be no church but a synagogue of Satan: and
that for 3. causes. 1 Our condemning al your Christian churches as godles
buildings* this you call our Iudaisme, and say, it has lost al right of
disputing. 2. Secondly, our befooling (as you vvisely speak) of saying the
Lords prayer according to the express commandment, and making phrases of
words to mean matter of such effect. 3. Thirdly, our excommunicating for
baptizing in the Dutch church: and for it, you call me a wicked excommunicator,
and say I have given my self over to Satan.

Unto these points (passing by, for the present, the venim of your tongue) I
answer. We witness against the corrupt and false estate of your English
Cathedral and parish assemblies, 1. as not being a communion of Saints, a
people caled and separated from the world, and brought into covenant with God;
2. as not worshipping him aright in spirit and truth according to his own law,
but after humane inventions; 3. a^ not having the ecclesiastical regiment and
ministry prescribed in Christ's testament, but an other received from the
Roman Antichrist. Of these and many other your particular transgressions
derived from these, we have published our proofs and reasons in the Confession
of our faith, and sundry other treatises: against which, if you have ought to
object, or can any way defend your churches estate, you not only have liberty
but may get your self credit so for to do. How is it then, that you leav these
mayn matters, and meddle with one particular of the Temples; which howsoever
they be evil, yet we thinck your preisthood and service in them set up and
used, are much worse. But if they be too bad for you to defend, and the
Temples, you thinck, will more easily be justified; we are content you shall take
your choice, so as you will add doctrine to your lips, and prove by Gods word
that which you affirm. In this your writing you have neither convinced us of
Iudaisme, nor warranted your Temples by any law of God; only we have your bare
word, caling them Christian churches, and holy buildings, and the old Popish
argument of antiquity and hundreds of years. But for this latter, I leav you to
try your title with the Papists, who challenge (...) supp. to the king* reason
of relig. 6. and 15
your churches, and many other things as being their right, and by them
erected. And for the former, I refer you to the scripture, which condemns the
antichristian worship, for idolatry and Rev. 9.20 2 Chro. 11.15.
worship of divils, and makes Babylon Rev. 18 2
the habitation of divils; and has 1 Cor. 10.20.21.14. 1 Ioh. 5.21
forbidden us al manner communion and fellowship with divils or idols; or
reteyning and using any monuments Exodus ^3* 24. Deuteronomy. 7 25.26. Isa. 30.22.
of their abomination; and draws their Deuteronomy. 12.2.3.
places within this compass as well as their altars and images, and
vvarranteth us not by any law or example of the Prophets or Apostles to use
such idol howses for Gods worship, which are appropriat to the worship of Satan,
and a part of his childre^s devotion. It remains then upon you, to justify
the use of these Massehouses, and to discover our error (if such it be) that
reprove and condemn them.

Touching prayer, we hold it to be a pouring out Ps. 62.8.
of the heart before God, by making requests or giving of thancks according to
the present need and occasion; through the help and working of the Ro^ 8.15.26.
Holy ghost which God has shed into the hearts of al his children. We find that
all the holy men of God, used thus to pray in the spirit, without reading or
saying by rote any number of words, and have plentiful examples hereof in Ge^.
15.2^ 8. and 17.18 and 24.12.27. and 25.21. and 32.9 Exodus 5.27. and 32.11.
Ios. 7.6.7. 2 Sa^. 7.18. and the book of Psalms throughout. 1 king. 8.22.23. 2
Chro^. 14.11. and 20.5.6. Neh. 1 4.5. and 9.5 ^. Dan. 9.3.4. etc.
Abraham Isaak and Israel, Moses and Joshua, David and Solomon with many other
Saints. We find it promised, that at Christ's coming, the spirit should be more
plentifully powered upon the church, even the spirit Zech. 12.10.
of grace and of supplications; which he graciously performed both Mat. 6. Act.
2.
by doctrine and spiritual gifts wherewith he furnished his disciples; who
accordingly Act. 1.24 and 4.2
prayed, not with prescript words, but with such as the spirit gav them to
utter, God Ps. 10 ^^
preparing their heart, and bending his ear. According to these rules and
examples in scripture we offer up our prayers in faith; acknowledging that
form, caled the Lords prayer, to be a most perfect pattern given for our
instruction; and that it is lawful and good to use any of those or other words
of scripture fitly applied to our present purpose. This you profanely call our
befooling of saying the Lords prayer, and like not, as it seems, of such
praying, but would bind us to the saying over of those very words, without
showing any proof by doctrine or example for that you say, save that you
mention only th'expresse commandment. As if we might understand any
commandment contrary to the Analogy of faith, and whole tenor of the
scriptures. It is the true meaning of Gods oracles that must be regarded.
Otherwise we know the Papists, have as express words This is my ^odie. Mat. 26.
in show for their real presence in the Sacrament, and think they have as good
warrant from Luke 1.48. to say the Ave Maria, as you for the Pater noster. But
if you will needs understand and require a pronouncing of those words in
praying, seeing the commandment is general for all times and persons; you must
first cast away your own popish leitourgies where you teach men to say other
words, and by which you check the Lord Jesus and his spirit, taking upon you to
giv laws and forms for prayer, other then his Testament allows. You may as
well reduce preaching to the reading over of the 10. commandments, as praying
to the reading of Our father. And as your prescript leitourgies, so your
conceiving of prayers otherwise, at your sermons and other times, sufficiently
refuteth your own doctrine. You shall do well therefore better to approve of your
own doings, and to convince ours by the word of Christ, before you persuade
people to your custom, and speak evil of the way of truth with such bitterness.

For our excommunication I answer, 1. That my self alone never excommunicated
any, but together with the church whereof I am, in the name and by the power of
Christ, who has Mat. 18.17.18. 1 Cor. 5.4.5.13.
given us this charge and authority to cast out from amongst us al wicked
persons. This have we done to diverse, and God has confirmed it in heaven, and
we have seen it with comfort, in the conversion of many, and hardening of others
that they have grown worse and worse. 2. And where you charge us with
exco^municating for baptising in the Dutch church, we in deed mislike the
faults that are in this Dutch church about baptism, and will not suffer our
members that have joined in covenant with us, to run into those Luke 17.3 ^ev.
19.17.
iniquities, or partake with them, (though we have not hitherto cast out any
for this particular you mention, but for other transgressions that deserv
cutting of, as we by Gods word ar ready to prove.) But if you will take upon you
to defend the corruptions of this Dutch church, in baptizing the children of
them that are of no church, and their other transgressions in their
constitution, government, worship etc. whereof we have admonished their
overseers, and which things ar published in our answer to Mr Iuni^^, and ar
neither amended among them nor approved by him or themselves, we are willing to
hear what you can say, and when you have justified them by Gods word, then may
you justly blame us for condemning them.

But more cause have you to look to your own practice about excommunication
th^n thus to revile us. You gav out the curse 1 Cor. 16.
Maranatha against your right reverend Father in God John Whitgift Archb. of
Cant. and vainly boast that you killed him. Who has committed that censure
unto you, and by what authority proceeded you against him? Ar the keys of the
kingdom of heaven put into your hands alone? and vvil you take unto you papal
power? Unless you can approve of your actions by the law of God, it vvil be
found that your self are the wicked excommunicatour.

You call me a blasphemer of the Christians and their church. I require proof of
your accusation* show in what words or vvriting I have blasphemed any
Christian: if you can not; bethink you what will be the revvard of lying lips.

How vain Iam. ^^.26.
is your religion, that refreyn not your tongue, but let it loose unto such
vituperie and despite? taunting and disdeighning them that never did you evil;
tvviting other learned men that have so well deserved of the church by their
vvritings, exspecting thanks you vvote not for what; and affecting popular
praise. Know you not Iam. 4.6*
that God resists the provvd, and gives grace to the humble? How contrary
are your to Christ, who Ioh. ^.4.
received not praise of men? and how can you beleev aright in him verse. 4 ^
which seek honor of men, and not the honor which comes of God alone? And
for your persecuting of this poor church of Christ, making us the mark for your
Ps. 120.4
sharp arrows, and thincking because we are despised of the world, that you
also may tread us under your feet, be sure the Lord will bring you unto
judgment.

As for me, I never expected honor from you, I know the Pro. 29.27.
upright of way is abomination to the wicked, I account it my honor to bear
evil men's reproach. The best glory of my study, is to know Christ and him
crucified, and to be made partaker of his sufferings that I may reign with
him. And behold in this your reprochful writing, I see how he is crucified
again in his members, vvhipped with the scourge of the tongue, and peirced
with nails and speers, even bitter words: for which I wish you may find
repentance, and mercy with the Lord, otherwise I leav you unto his rebuke, who
vvil reward you according to your works.

Prove. 11.12. (...)

Henr: Ainsworth.

Mr Brough. his Reply. To Mr Ainsworth, consideration of his desperate and
Satanean condemning of all Christians.
ONe Ebrew sentence in your long writing was from God: to make you, as all
heretics, damned of your self. He that despises his Neighbor, wants wit.
You that cannot tell whether the Ebrew characters were all in the two Tables,
as now we have them; nor whether the vowels were aequaevae with the
consonantes; nor how to express the Ebrew soundes: as why Bosor, s, for v, 2.
Pet. should be Balaams father; nor dare determine why Ioakim is left out, Math.
1. as your wisdom is charged: and despise all Christendom, must needs be
counted witles. Your doings show that. I accuse you that you put colored silk
for colored thread; and white silk for linen. You prove that I say true: and
think by much babbling to clok^ your ignorance. And you would be taught of the
worm. If you had a mind you might sone learn that. For the Archb. you say I
did excommunicate him. How, otherwise then citing him to Gods judgment, and my
self. May not any to any do so? I did so 6. years ago: and assured the Readers
that they should see him or me pay the price. So I excommunicate you. And for
your befooling of us for our Temples, sobriety should be more in you then to
require one man to teach you, where all Christian laws would put you to death.
G. Johnson for whom I wrote to the B. of Duresme, that I thought him tractable,
and desired that he might be suffered to come hither, was accused of turning
the subjects from obedience, upon contempt of our churches. And is dead: as one
of New Castle vvrote, returning a letter sent to him. In this case no subject
will dispute, one for all Christians against you, vvheras you are less then a
worm, to all Christendom, what joy can a man have to tread down such: who
presently turn your coat, and join with your adversary. Art would suffer
in you but this: either to confess your blindenes that denied wool to be in
the Ephod; or to resist directly: and not to bring a Satanean doubt. So for
linen: whether you meant silk by it; or, as a dottrell, missed. In two words
this might have been done. You shake your self like a reed; and yield: and
would be taught. Know you not that laws kill you for your disturbance
passed, unless you can persuade your Judges, that is, all Christendom, that
they were Satanean. As I have made you yield in this, for woollen and linen,
so you will turn your coat in every thing. Now Archb. Wh. is the M. R.
Father: confess your error, as he did: sending M. Geffrey K. for Basil, and
you shall find some praise of sobriety more then you have. But although I have
made you yield, you thank me not: but fail as Rabsekeh. Go into the coals
which thou have kindled.

Mr Ainsvv. his Answer.
Psalm. 57.4. My sowl is among lions, I lie among the children of men that are
set on fire, whose teeth ar spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword.


2. These. 3.1, 2.
IF the Apostle Paul had occasion to desire the prayers of the faithful for him
that he might be delivered from unreasonable and evil men; much greater need
have we that witness the gospel in these last days, to desire the same. For so
great is Satan's rage, because his time is now short, as he omitteth no
opportunity or means to beat down the faith and fortress of the church,
which maugre his spite, God will uphold unto the end. How I have been drawn
into this conflict with Mr Broughton, (a man that bends his wit and learning
against this poor afflicted church,) may appear by my former vvritings. In what
manner I have carried my self toward him, though I knevv him to be so great an
enemy, and how he again entreats me, I leav it for them to judge that shall
view the things passed. And now seeing him to have so intemperate a spirit; as
he vvil neither convince me with sobriety, nor admit of just reprehension for
his own overcariage; I purpose no more to direct my style unto him, but
turning to the discreet Reader, vvil show the weakness of his cause, and his
bad dealing against me.

About the question of silk he triumphs as conqueror, and blames me that I
thanck him not; but if he never get greater victory in other battles, it
will be long yer he wax rich with the spoils. Let him that reads consider
what one scripture or reason he has refuted me with, or what answer he
has made to the scriptures and reasons by me alleged. The foundation of his
doctrine for the uncleanness of silk, and for linsey wolsey, is the Rabbines
vvritings only. But he that blames a nation for corruption in religion, should
be ready to approve his blame by the vvritings of the Prophets and Apostles.
Himself has elsvvhere this sentence, Reply upon Tho. winto^. page 5.
He that will do any thing without warrant of scripture shall anger God; that in
this, and the other points following, vvherin he shows no title of
scripture, men may see he condemns himself. Neither know I how we may
trust his Rabbines: I speak not of matters of faith only, but of this and such
like things: for Josephus Antiq. lib. 3. ^. 4.
vvriteth that the ram^ skins were died red and blew and purple etc. when
Moses tells us only of Exo^^. 25 ^. and 26.14 and 36.19.
red. And R. D. Kimchi says On Iud. 20.27.
the names of Abraham Isaak and Jacob were also graven on the stones, when
Gods word mentions only the Exodus 28.9.10.21. and 39.7.14
12. sons of Israel. And their ignorance in some things themselves confess,
as what the R. Dav. in lib. radic.
Vrim and Thummim were is not manifest among them. Men should therefore take
heed how they admit of al their sayings for oracles. What through the grace of
God I saw in the thing from the scriptures, I freely manifested, and would not
concele it, though it should make against me: for I never sought any credit to
my self herein, but the truth. He blames me for not resisting directly; but I
will first discuss the matter, and as I shall find proof, so will I speak. I was
charged with false doctrine for following the translation of silk: It lies on
Mr Br. to prove his charge, which yet he has not done, except reviling proves
it. He would have me say, whither the white were linen or silk. I have told him,
(if he would take it) that I thinck it to be neither of both properly as these
things ar with us; yet that it may be caled either of both. That it may be
caled linen, himself grants; that it may be caled silk through custom of our
tongue, I have proved, and he answers me not. Let him with the former, mind
Straboos Geogr. lib. 15.
testimony, that shows (...).
silk to be made of bysse, the stuff that himself grants to be in the
Sanctuary; that we need not make scruple of the name in English, which before
us was given in Greek. And for wool, himself that would have us to receiv it
from him, will not yet speak plainly what he means, vvhither that of the
sheeps fleece, as Englishmen would understand him; or other wool that grows
on trees* for then it will appear, the strife is merely about words; and such I
never denied it to be, but have proved that of such wool, linen (as we call it)
is made, by Pliny and others. Theophrastus (...).
is plain, speaking of trees in Arabia and India, that yield ((...)) wool, as
in an apple, which when it is ripe, opens, and the wool is taken out, (...).
of which they weav sindons (that is, fine linen clothes) some cheap, others
very costly. Strabo Geogr. lib. 15.
has the like words, of trees, on which grow (...).
wool, whereof fine-woven sindons were made; of which sindon or fine linen we
read in the gospel, Mar. 14.51. and 15.46. Now considering this variety of
names in writers, why should a wise man stand upon terms, when it skilleth not
what it be caled; except there were such an uncleanness in silk as he has
spoken, but not yet confirmed. If he thinck that he can help himself with that
which I have showed from the Epistle to the Ebrewes touching wool, let him urge
it, and speak plainly what wool he means; and how he vvil conclude, that
because the sprinckle was wool, therefore the High priests garments were linen
and woollen, as with us these things are taken. If he deceives the world with
ambiguous words, and intends that fine stuff of trees which by vvriters may
be caled wool, or linen, or silk, though properly it be none of these, but a
fine silken cotton, and such as by Tre^ellius was the only matter whereof the
garments were made: let wise men judge of his dealing, and how great a
conquest he has won; and let him joy in his prowess, I will not envy his
glory, nor make any further strife.

Having ended the ceremony, next follows more weighty matters of religion.
Three points from amongst al other Mr Br. chose out to reprove us for. 1. Our
condemning of the idol Temples, which he caleth Holy buildings; 2. Our manner of
praying, without saying over the form of words caled the Lords prayer; 3. and
our excommunication of some for declining to the corruptions in the Dutch
church; by him reported, for baptising in the same. Of these things I wrote
breefly for the clearing of our selves, and exspected some great matter to
follow, especially from such a man so renoumed for his learning: and the
rather, for that these points seem much more justifiable against us, then other
evils that we reprove.

But lo, he passes over these things in silence, neither bringing proof to
convince us, nor making word of answer to the scriptures that I alleged for our
defense. Only one point, that it seems went near his heart, where the blame
that he sought to bring upon us, I returned upon his own head; to weet, his
abuse of Gods holy censure of excommunication: for this he would say somewhat,
(which anon we will examine,) but ere he had brought any one sound reason, the
fire was kindled in his breast, and he throvveth out an excommunication against
me also: and then runs into by matters, leaving the discussing of these
things whereinto he was fallen, perhaps ere he was aware. Neither was this
enough; but to find occasion of new matter against me, whiles these writings
were under hand, he came unto This his dealing, the party that told me, is ready
to justify unto his face if he shall deny it.
one amongst us, and enquired of him what doctrine I had taught touching the
stones on Aarons brestplate, and would have urged him upon his oath to tell him;
insinuating that he knew I followed the Geneva translation, and consequently
must needs err. And though at this fishing he could find nothing against me;
yet it seems the matter died not; for now there fly abroad certain Of these
writings, see hereafter, Page 24 etc
papers, wherein I am blamed with infinite errors for following our common
translation of the stones names, and the Geneva notes for placing them. To
these writings I answer, that they conteyn a mere forgerie: I neither followed
the English translation in all the stones names, nor their application unto the
tribes according to the notes, as is known and will be testified by many that
heard me, though it be now some years since I spoke of that scripture. What
vanity then is this, to feighn first an accusation, and then to frame a
confutation of men's own fictions? How unworthy is this dealing, I say not only
of a Christian or learned man, but even of a man of civil or humane carriage?
Nor yet did this fire blaze enough, but again the bellows must be put to it,
and other Of these writings, see hereafter, Page 24 etc
writings were sent out against me, saying upon the report of some, that I had
taught on Exodus 12.40. that Israel was in Aegipt 430. years. Upon the credit of
this testimony, great things ar inferred against me, as overthrowing not only
al Moses, but withal the new Testam^^^. The falsehood of this charge is no less
notorious then the former, and is a mere slander of me, as is known unto God,
and my own heart, and many vvitnesses, who heard and can testify how from Exodus
6. and other scriptures, I shevved the Israelites could not be dwellers in
Aegipt, so many years any thing near. Let Mr Br, therefore name mine accusers
that have so belyed me, and clear himself, or receiv with them the due desert of
false calumniation. And let wise men mind the dealing of these adversaries,
thus to seek receiv and publish abroad matter of accusation against me. Neither
can I tell how many such like lying papers they have and will spread concerning
me: Only this I know, that God will be judge and avenger of al such wickedness;
unto him I commit my cause. And though they shall proceed in this their malice,
yet rather then I vvil continually trouble my self or the reader with such
fruitless matters, I will follow his example who in like usage was Psalm. 38.13.
as a deaf man that heard not, and as a dum man that opened not his mouth; and
will trust that the Lord will Psalm. 31.20.
hide me in the secret of his presence from the pride of men, and keep me
secret in his tabernacle from the strife of tongues.

But who would think that a man thus setting himself to seek out error
amongst us, and giving out papers with large confutations of forged matters,
would be silent if he could except against our profession in any point? yea
that in the three things culled out by himself against our faith and practice
he should suddenly be so mute? If he be not able to prove his cause against us,
let him yield unto the truth, and ask mercy of God for the reproach vvherwith
he unjustly lodeth us. If he thinck he can prove it, why seeks he to set on
foot new matters and leav the old? wise men will soon see this vveak carriage.
And is it not a worthy argument that he mentions for upholding his idol
temples, that al Christian laws would put me to death, and therefore sobriety
should be more in me then to require one man to teach me. Could not the Turk
himself with this bloody reason quickly confute al Christendom? and did not
his predecessors the Papists fight with these weapons against Gods former
witnesses in their several ages? I perceiv now if the magistrates sword will not
mainteyn these holy buildings, we shall have no defense for them from Mr
Broughton. Well then, let Baal plead for himself against them that shall ruinate
his howses and altars. And whereas he thincketh it will be no joy for him a man
to tread down, me that am a worm; let him go on to rejoice in his manhood; I
will rest contented with my portion in my saviors lot, who was before me Psalm.
22.6
a worm and not a man, the shame of m^n, and contempt of the people.

For his curse given out against his Lords grace of Cant. now that he is put to
justify the same by the word of God, he writes very faintly; asking How he
did it otherwise then by citing him to Gods judgment, and himself? and further
asking, May not any to any do so? But I would ask again, May not any heretic
in the world say this much and more also for ^is erroneous doctrines and
actions? Do not the Papists plead much better for their Popes preeminence? And
if he bring no better proof, I doubt he teaching that any may giv out the
excommunication against any, vvil be judged both of Papists and Protestants, to
have ^^^ed but false doctrine.

The commandment of Christ does plainly refute it, Mat. 18.15-17. where he
wills that our brethre^s sin^es should first by our selves, next by
witnesses, thirdly by the church be convinced before excommunication. And Paul
in a public and most loathsome crime that was in Corinth, 1. Cor. 5.
willed the church when they were gathered together, to deliver the sinner to
Satan by the power of Christ. If one man may excommunicate an other, what use
is there of these laws? yea what confusion and uproar would it not breed
amongst men? And where he asks how he did it otherwise then by citing the
Bishop and himself to Gods judgment; shall we take him to mean that he
excommunicated and cursed himself also at the same time: For against the Prelat
thus he wrote and printed, In his book entitled, To the aged Sir, John of Cant.
You know you have the Anathema maranatha given you, it returns to the giver
if you deserved it not; if your desert be doubtless, you ar surely miserable.
Now the Anathema maranatha is the dreadful sentence which the Apostle inioyneth
against such as love not the Lord Jesus Christ, which in our English Bibles is
expressed by Execration and Excommunication to death, 1. Cor. 16.22. Can any
man of judgeme^t think that the church of Corinth should no otherwise proceed
against such an enemy of Christ, then by citing him and themselves to Gods
judgment? In doubtful matters, and where no proof or witness is, an oath may
end the strife, and the thing be left unto God, to judge and bring to light
when pleases him, as Exodus 22.11. 1 king. 8.31.32. Heb. 6.16.
the scriptures teach: but in cases of excommunication the sin must be
manifest, and sinner obstinate, and then he by the church through the power of
Christ, delivered to Satan, that he may be humbled and ashamed for his sin, (if
such be the will of God) and so return to Christ and the church and be saved.
And this censure the church executes with full assurance of Gods good liking
and approbation, knowing that he in heaven judges and binds the sinner with
them, as Mat. 18 18.
he has promised. If this certainty must be of a man's wicked estate before
excommunication, much more must it be, before the Maranatha. And as for Gods
judgment seat, we know that we must 2. Cor. 5.10.
al there appear at that day, to receiv according to that we have done: but
excommunication is Gods judgment of sinners in this life and world by his
church; the power whereof is not left in any one man's hand, much less in every
man's, to excommunicat his neighbor, and then to say, I have but cited him as
my self to Gods judgment. But let us search a little further into this his
censure. He gav it to the ArchB. and then either he or himself, by his own
grant, was accursed and miserable. If the man be accursed, so ar al his
actions which he does in that estate. Neither may any Christian have spiritual
or civil fellowship with one so cast out, but must avoid him, least he partake
with his punishment. The sin of Achan in meddling with the anathematized or
excommunicat thing, brought wrath upon the congregation of Israel: Josh. 7. The
ArchB. was chief Pastor of the church of England; he being accursed, al his
administration must needs be abominable, and they that joined with or submitted
unto it, were defiled. Thus Mr Broughton being but one man, and an inferior
minister, has of his own authority, cast out of communion from Christ and his
church, (as himself estemeth it,) from King, Queen, Counsel and the whole Realm,
their Archpastor and metropolitan, without their consent, and if any of them
have since that his cursed estate communicated with him in doctrine, prayer,
sacraments, or any other part of his ecclesiastical function, which extended
over all the land, they communicated with an enemy of Christ and member of
Satan: and if any Bishop or other minister have received ecclesiastical office
from him, they received it from the Divil and not from Christ. This blessing
and benefit has Mr Br. brought upon his country. He says, laws kill me for
disturbance: but let this his presumptuous dealing be looked into, that thus
intermedleth without lawful caling, or any just manner of proceeding to
excommunicat the Archpastor of all the realm; and let men of place mind, whither
his disturba^ce past and present, deserves not rather the sword which he so
maliciously would bring upon his neighbor; and whither I had not just cause to
say, that himself would be found to be the wicked excommunicator? If others
should beleev and practice this his doctrine, one man may curse an other, and
none shall know almost with whom he may live or walk in communion. For if any
man anger his neighbor a little, (as I have angered Mr Broughton) his neighbor
may presently excommunicat him, (as this man has done me,) and a minister may
curse the greatest man in the land. But now if the Archb. were not justly and
lawfully cursed, then Mr Br. says it returns to the giver; and then himself
has been ever since that day, and so shall continue til he get out by
repentance, a cursed wight, and one that has given himself over to Satan by
wicked excommunication. Betwixt himself and his most reverend Father the curse
then does lie; and between them let it rest.

The effects following his excommunication ar next to be minded. He assured the
readers, that they should see the Archb. or himself pay the price. Would he have
men expect miracles by his hands, as if some great plague should follow the man
tht he curses, or else himself? The word of God teaches us to look for no such
thing by the excommunication of a whole church, much less of one man; but
rather to hope for the sinners conversion and salvation by means of this
censure; or otherwise to leav him to Gods judgment, without looking for
corporal punishment upon him in this life. For God often suffers wicked here
to flourish long, and go down in peace to the grave, when he lays his rod and
strokes upon his own beloved children. And if he please to lay any judgment
upon the wicked here on earth, yet he reserveth such things to his own secret
counsel, and will not have them expected from the mouth of man. Let Mr Br. then
look how he presumes thus to limit the Lords judgments betwixt his neighbor
and himself, least the evil light on his own head. It seems because the
Archb. is dead, this man thincketh he paid the price of his curse; and if
himself had first died, the reader must have judged his curse killed him self.
Well let him beware he curse not many, least some of them do out live him, and
he dynig without repentance giv the world occasion to thinck he died accursed,
and surely miserable*

Yet let the effects following, be minded of the reader as he willed him. For
the Archb. as he says, confessed his error; I hope then Mr Br. was not so
unmerciful but to forgiv him, except he count his sin to be against the Holy
ghost, ^at. 12.
unpardonable. If he forgave him, and after it the Archb. died; a man may
suppose he died rather upon Mr Broughtons blessing then his curse; if any would
think he killed him, as himself now often boasts.

His Bull of excommunication given out against my self, I desire also may be
considered.

First he says no subject will dispute, one for all Christians against me: yet
he being but one, will excommunicate me.

2. If I were to be excommunicat, it must be for sin wilfully persisted in;
such he has not proved to be in me; neither will be brought to prove by Gods
word any thing he says.

3. Mr Br. being a member and minister of the church of England, I am none of
his brethren, nor any fellow member with him of that body, which we witness
against not to be a true gathered and constituted church of Christ. What
authority then has he over me, except he be a Pope and claymeth power over
all churches?

4. No false Prophet or antichristian minister, has the power of the keys, or
right to administer the word or censures of Christ. Such is Mr Br. having
received a false ministry or preisthood at the hands of his right reverend
Fathers the Prelates: which ministry we have disproved in many writings
published; and Mr Broughton himself will not and cannot approve his own function.

5. We are counted schismatics and out of the church: and of me, he says I
have given my self to Satan by wicked excommunication. If it be so, I am not
within, but without the church already, and therefore cannot be cast out of that
communion in which I am not. Now the Apostle Paul and the whole church of
Corinth had no authority to judge them that were without, but only them that
were within; and God judges those without, 1 Cor. 5.12.13. But Mr Br. in
judging and excommunicating me, (if I be such as he esteems me,) has taken
upon him more power then the Apostle had, and presumes to do that which
perteyneth to God.

6. That which he says to the ArchB. if you deserved it not, it returns to
the giver; let him apply to himself in this case. If I have deserved it, it is
for sin: al sin must be discovered and judged by Gods law; and the sinner
wilful. With me he refuses to debate the matter; how am I then convinced of
sin, or deserv I this censure? What then shall I say; shall I wish it may turn to
the giver? Shall I say, Psalm. 109.17.18.
As he loved cursing so shall it come unto him, and as he loved not blessing, so
shall it be far from him; as he clothed himself with cursing like a raiment, so
shall it come into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones? I will
rather reward this man good for his evil toward me, and pray God he may find
grace repentance and mercy, because I hope he has done this ignorantly; if
otherwise, he shall receiv the more heavy judgment. For doubtless God that
will not hold any man guiltless that shall take his name in vayn; vvil not
suffer this great profanation of his name and censure to go unpunished, except
the sinner purge himself by vnfeighned repentance.

As for me, I have otherwise learned Christ, then to fear the curse Prove. 26.2.
causlesse, or to be affrayd of vain-man, whose breath is in his nosthrils. The
Lord promised to Genesis 12.3.
Abram, (whose child through faith I am,) I will bless them that bless thee,
and will curse them that curse thee. And though this envious man like Shimey
revile and curse me, yet I say with the prophet, 2. Sam: 16.12.
It may be the Lord will do me good for his cursing this day. In him I trust to
be hid from the Job. 5.21.
scourge of the tongue, and from the Psalm. 12^ 4.
juniper coals wherewith this enemy would scorch, and into which he would send
me. Yea though his mouth were (as Dan. 3.19.
Nebuchadnezars furnace) seven times hotter then any man's, I will repose in him
that saved his servants from Verse. 27.
that flame; and has made this promise to every true Israelite, When thou
walk through the fire thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle
upon thee. Isa. 43.2.

Henr: Ainsworth.

Mr Hugh Broughton his other vvritings against Mr Henry Ainsvvorth aforesaid.
Articles of vnlernedship objected to Mr. Ainsworth: showing that he does not
well to take upon him a Doctorship.
And first from Aharons attire: afterward for all Exodus and Ebrew and Greek
studies: showing that he should do better to learn yet 20. years, then being
blind to lead the blind into ditches.

M. Ainsworth was accused that he said the Ephod had blew silk, scarlet and
crimson, and white silk: where in truth the colored was woollen thread: and
the white was linen: by the universal consent of the Ebrewes who had 1400.
years open sight and use of these matters: and in all their records are
uniform for the matter. Also the best Rabbis of Christians upon the great
Plantine Bible in many places might have forced him to have perceived his
blindness.

Ainsvvorthes answer.
In steed of humility he bableth most senseles through a sheet of paper almost
all near written to match the leaves of a forest in gross errors by talk:
turning Dictionaries, and disputing most senselesly: and after warning, in
reply, he thus speaks.

1. He thinks that white silk and white linen is all one. So blew silk etc.
and blew linen: and he makes no conscience in having deceived his hearers: and
cares not for the Law of leaving open a well into which the vnheedy may fall.

2. Because in private garments, Levit. 19. diverse stuff is forbidden, he
dreameth Aharons Ephod had not diverse stuff. And will beleve the Scripture
rather then all Jews consent: as though the Scripture expounded the tongue:
the Old T. the Heb. and the New T. the Greek.

3. He might as well say Aharons Ephod had no golden thread; because Levit. 19.
diverse stuff in garments is forbidden.

4. For an Hebrew word, Mr Ainsworth dare take against all (...)* None of wit
will think him wise.

5. For a Jews Law, and open story, he prefers hi^ (...) all Jews that
ever handled Moses.

6. He despises this law, The Scribes and Pharisees sit in the chayr of
Moses: So hear them.

7. The Apostles never in terms force, leave the Rabbines skill Mr Ainsworth
will be wiser: to what worth all not blind will see.

8. The Lxx. Exodus 28. have Bysson, (...), the Apoc. allows that. Yet Mr.
Ainsworth bableth of Tremelie^ from whom D. Iunius departs infinitely: and
can be giving counsel forsooth to others to regard a Latin for Hebrew help,
where the Apostles damn him.

9. He can teach us all, English: that white linen and white silk is all one.

10. And by him, silk contains linen and the worms thread, as Hades, heaven
and hell. As he knew not till of late, Hades: so not yet the Ephods thread.

This much now: more hereafter.
Of infinite errors in M. Ainsworth, following the Genevah translation and
notes for placing the 12. names of the tribes: and for the names of the stones.
The Apoc. 21. translateth all Ahavons 12. stones. There also according to the
tribes carriage, the order is given: that Ruben and Joseph both, lose
supremacy, Joseph for Jeroboam: and Benjamin by right comes in the first
foundation: which Joseph should have had: Judah because of our high sacrificer
has the place of Levi, and Levi of Judah: Symeon always base is rejected into
the ninth: and Isachar has his place: Next of order after all three of Lea
comes Zabulom and sixthly Ruben to come before the handmaydes sons: Then Aser
for Anna that showed Christ present: then Joseph, that in his Berylls two held
6. and 6. Then Symeon: Then Nephthali for Barack before his elder brother Dan:
and he, as by birth before Gad. By the stones names the tribes are as well meant
as if their names were engraven into them.

1. M. Ainsworthes translation leaves this heavenly matter as nothing
belonging to Aharons care of Judgment: which he ware on his breast: or to the
providence of Christ for all the tribes story.

2. The holy Gh. allows the Lxx. in Beryll: Joseph's stone: thrice set in the
Ephod. Onix has M. Ainsworth, never used by God: as though the new Test: would
omit the stone that bare all their names. None of heed taking and lerning would
so think.

3. One that took the right course of study for tongue would note how much
Hebrew of the Lxx. or Greek translation, the N. Test: allows: and in how much
more that follows exactly the principal hea^hen Greek, for an Ebrew term
well known: and in how much, the ^halmudiques. M. Ainsworth is as a babe for
all this, and never knew (...) any such matter belonged to Divinity study.

4. Heathen Greek, and the Lxx. in these, John Apoc, 21. allows: 1. Odem:
Sardius. Rubens. 2. Pitdah: Topaz. Symeons. 3. Barecheth: Smaragd, or Emerauld.
Leuies. 4. Saphir: in Eb. and Greek. Isachars. 5. Leshem: Hyacinth. Dans: as
the town Leshem. and by the stones name the parters of the Land knew, that
Leshem the town should befall Dan. 6. Achlema: Amethyst. Gads. 7. Tharshish:
Chrysolite. Asers. 8. Beryll, for Shoham. Genesis 2. Joseph's.
These eight, heathen have: and the Lxx. in sense as Rabbines would expound
Ebrew: and the holy Ghost allows them. Wilful despising of the holy Ghost is
flat Atheism: Blindness not learning must M. Ainsworth plead.

Of four Jewels names: altered from the Septuagintaes, Apoc. 21.
Four names of stones the Lxx. brought, which the holy Ghost rejects. Apoc.
21.

Nophec, the stone of Judah, is Anthrax, in the Lxx. But Chalcedon in the Apoc.
as Andreas Caesar thereupon noteh by the order of the stones: And God allows
Tharg. Ierusalemy: upon Exodus 28. where Nophec is Chadcedona.

Iahalom, the stone of Zabulon, was Iaspis in the Lxx. Though Iaspe in Ebrew,
was Beniamins. God gives Zabulon the Sardonyx: the hardest next the Diamond,
and fit for the notation of Iahalon: named of abiding the hammer and of
Beating. Therein the Apostle makes heathen, as holy, by applying an heathen
term to a strange Hebrew.

Shebo was Achates: in the Lxx. and Nepthali was engraven in it. The
Chrysoprase is a white achate green on the one side: with a golden list: that
does God bring for the Achat: Apoc. 21. So Thalmudique and Apostolic Greek is
here.

Iaspe of Benjamin, has Apoc. 21. Iaspis: and the son last in Birth: but of
the first betrothed wife, has the first foundation.

How far Mr. Ainsworth has been from fitting these names: his own heart and
his hearers can tell. And all who be not cauterized in heart will confess that
God is much contemned, in that his translation was not regarded. Yet Mr
Ainsworth follovving the interlineal of Aria^ Montanus, yet refusing him and
all of esteem for wool throd, will with saucy malapertship rather cast of all
this then confess how babish he is for lerning. If he dare reply, he will
show himself to be as a man giddy in a tempest: not knovving what to speak,
nor what to affirm. He that checketh him, will adventure his fame that so it
will fall out.

And this much to show what a Babe Mr. Ainsworth will show himself for twelve
dum stones: to be as dum as they: or a Nabal, if he plead he may despise the
holy Gh. his translation. He is like to be guilty of further error.

How the Patriarchs were to be graven in the two Berylles: and in the 12.
several stones.
Our Geneva, and Church Bible, and Tremelius, in their words bear this sense
that they were to be engraven according to their birth: they first who first
came into the world. It is marveyle that Tremelius was so simple. Philo of
Alexandria who saw the Ephod, places Isachar in the Saphir: which by birth
Dan should have had. And base Dan should have had in the Saphir, the second
foundation in the Revelation: And noble Isachar, the place of base Gad, and the
last in the Revelation. If Mr Ainsworth will affirm that he rightly fitted the
Patriarchs to their stones: the writer of this will highly renown him. If he
missed, he disturbed, Iosuah, Ezekiel. Apoc. and all light of the holy story:
which chayneth the stories of the Patriarchs birthes, and life: and their
sons possessions, and carriage, and regard from God, all together.

Of Exodus v.1. unmarked.
Exodus Chap. 1. sets all Leahs sons together: and only Isachar and Zabulon
move the doubt: vvhither they follow Judah: or come after the four handmaids
in the stones: The Rabbines in the Thalmud consent, show that thence Moses
taught how by kindreds all together, as the first had seniority of birth, the
term Tholedoth was to be expounded. And they savv extreme absurdities, if
that were not observed.

Of Heathens native light for Heroaldry.
Poets Greek and Latin compare Man's case with resemblance in Natural things
fit to all judgments. Ovid in describing the Suns palace, observed that:
and in description of Sleep, of Envy, and in all his transformations. Moses and
the holy Prophets allegories are extremely perfect and pleasant in that kind.
And for Aharons attire, the Rabbines, by Natural heroaldry, and by the
Prophets, speak the same, that the holy Apostles do from God. The white
linen, the Helmet or Bonet of salvation, the strait girding of the loins,
Vrim and Thu^mim in faith and love, the building of the Temple, and sighting
for the Church, and teaching the covenant of salvation meant by a throne
holder, like Jasper and Ruby, with a rainebow like a rainebow, and bearing of
Gods name in the forehead: these show in the New Test: what Aharons attire
meant. And most of this have the Prophets, and also the Rabbines. And nether
Prophets the doubtless warrant, nor Rabbines, auctours for phrase commonly
allowed by the Rabbines, ever took the worm for signification of cleannes. As
in Greek (...) Chamerpes earth-creaper, is a name of slavish and earthly
affection.

And our Lords sufferings were taught by Blew scarlat and krimson: fit for
blood of al sorts: and white for good success in justice. And if he had been to
descend to hell, black should have resembled that. And why no Iron was in the
Tabernacle: Plato and Tullie would soon see. Iron, is an instrument of
vvarres, not an ornament of a Temple. So where in Daniels Image, wars of 300
years betwixt the two legs, Seleucidae and Lagida should be still for Judea,
tossed and scattered on both sides, Iron was a sensible note: and not gold
silver nor brass, to express that. He that marketh this may bring the like
wit to the twelve stones: how they were fit in badges: and show that he
bears chosen Mispat, the care of right judgment on his breast: and girdeth up
his loins like a man, to fight the good combat of God.

Of Jacobs sons by his noble Wife, and base Handmaydes.
Christ, Prove. 8. delights to play with the sons of Adam. Not with the
wicked: of whom he says: that it repents him, he made man. But in the godly
he delights: as he wrestled with Jacob: and before showed him a Lather:
reaching from the earth to the heavens: and 20. years showing heavenly favor
strengthened the godly Patriark: and after in all varieties was still with him.
In such Christ his delight is. So in precious dum stones he speaks the
Patriarchs story. Of noble Lea, be two vvarriers, two seamen, two statesmen.
Of the two handmaides, each has, a warrier, and a borderer upon sea. The noble
Rachel has two noble state tribes. Of Leah, Ruben the eldest had his land
upon the enemies: as bound to fight for his brethren. So Symeon, a warrier
against Sychem was placed upon Amalek: and gate from Amalek many towns, and
did Ruben from the Hagarenes. Dan of Rachels handmayd gate and held Leshem the
town, by war. and G^d of Leahs handmayd, was in a Plain, nere Ruben,
bordered upon the Enemy: that garrisons might war still with him. Seamen
were two of Leahs, Isachar and Zabulon whom Jacobs tongue placed upon the
middle sea. Aser of Leahs handmaid was placed with them: and Nephthaly of
Rachels maid, held Tyberias sea, a blessing, upon which Christ vvalked. And
Rachels two sons had noble glory, Joseph in Jesus conquered the land: and
his tribes had long glory: And though Rachel soon dyed for a spice of
Idolatry, in travel: yet Benjamin had the temple in his tribe: And Levi
served there in holy work: And noble Judah built the temple, and long held
the kingdom.

The 12. stones, answering the tribes case.
The twelve stones are fit: The VVarriers red, or with some vvarre-note: the
Seamens fit: Joseph's most sit in clear Beryll: and Beniamins in the Jasper: and
Levy in the Phoebean Jasper, Ovid. Met. 2. and Judah in the flaming Carbuncle.
Mr. Ainsvvorth his own heart can best tell whether he knevv Moses purpose,
Exodus 1.1. to set all Leahs sons together: that Dan should have Leshem: or
vvanted learned sight to avoid our ttanslations errors, and to follovv the
learned Rabbines deep skill herein. But I am afraid the bare narration of this,
will rather drive him to some saucy malapert raving, then beat any wit into
his unlearned head: who yet will needs be geving counsel to others how to
learn Hebrew, by impudency to hide his ignorance.

Of Ezech. chap. 28. using 9, of the 12. stones.
Ezechiel tells of old Chyram king of Tyrus how in David and Salomons time he
had the whole dignity of Israel in Gods people, and holy tribes: and leaves
out only three handmaydes: as beginning of noble, and still ascending: taking
in no handmaydes tribe, but happy Asers, his borderer. Nepthali, Dan, God, the
three last Apoc. 21, Ezechiel of force leaves out: as not obbrading base
dignities. If M. Ainsworth had not Rabbines help here: Aharons breast had little
heart from his lerning, and he may say he obscured Exodus, but could not open
the first verse, as the Thalmud would profitably have taught him the right.

Of Badgers.
Badgers skin our Genevah has for the tabernacle: But the Bishops amended that
into Taxus. It is an ox kind beast, Ezech. 20. whose leather is the best for
brave shoes: and not the unclean. How Mr. Ainsworth quit him self therein:
whether he stained all trope of Ceremonies therein, or played the man, his own
heart, and his hearers will censure.

Of the Candlestick.
Hebrews note well, that all the stories in the Bible after the first six
days of creation, and fall, and seventh of rest, in men's glory or shame have
relation to the order of creation still calling men to consider that. So in
Henoch, Heber and Isaak noble short life, and holy long life: and short by will
but long of Gods stay, bare all glory. and 777 in Lamech: and 600 was sad in
Noah: and 6 times seven is often for to teach trial or experience. So 42.
years after the land was parted brought Chusan a full seven years
oppressor: but in the Iubily Othoniel showed God had his time. The Candlestick
had 22. bowls; 11. knoppes; nine flowers: the 42. devoured of two bears: the
42. killed with Ochosia; the 42. Mat. 1. are lernedly observed for number as not
commonly cast. And the Candlestick but by Jews had never been marked. And if
one dish knop, or flower want, they hold all maimed: as no help to story. Here
Ainsworth may babble as he cannot but prate: But if he had conscience as a
grain of mustard seed he would not be a doctor.

Of girding about the breast.
Our L. Apoc. 1. was girded about the breast: Ainswoth Exodus 28. was to have
showed why? and by what custom Rabbines there would have told him. But the Bat
and Mowleward will teach that which he never learned. They that like of him are
like unto him: and all that put any trust in him. (...)

Conclusion.
He cannot as an Ebrician or Grecian in learned schools would, grammatically
expound one line of either Testament: Such a mate should not befoole all that
go and went 1500. years to churches as some yet stand.

To the English company that hold M. Ainsworth of some worth forlerning.
YOu report that Ainsworth taught upon Exodus 12.40. that Israel was in Egypt
430 years. And one no better learned then he, would so expound the Ebrew. For
Moses in a matter known, would use a short bravery of speech, that heathen
should not brable for 215 years spent in Chanaan for 70. souls: and 215 in
Egypt for six hundredth thousand valiant men: But left his speech short. Now if
your reports of M. Ainsworth be true, mark his dullness. Cohath, Exodus 6. is
Moses grandfather. He came with Jacob into Egypt, Genesis 46. All his years were
but 133. Exodus 6. Amram was his proper and immediate son, Exodus 6. He lived
but 137 years, Exodus 6. Moses was his next and immediate son. He lived but
120 years. Deuteronomy. 31.

133 137 120 390
So Moses should be dead, before the Law was geven, 40. years: and all
religion grounded upon Moses should he fables: by M. Ainsworth: unless he
turn: as he did for wool* and linen in Aharons attire. wherein if again he
will revolt, let him confute Arias Montanus following the universal Jews
consent.

How M. Ainsworth denies the New T.
S. Paul says, Gal. 3.17. That the Law came 430. years, after the promise,
that in Christ all the nations of the earth should be blessed: So Years are to
Isaaks birth 25 To Jacobs 60 To his in Egypt before Pharaoh 130 215 And so of
necessity in Egypt but 215 430 all.


Thus either M. Ainsworth must eat his words or be guilty of rejecting all
Moses as a fable: and be as a man forlorn of God: that will be teaching of
others being so far from all hope of lerning and wit.

To the company of folk that hold M. Ainsworth of worth to teach Divinity.
1. MR. Ainsw. has been reproved for not teaching that the blew purple and
scarlat in the Ephod was upon woollen thread, by the universal consent of the
Jews: whereof some records were 500. years old, while the nation yet beheld
with their eyes what was done.

Mr. Ainsw. cares not for such a testimony. S. Luke thought their testimony
sufficient for Nathans house and for Zorobabels twice: and they who know not
when humane testimonies be as strong as need to be, should not teach Divinity.

Arias Montanus and his fellows who dealt in the great Bible, which turned the
Thalmud Dictionarie and all the Chaldy Paraphrastes into Latin, whose lerning
herein all Christendom follows, were cited against him. But with himself
his own aucthority is more.

Here you must see what such a man is.

2. The white was told him to be linen.

He answers that by silk he meant flaxen fine Linen. How well judge your
selves.

3. He taught you, unless his hearers be impudent, that Israel was 430 years
in Egypt; as our English translation goes. So Moses should be dead 40. before
the Law: and all his writing should be fables.

Unthankfulness.
They who know what long ago I wrote, and first opened in English: and how he
taught the same, never mentioning whence he was taught, and how ye most
admired him for that, think him an unthankful wight, and you very simple.

4. XX years ago, the time of Adams fall, that he fell his first day, was
holden a wonder: till I showed how the Jews universally and many Greeks and
old Latins hold that. M.A. could find praise for that which he never studied.

The whole Chronicle, and the settling of the Iubilies, with our Lords death,
and plain reconciling of the two, S. Math. and S. Luke, and distinguishing of
Daniels Beasts and them of Apoc. was not taught uncontrolled, till in my
Scripture concent I handled the matters. For this, glory, Ainsw. would take,
but give no thanks.

5. He comes 20. years short of Eb. and Greek: That will I soon prove.

6. He thinks that the Gospel has a New discipline: The Jews tell all, all
was in the Synagoges before Ezraes time and while Jerusalem stood. All his
study here tottereth.

7. His labor tends to overthrow this state. Holding no true church to be
here. This dealing is stark bad.

8. He knows not what the Bible is. He has suffered you to use, Math. 1.
Josias begat Iehoiakim, and Iehoiakim begat Iechonias. S. Mathewes true
copies have not Ioakim. And the Jews would swear that God never penned the N.
Test: if Ioakim were honored there: He that killed Vriah the Prophet, and would
have killed Jeremy, and brent Ieremies Lamentations, and was buried like an
ass: condemned by the Jews whole consent, that he is gone to eternal
destruction.

9. And if Ioas, with his father Vzias and Amasias, better all then he, be left
out, it were strange that Ioakim should be in. Some trifling copier, knowing
that he was indeed son to Josias, and father to Iechonias, put him in: not
knowing why S. Matthew left him out. The Greek copies far the greater part: and
all translations, the old Latin, the Arabique, the Syriaque, the Ethiopian,
leave him out. And the drawing of him into S. Matthew, shuffleth the condemned
state of the Kings, to have of their company one, among the blessed Private of
Nathans house to disturb the whole argument of S. Matthew and of all the New
Test: which teaches the kingdoms of this world are full of imperfections. Of
this M. Ainsw: was warned. Then he runs to a discourse of M. Bezaes fame:
as though respect of person might be in examining the truth: and where Beza
condemns himself: M. A. will speak for him. M. Beza at the last saw and
revoked his most deadly error.

Of 848 margent readings in Eb.
848 Margent readings be in the Old Test: some of our men following Da: Kimchi.
praf. to Ios. held them warninges that a word in the text was there, corrupted.
The Jews damned Kimchi of Atheism for that: and taught him to yield reasons
of the Text and Margent, afterward. And though Arias was caught once therein:
yet in some of his copies that is omitted. By ignorance herein often
contrarieties seem to be in Gods word: As 14 times where (...) the Negative and
(...) the Affirmative come both: as Exodus 21. (...) has not betrothed her:
(...) has taken her for his. When M.A. can tell how the Bible is in both, Gods
word, then hold him learned. Till then let him chose a fitter match to dispute
with him.

Of Rabbines unknown.
The Ebrew is all lost: saving so much as the Old Test: has: And these auctors
we have that help us: The New Test: expounding many a thousand word of the Old:
whereof I will lend M. Johnson a Dictionarie compiled by my self: Next the Lxx.
Thirdly the Thalmud Ierusalimy: and the Babylonian: the compilers whereof still
kept the tongue in their schools: One man after the Apostles days joined all:
But the fragments were from age to age since Babelended Ebrew. Without judgment
herein, a teacher must use other men's spectacles. Endless millions of hard
tricks has the holy tongue: as fitted to Adams wit to where us: where, but for
the Jews, whose millions spent their life to mark short speches, our short
life would come short. M. A. despising Rabbines herein shows himself. Force
his short vnsuperfluous answer to this. Then for the New T. I will as much
charge him.

H. Broughton.

Mr Henry Ainsvvorth his See before, in Page 18.
other answer concerning the vvritings aforesaid. An Answer to the Articles of
vnlernedship objected to me by Mr Broughton.
ALthough the conscience of mine own infirmities and ignorance, who know
nothing yet as I ought to know, but come far short of the wisdom of the
learned both before time and in these my days, would stay me from making any
answer to these Articles, whose title pretend want of learning only, and are to
no other end penned or spread but for my reproach, which I can be content to bear
in my bosom: yet because I see many of them to conteyn besides malice, most
manifest lies and forgeries; and to tend unto the disgrace of Gods truth and
discredit of his Church unto whom they were sent, and whom the author would
urge to force my direct answer, which he presumes I cannot make, yea dares
me, and will he says adventure his fame I will show my self as a giddy man,
and not knowing what to speak; I have thought it needful to show the vanity
and falsehood of these his objections; which if my accuser himself will not
lay to heart, yet others of discretion may easily perceiv.

Of the question about silk.
In opening Exodus, I followed our common translations of silk, to express
that Egyptian stuff which is now not used nor known amongst us. For this word,
a clamor of error was raised, and I charged with false doctrine. Mr Broughton
affirmed silk to be unclean and unlawful in ceremony; and said the matter was
linen and woollen thread. Of this, some writings passed between him and me,
unto which I refer the Reader. His Articles collected from my writings, are:

1. That I think white silk and white linen is all one: so blew silk and blew
linen etc. Answ. I think not silk and linen to be one, but very different
things: yet that the Ebrew (...) Shesh, and the Greek bysse, may be caled
either of both without danger of error. This I proved by sundry reasons yet
unanswered.

2. That because in private garments, Levit. 19. diverse stuff is forbidden, I
dream Aarons Ephod had not diverse stuff, and will beleev the scripture rather
then all Jews consent etc. Answ. I objected against linen and woollen, Gods
law Deuteronomy. 22.11. where such garments were in express words forbidden all men;
there Moses explaneth the former place of Levit. and I will in deed beleev the
scripture, and Moses own exposition, before all Jewish Rabbines that shall
teach otherwise.

3. That I might as well say, Aarons Ephod had no golden thread, because Lev.
19. diverse stuff in garments is forbidden. Answ. I doubt not of golden thread,
the scripture is plain, Exodus 39.3. But wool Mr Broughton grants is not in
the text: why then should I be charged with error for not admitting wool. I
showed express words in Ezekiel, where the Priests might not wear wool in
their administration, Ezekiel. 44.17. I granted also God might dispense with that
law, Deuteronomy. 22.11. if he would; let his will be showed, and I yield. Further
let Mr Br. affirm and prove that by that law, Lev. 19. gold with linen is
forbidden as woollen with linen. His Rabbines Which, hold (...) that nothing
(...) is forbidden but woollen and linen. Munster. praecep. prohib. (...)
here will fayl him.

4. That for an Ebrew word I dare take against all Ebrewes. Answ. Not so, but I
join with the best that I have yet seen, and ar most consonant to the
scriptures.

5. That for a Jews law, and open story, I prefer mine own pate against all
Jews that ever handled Moses. Answ. A Jews law and open story to prove silk
unclean, and proper linen and woollen in Aarons attire, has not yet ben
showed. Tremellius a learned Jew I prefer before his inferiors.

6. That I despise this Law, The Scribes and Pharisees sit in the chayr of
Moses: so hear them. Answ. The Scribes and Pharisees of whom Christ spoke, I
have not yet heard speak against me: much less despised Christ's law. Let it
be proved that they taught such things as Mr Broughton affirms, and that they
did it according to Moses Law. Let it also be proved that Christ sends us for
instruction to such Rabbines as should come after.

7. That the Apostles never in terms force do leave the Rabbines skill; but I
will be wiser etc. Answ. The Apostles left the Lxx. interpretors skill in the
terms and names of some stones, Rev. 21. as Mr Br. himself confesses* much
less did they follow the Thalmud and later Rabbines which have risen up since
the Apostles left this world.

8. That the Lxx. Exodus: 28. have bysson (...), and the Apoc: allows it; yet I
^^bble of Tremelius etc. and the Apostles d^mne me. Answ. The Lxx. have bysson
for (...) Shesh, Exo. 28. they have also bysson for (...) buts* 1. Chro. 15.27.
2. Chro: 2, 14. and 3, 14. and 5, 12. etc. and of Buts the Greek and Latin
names of bysse ar derived: We may well think the Apocalypse allows this
latter; and also Tremelius to say true. So the Apostles yet damn me not.
Neither have I ever denied that (...) Shesh may be caled bysse. Wherein then am
I damned?

9. That I can teach all men English, that white linen and white silk is all
one. Answ: This Article serves to increase the number, what differs it from
the first? I teach no other English then I have learned, and others, I think,
with me; namely that bysse may be caled fine linen or silk; yet not that these
two are all one. Let Schools and Dictionaries speak for English; and Strabo
Geogr. ^ib. 15.
for Greek.

10 That by me, silk conteyneth linen and the worms thread, as hades heaven
and hell. Answ. A false collection. I said not so, but that silk is a general
name as well for that which naturally grows, as for that which the worm
works. Let my former writing be looked upon.

11. That See before Page 31.
the universal consent of the Jews, whereof some records were 500 years old
etc were alleged, but I care not for such a testimony. Answ: Such things I
have heard spoken of, but their testimony is yet to allege; let Mr Broughtons
former writings and proofs be viewed.

12. That * Arias Montanus and his fellows who dealt in the great Bible etc.
we^e cited against me; but with my self mine own authority is more. Answ. I
know not where Arias condemns silk to be unclean. He speaks of In appar.
^acr. in Be^^kel,
wool following the Rabbines, but names not what manner wool: neither yet
does Mr Broughton himself, that the strife might be ended. Besides, he sends
me to Arias about the question of silk; but blames me for following him in the
stones names. Thus uses he learned men for his own advantage; if they be with
him, they are more then mountains, if against him, they are less then
molhills. I would the Bible might decide all controversies of religion.

Of Isreal's soiourning in Egypt.
A false report Mr Br. received against me, that I should teach that Israel was
in Egypt 430. years. They that heard me on Exodus 12. and remember my doctrine,
can reprove this his untruth; and some have already to his face witnessed the
contrary; yet does he not retract or call back his slanderous writing. Let him
name my accusers touching this, except he will have men think himself feighned
it. A large confutation he makes of this error, that he may be seen to build
castles in the air. But why does the man so skirmish with shadows, and fight
where he has no adversary? he has points of doctrine under my own hand,
which he first reproved and I have justified; why deals he not with them, but
follows after leasings?

Of a new discipline.
Mr Br. says, I think the Gospel has a new discipline etc. and all my study
here tottereth. I answer, what I hold of the discipline, as he caleth it, is to
be seen in the Confession of our faith and our daily practice. Against this he
has yet proved nothing, And I doubt not, through Gods grace, but out building
will stand, when all Babels towers shall totter and fall.

Of overthrowing this state.
He says my labor tends to overthrow this state, holding no true church to
be here, and that this dealing is stark bad. I answer, Mr Br. deals like
Sanballat, Neh. 6. We have ever sought the good of this state and country, and
no way the overthrow or hurt thereof. We hold here to be many true Churches,
Dutch and French; which yet have their corruptions, from which we desire they
were purged. Mr Br. can neither justify their corruptions, nor yet would have
them amended. This dealing is stark bad; and his belying of me is no better.

Of the 12 stones.
1. He charge me with infinite errors, for following the Geneva translation of
the stones names etc. Answ. I followed not that translation in all; neither can
he prove that I followed it in any one amiss: so his supposed errors vanish
into lies.

2. In another place he says, I followed the interlineal translation of Arias
Montanus. Answ. This untruth crosses the former: Arias differs from the
Genevah, if I followed him, how then followed I the other? neither yet followed
I Arias in them all.

3 Again he says, My own h^r^ and my hourers can tell how far I have been
from fitting the names. Answ. Thus when he can prove nothing, he would have
somewhat from my self. My heart knows not that I gav any name unfit: yet am I
not hereby justified: for in many things we fayl all: and who am I, that I may
not mysse in such things? neither has any of my hearers reproved me for
misnaming the stones; nor this my inquisitive adversary himself yet convinced
me of any one. And now to put him out of doubt, that he shall not need
hereafter to fish any more from others, I will show him whose translation I
followed, namely the Apostle John's, Rev. 21. of whom I was persuaded in
general, before I knew the particulars that he translated all the stones from
Aarons breast to the heavenly Jerusalem. That I followed him, they that heard me
comparing Moses and him together, can yet remember and witness. That I might
most safely follow him, none of grace will deny; yea mine adversary himself
approves it, and so condemns his own malicious heart and slanderous pen.

4. One particular name he charge me with, as that I had the Onyx, never used
of God. Answ. This also is untrue. I gave not the name of Onyx unto (...)
Shoham for these reasons. 1. because no Onyx is mentioned in Rev. 21. where 12.
stones are reckned. 2. Because I found the Greek of the Lxx. on Exodus 28.20. to
translate (...) or (...) the Beryll for (...) Shoham. 3. Because I saw the
Chaldie paraphrase to have also (...) burla, the Beryll. 4. Because in the last
edition of Pagnine Thesaurus, I found for (...) Shoham, the Arabic to be (...)
Al belor, which seems by transposing of letters to be the beryll. Wherefore I
taught it to be most probable that the Onyx in our English Exodus 28. was the
Beryll, in Rev. 21.

These charges I found in his papers, and do now openly deny them; let him
prove the contrary against me if he can; or else be ashamed so to traduce me
without cause. His other things about the stones names and applications are but
presumptions and surmises of his own head, thinking that I did not or could not
open them aright. How I applied them he cannot tell, neither shall he be told
for me, until I see in him more Christian affection: though I care not if he
knew every particular. When he has quitted himself of these untruths, or
repented them; let him proceed to other matters, so as he will directly affirm
and bring due proof of his words. The like I answer for his other insinuations
of the Badgers skin, Candlestick etc. They are but wiles, whereby he would
withdraw me and his reader from the other controversies of Prayer,
Excommunication, and Idol temples, which himself began, but would now shift of
with these new matters. Some things he has which concern me no more then any
other men, yet coming in his way he sends them out against me, that the show of
them may delude the simple. He run^eth into the genealogy Mat. 1. and
causlesse blames me, who never opened that scripture in the church. He
speaks of a discourse, that I should run into of Mr Bezaes fame, whereas I
never mentioned so much as his name in any of my writings, nor will be drawn to
meddle with other men's controversies which belong not unto me. Only this I say,
Mr Broughton might get himself grace better otherwise, then by seeking to
disgrace other learned men for their infirmities, that the best ar subject unto.

As for my vnlernedship, as he caleth it, be it never so great, yet is it no
prejudice to the truth, which the most (...). 9.4. ^. 1.27
unlearned may through Gods grace profess and walk in. Learning I have none to
boast of; it is enough for me if I may know Christ and him crucified.
Notwithstanding let the reader mind that though he shoots his arrows at me
by name, yet his reason reaches unto al other men whom I acknowledge to be far
my superiors in learning, as Tremellius, Iunius, the 70. Greek interpreters,
Arias, Pagnin, Vatablus, all translations, Latin, English, Dutch, French, all
Dictionaries, etc. seeing none of these agree in the stones names with Mr
Broughton, and therefore are by him indicted of vnlernedship, that himself alone
may be Doctor of the world, when as he has not yet taught his own tongue to
speak truth and absteyn from lies, as these reproachful papers given out
against me do witness, Unthankfulness I never showed to him or any; but have
spoken and thought better of him then now I find he deserves. If he have
published his works to be praised of men. Christ has told him ^
he has his reward. I wish he may repent of his evils intended against me and
others without cause. And that we all who profess the Lord Jesus, may add
virtue unto faith, and remember what God has said unto man, Behold the fear of
the Lord is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding. Job. 28.28.

Henr. Ainsworth.


