A LETTER TO A FRIEND, TOUCHING MARDOCHAI HIS AGE, which helps much to hold
the truth, for that chief prophecy of our salvation, in Gabriels seuenties,
which show that most exactly 490. years after the Angels speech Christ the
most holy should be killed to give life. Dan 9.23.

1. Cor. 1.25. The foolishnes of God is wiser then men.

Imprinted for G.S. and W.W. 1590.

filigree and depiction of two trees entwined OMNE BONV^ SUPERNE



The Printer to the Reader.
THat the Letter following might better be understood, I requested the Autour,
that one special Text might be set before it, as he had translated it. Dan. 9,
24. I heard him affirm, that none, for skill in Hebrew would blame that
Translation: and though many differ, it was not for ignorance of the tongue: but
by their conceit touching the matter, drawyng the words as they judged of the
whole cause. Thus he translated that point, which was Gabriels speech: who
came to Daniel, praying at the time of the evening offering, or three of the
clock, or ninth hour by Scripture phrase: ( For so he vvriteth in the Letter.
at which hour 490. years after most exactly, our Lord gave up the ghost:)
and told, that at the beginning of his So th'authour taught: that even the
faythles Jew Aben ezra upon Dan. 9. begins the time from the word that
came forth at Daniels prayer, and ends it when Christ is sealed: And that
the Jew, though he could not cast the times particularly, nor knevv Christ to
be the most Holy, yet durst not depart from the propriety of plain words,
to pervert the spech of the living GOD, and he vvyshed others that
circumspection. Such as begin and end to that effect may not make here a
certain number for an uncertain.
prayer came forth the word (or answer from God) which he came to show: and
says thus. Seauentie seauens (of years) are cut out, for thy people, and for
thy holy City: to consume wickedness, and to abolysh sins, and to make
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring righteousness everlasting, and to
seal Vision and Prophet, and to show Christ the Holy of Holy. Know and mark:
from the outgoing of the Word, to return and to build Jerusalem, unto Christ
the governor, shall be seven seauens (of years) and sixty and two seauens:
(in the other) it shall be restored and builded, Street and Wall, and troublous
shall these times be. In that after the sixty and two seauens Christ shall be
killed: and not for him self: thereupon the City and holy place shall he
destroy, the Governors own people to come: and their end shall be with a
Flood: and at the end of war, it shall have a final judgment to
desolation. But he shall confirm the Testament for many the last Seven: when
in Half that seven he shall end the Sacrifice and Oblation. Afterterwardes
by an Army abominable he shall make a desolation: even till utter destruction
and final judgment flow upon the desolate. And this much for the Readers
preparation, to understand the Epistle following.

To his good friend A. T. of Mardochai his age: a light to Gabriels seauenties.
YOu desire to know of me, in what age Mardochai lived: because you hold his
times to help much the truth of Chronicle: whereby sundry Books of the holy
Prophets may better be understood. Your request is reasonable: because you
rightly judge of the profit arising by that knowledge. For whereas the chief
prophecy in all the old Testament, touching the time of salvation is
obscured: that of Dan. 9, 24 and also Dan. 11. Ester, Ezra, Nehemiah, Aggi,
Zachary, by reason that men attribute near 100. years more then common
lykelyhood can suffer, or some writers old and late will grant, to these men
after Babel was taken: I mean to Cyrus Cambyses, Darius Hystaspis, and Xerxes:
They who hold Assuerus to be Xerxes (who be ye chiefest Patrons of that
excessive time) if it can be showed that Mardochai was in captivity 63. y.
must needs grant that from Cyrus Some give Cyrus but 3. years, and that under
Cambyses 7. to Darius Hyst^spis 12. y. as Sederolam and Xe^xes but 10. alone:
some more, as in Clem. Alex. Cyrus has y^ 30. Cambyses 19. Darius Hystaspis
46. Xerxes 26. Their times before the surprising of Babylon, and viceroygne:
might well have so much as other abridge from this: but from Babylons fall 30
year must be their most.
surprising of Babel to Assuerus end, when yet Mardochai was somewhat active:
30. years agrees more with the common course of life, then 121. And that
being settled, touching years thence to Tiberius 18. year: Some old Greek
account will very well agree with us for Daniels seauens, to make up. 490.
years. Wherefore your judgment, careful to know his times must be allowed:
and endeavor to satisfy your request must be used.

The Scripture whereupon disputation of late grows, is this. Ester. 2.5. In
the city of Sbushan, there was a certain Jew, whose name was Mardochai the
son of Iair, the son of Shimei, the son of Kish, a man of Iemini, The
question hereupon aryseth, whether Mardochai or Kish was of the Captivity.
which had been carried away from Jerusalem with the captivity that was carried
away with Iekoniah king of Judah whom Nebuchadnezar king of Babel had carried
away: and nourished Hadassah, that is Ester, his uncles daughter: for she had
neither father nor mother, and the maid was fair, and beautiful to look on:
and after the death of her father and her mother, Mardochai took her for his
own daughter. To this text I think good to join immediately an other touching
them, who were captiued with Iekoniah, to show that not only valient men, but
also women and babes were then carried captive: of which babes Mardochai might
be one. Thus it is written 2. King. 24 14. And he carried away all Jerusalem,
and all the princes, and all the strong men of war, even ten thousand into
captivity, and all the workmen and cunning men: so none remained saving the
poor people of the land. Now if none were left but the poor of the earth,
noble women and children must needs be in the reckoning of the captivity. But
let us return to the first text Est. 2.5 Upon which Scripture, we must weigh
what has been thought, and may be. I hold it doubtless that Mardochai by this
text was in the captivity. Of old time it has been holden that Mardochai was
of Iechonias captivity.
The same held also the most ancient: that it may appear, this opinion not to
be new, but holden constantly of long time, the father of TRUTH. The Greek
additions to Esther plainly show, that in ancient time Mardochai was holden
to be of Iechonias captivity: for thus it is written. Esther. 11.2. Mardocheus
the son of Iairus, the son of Semei, the son of Kish, of the tribe of
Benjamin had a dream, a Jew dwelling in the city of Susis, a noble man, that
bare office in the kings court. He was also one of the captivity which
Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon brought from Jerusalem with Iechonias. That
those Greek additions be very old it appears by Ios. Ben-gorion, whom
Drusius thinks to be Flauius Josephus. For Ben-gorion in his Hebrewe story
follows them: and the Greek church styfly enough held them. Wherefore if
that age were now alive, and called to an after reckoning for the Persian
continuance, I judge by Mardochais age, they would willingly cut off about a
hundred years for their ouerreaching Chronicle: and rejoice not a little to
have Daniels times brought to plainnes. They did not only of ancient days
allow of ye greek additions for Mardochais times: The ancient Greeks by their
own grant, would shorten much their account for the Persians years.
but in their own writings do the like. Josephus says, that Mardochai had
been at Babylon. Clemens says that he was in the Captivity. So does
Athanasius in Synopsi, in Hester. Cedrenus places Assuerus in the beginning of
Darius, and Cy. Monarchy. Zonaras much follows Josephus. These men's
testimonies against their own negligent account, should seem to be void of
partiality.

Pagnins careful translation is void of doubt: that by it Mardochai is of
Iechonias captivity.
The like I may speak of the Latins. Pagnin his skill in Hebrew gives place
to none Italian, former nor later. In his translation of Ester, out of doubt
Mardochai is a man of Benjamin, which was carried captive with Iechonias. The
french glory of Vatablus, and his judgment, by our learned Fathers, who put
before the Bible his brief sum touching it, has been greatly esteemed.
Vatablus agrees with Pagnin, and further speaks of Kish: whom he holds him
to be.
Vatablus remoueth the doubt further, shows that Kish there is named, to show
Mardochai to come of ye Kings seed. Now where some doubt why obscure Kish
father to Saul, rather then Saul should be recorded: for them a certain
Hebrewe yields a reason that satisfies me. As Mardochai taught Ester to hide
her kindred, so the other Jews endeavored to do, Why Kish rather then Saul is
named.
and kept the memory of Mardochais nobility rather by Kish, famous amongst
them, and obscure to strangers then by Saul, whom Haman of Amaleck might have
heard of. If any despises the Hebrews reason, let him bring a better. With
Pagnin and Vatablus agrees Arias Montanus: Arias Montanus and Tremelius
translations.
whose like, if Spain had bred many, the Pope should have been closely bitten
to the heart. Though he follow the common Chronicle, yet he made conscience of
wresting holy Scripture. Tremelius likewise, whose translation gives place to
none (whom I could wyshe for many special points, not to be altered by
following the Heathen) he translateth the Hebrew so, The common judgment of
Italy, France, Spain, and Germany.
as speaking that Mardochai was of Iechonias captivity. This Italy, France*
Spain, and Germany held.

And least any should take advantage by the relative, (Which) to refer it to
Kish, and not to Mardochai: they translate the last antecedent before it, Vir,
not viri.
that is (MAN of Benjamin) in a case joined to Mardochai, and disceauored from
Kish. Two reasons moved them to that, as I think: one, because in the Hebrew
upon the word Kish lies a stay of a king-accent, in force and form like a
comma in Latin. An other was, because a sentence is joined on a copulative,
Tiphcha the King-accent, usually distinguishes.
which can not be removed from Mardochai, who was carried captive and norished
Ester, Also it seemed to them senseles, to admit in the midst along narration
touching Kish: where the spech began of Mardochai, and afterward to make a
sudden step again to Mardochai: And so would I think. These who comment
upon Ester, follow the same, Lyra, Brentius, Bullinger, and Lauaterus upon
Ester.
Lyra, Brentius, Bullinger, Lauaterus. The argument in the Bible translated at
Geneuah, before the book of Ester draws in the same yoke. And on the Latin
Ioh. Benedictus. So the French does, and many more. And whereas expressly
Mardochai is named Ezr^^* among the^ who gave their names to return (if
occasion best served so) in the first of Cyrus.
Mardochai is named amongst them who did, or might return from Babylon in the
first of Cyrus, I see no reason why the many of them who affirm even that
Mardochai there to be Esters cosen, should be rejected. I will not soon
believe, that the providence of God would in Scripture so place names, that
thousands of the paynfullest and the wisest should be deceived, as holding
them the same men, when they are other. As Nehemias Ezra. 2.2. is holden of the
most to be R. Symeony there upon Neh 12.3. The authoure of Ezra. 4. was
watchful to follow the common opinion to make Ezra to be of the captivity, as
immediate son to Saraiah killed at the third captivity 52. y. before
the.70. ended (...) Nehemias and Ezra several treatises are purposed.
the same who is Artaxast his cupbearer. And Ezra Neh. 12. coming home in
Cyrus first, is holden of the Hebrews to be the same who wrote the book named
so, and lived to the last times of the Persians: and by 4. Ezr. 3. may very
well be: So no more will I admit two Mardochais, then I will here two Nehemiahs
and two Ezras: seeing I see no reason why obscure men should be chief in
cataloge of personages, and famous men be left vnreckoned, who in open dealing
have the next glory to Zorobabel and Iosuah. But of the other two Nehemias and
Ezra, I may take some other time of a longer discourse. I will return to
Mardochai. They who hold of the Pope, notwithstanding their error in giving
the Persians too long a continuance, yet would not in the particular deal
here against their conscience: for their table in Apparatu Bibliorum holds
Mardochai Esters kinsman to be of the captivity of Iechonias, and also to be
the same that is mentioned Ezra. 2.2. So Schubertus, and Lyra, had rather hold
Mardochai much above. 100. year, then with Burgensis deny him to be of
Iechonias captivity. And John. Benedictus notes (from Philo) that he lived
198. years. Likewise some of our own country, who have by authority
written, Codoman and his translater, simply ouerseene.
in notes simply enough gathered from Codomanus: place Mardochai so: that well
he might be of the captivity of Iechoniah. Notwithstanding that some who have
trauayled more in this kind, would soon conclude that thereupon they must cut
near 100. years from their own account. The testimony of any against them
selves, should have some force. Bucholcherus brings it as a most common
opinion, that he lived in the days of Euilmerodach and Bal Sasar.

The Hebrews are not least regarded for commenting as touching the story,
contained in proper speeches of the Prophets. Of them I have seen twelve
several Writers touching Ester: by which all it may be learned, that the Jews
held Mardochai to be of Iechonias captivity, as the Talmud in Megillath
Ester, two Chaldy Paraphastes, Aben-Ezra, Solomoh. Iarchi: which are joined in
Bonbergius Bibles: seven commentaries printed in little books alone. Add
Midras Rabbah, who passing it over as touching plain words, in the whole
discourse shows what the autour thought. And seeing the Jews ever since
Mardochaies time, yearly in the month Adar, celebrate a Feast for the
deliverance by him: it would be too rash to affirm so many thousands now
2000. years not to understand his story: but in a Whether Kish or Mardochai
should be of the captivity.
trick of Grammar al to be ouerreached. Moreover closely they give a bitter
frump to some Christians in Sepher Iuchasim in the word Ezra: when they feign
Mardochai to live 400. years: teaching their children thereby how unskillful
many of our side are in the story of Scripture: The Jews floute Christians
ignorant of Mardochaies times.
for if this be true that no male were carried with Iechonias, but fit then
for war: and under the terms of All Jerusalem, 2. Kin. 24. women and babes
be not contained: If also from Sedekias captivity the seventy years must
begin, and Mardochai live in the end of the Persians: and if Eusebius times,
and Ieromes hold: then by our assertions must Mardochai be holden toward 400.
year old. But justly is Eusebius blamed of Johannes Benedictus, and Marianus
Scotus. And Jerome may not be cited for them that would have Mardochai borne
in the fourth age after the captivity. For Scaliger, and such as lean upon
him, hold that Darius (who buylt the Temple So S. Jerome thinks, as do some
Hebrews and Gryn. upon Ag. Hellanicus of Atossa.
17. year after Cyrus first) was after Mardochai: So that he will of force have
Mardochai near Cyrus times. And Eusebius may be confuted by him self, citing
Hellanicus out of Clemens, who writes thus: Atossa the queen of the Persians
first invented Epistles. Though Epistles were used of old, as in Judah and
Israel: also in Homer Il. Il. zeta in Bellerophontes.
yet when Heathen skant used written records, the letters sent by Hester
Adossa to 127. Provinces might well be the most ancient for famous and fresh
memory in Hellanicus days, whom Thucidides names as his former. Thucidides
dyed in the times of Peloponnesus wars.
And herein the antiquity, who had followed the games of Olympia, to teach of
man's redeemer against express word in Daniels ninth, control them selves,
and call the times to as short a reckonyng as truth hereafter much by heathen
account will require. An Hebrew disputes learnedly, An Hebrews reason of
Esters times.
to teach us that Esters stories fell out soon after the captivity: because
many of rare godlynes must needs then be amongst them, that God should in
sundry places give them so great glory. It is not commonly seen, that the age
vnafflicted should be of more godlynes, then they who before had felt Gods
hand. Iosuahs elders and their posterity teach us so to think: likewise
David's age, and Roboames. Moreover, the Apostle gives that company a singular
testimony Hebr. 11.24. who by faith avoided the edge of the sword. I doubt
not, but that of them it is spoken there. Over and besides, the prophecy of
Jeremy touching ye good Figs may very well have accomplishment in Mardochai.
Lyra upon Iere. 24.
And Lyra would think that in Mardochaies story mention is made of Iechonias
captivity, to show namely in some that favor of God performed, which in the
good Figs was showed. Here I may for the help of the Reader, abridge
Ieremies words from Ier. 24. To him God showed two baskettes of Figs, one of
good Figs, the other of naughty Figs: after Iechonias, the nobles and
artificers of Judah were carried captives. As the good Figs would God know
those captives, and bring them home: and as the naughty Figs, would God give
Zedekias and his princes for a terrible plague.

Lastly this I think and hold, that none ever denied Mardochai to be of
Iechonias captivity, but such as Either of them selves, or led by others.
follow the reckoning of Olympia games. All this considered, I judge it will
not sone take place, that some would teach this opinion to be new, or untrue,
that Mardochai is said to be of the captivity of Iechonias. And this of
Mardochai being granted, my sharpest combaters (I trust) will not deny, but
that Daniel might well understand his own words: and the Seauenties from the
hour of their vtteraunce, and first year of Darius and Cyrus in propriety of
spech, draw us unto the year wherein our Lord by death, brought light and life
to the world. Thus I thought good, though as fast as my pen could run, to
write my mind touching Mardochai: that you might be better confirmed to hold
the truth of Daniels seauens: the playnnes and propriety whereof, many
Christians strive more to make uncertain, then did the Jews: whom your self
heard at Franckfurt and Worms.

To this I will join a particular reckoning, agreeable to Daniels seauens: even
from such as for the whole agree not wholly with that which I steadfastly hold
to be the truth.

Cyrus 3. y. Schubert. Well may he have reigned 27. y. before.

Cambyses Artaxast. 7. years. Herodot. but he reigned in his fathers life 2.
y. of them at the least, as appears by conferring Ezra 4. with Dan. 10.

Assuerus holden most commonly to be Darius Hystaspis, 12. By arguments drawn
from Ester al through compared with Heathen, it may well be proved that
Assuerus is Darius Hystaspis, and by Hester 3.7, compared with cha 10.2. we may
well think that he reigned nothing near 36 y. Monarch, as some Heathen think.
years in Seder Olam.

Xerxes, of whose sole government Ezra makes no mention: only Dan. 11. He is
said to be the rich King, that should stir all against Grecia. Some hold
him to be Assuerus in Hester. Upon their assertion I desputed in Mardochai:
Schubertus grants him 10. years of sole government: but Tremelius joins
them to his fathers reign, and makes him but viceroy: and all 20.

And these be ye chief kings whose account troubles Commenters upon Daniel,
Hester, Ezra, Nehemias, Aggai, and Zachary, against the plain symplicitie:
which those books process do require. Of the^ I purpose to write other
several Treatises, to confirm this account in effect which others Jews and
Gentiles hold, and to overthrow that excessive reckoning, The shortness of the
time from Cyr. to Neh. government is seen by the age of these men Seraia,
Jeremy, Esdra^, Amaria, Hattus, Shecaniah, Mallu^, Rehum, Meremoth, Abiah,
M^amin, Bilga, Semahia: which came with Zorobabel, Neh. 12. and after the
buylbing of Jerusalem helped Nehemiah. Neh 10. Shanballat an active resister,
living to Alexanders days shows that it was but a short time afterward
betwixt both.
which the games of Olympia, cause to more harm for Jews, then the Idol
Iouis Olympii was loathsome in their Temple in old time. Now mark other kings
hence from Clemens 1. Strom.

Artexerxes 41. His 20. year finisheth seven seauens to the buylding of
Jerusalem, and full finishyng of the Temple, as writes Aben. Ezra, Tremelius,
Beroaldus, Wolphius: and the French notes before Ezra touch it. The Greeks
Josephus, Clemens, Eusebius, Cedrenus, ending the Temple in that time, had
relation to the seven seauens Dan 9. though the Olympiades carry them somewhat
aside: but by a friendly censure one might cite them to that textes meaning
whereupon they stayed: specially seeing otherwise they are little constant: or
worthy credit, but when many confirm the matter with them.

Darius 8. years.

Artaxerxes 42. y. In this Kings days Xenophon and Ctesias lived and wrote of
him. Plutarch wrote also, and many Grecians more. The more impudent be the
wicked Jews, which leave him out to shorten the time, and disanull by an other
extremity Daniels seauens.

Ochus 3. years.

Darius 6. years.

Their years in all are 130.

The Greeks.

Alexander 6. Herein I somewhat mende Clement from all other Gretians.

Ptolomy Lagi 40. years.

Pto. Philadelphus. 27. y. rather 37.

Pt. Euergetus. 25. y.

Pt. Philopator. 17. y.

Pt Epiphanes 24. y.

Pt. Philometor 35. y.

Pt. Physcon 29. y.

Pt. Lathurus 36. y. Strabo would place Lathurus before Physcon.

Pt. Dionysius 29. y.

Cleopatra 22. y.

Clemens copy omitteth ten y. in some one, by like in Philad. to finishe the
sum of 294. y. which sum in two places he has.

The whole sum is 300. years.

From Alexanders death in Ptol. 294. that same Melanthon, Bullinger, and many
others follow.

From Augustus 15. who reigned 56. to 18. further. 60. y.
From Cleopatras overthrow by Augustus to 18. of Tiberius 60. y. by accomptes of
the old and the later. And this I have laid down, that you might better
know, where the Jews help the Gentiles to hold the truth, for what times
the scriptures fully help us, and where the Jews may easily be confuted, and
the Gentiles agree commonly. This being well weighed, you may see that in
Mardochai antiquity and novelty must both agree to cast Daniels seauens, as I
showed in the Consent of Scripture which I wrote.

This one Treatise of Mardochai well considered will make men more capable of
truth in sundry arguments: which shall be (God willing) handled for manifesting
of Daniel.

H. B.

FINIS.

