A BRIEF TREATISE OF DIVERSE PLAIN and sure ways to find out the truth in
this doubtful and dangerous time of Heresy.

CONTAINING SUNDRY WORTHY MOTIVES UNTO THE Catholic Faith, or Considerations
to move a man to believe the Catholics, and not the Heretics.

Set out by RICHARD BRISTOW Priest, Licentiat in Divinity.

Printed at Anvverpe with Privilege. 1599.



1. John. 4.
CHarissimi, nolite omnispiritui credere, sed probate spiritus si ex Deo sint:
quoniam multi Pseudoprophetae exierunt in mundum, etc. Nos ex Deo sumus. Qui
nouit Deum, audit nos: qui non est ex Deo non audit nos. In hoc cognossimus
spiritum veritatis, and spiritu^ erroris. O most beloved, believe ye not every
spirit (or teacher) but prove spirits, whether they be of God: because many
false pro^hetes are gone them out into the world, etc. we are of God. Whosoever
knows God, hears us, he that is not of God hears not us: by this we know
a spirit (or teacher) of truth, and a spirit (or teacher) of error.

August. de vtil. cred. Cap. 14.
CHristus afferens medicinam, quae corruptissimos mores sanatura esset,
miraculis co^ciliauit authoritatem, authoritate meruit fidem, fide contraxit
mulitudinem, multitudine obtinuit vetustatem, vetustate roborauit Religionem,
quam non solum Haereticorum ineptissima nouitas fraudibus agens, sed nec
Gentium quidem veternosus error violenter aduersans, aliqua ex part
conuelleret. Christ bringing a medicine, to heal manners most corrupt: by
miracles did get authority, by authority found credit, by credit drew
together a multitude, by a multitude obtained antiquity, (for many live long:
one, or few, die quickly) by antiquity fortified a Religion which not only the
most fond new rising of Heretics practicing by deceitful wiles, but neither
the drowsy old orror of the very Heathens setting against with violence, might
in any piece shake and cast down.

TO THE READER.
WE that live now at this time, Gentle Reader, do both see and feel, that
very evil and troublesome are our days by means of certain questions, that
within these fifty years Luther and his followers have moved in religion.
Whereby although the most part of Christian men do stick still to that
religion, which was the only religion of all Christian men, and of Luther
himself before his breach: yet many others are carried quite away with the
change, and many also stand in doubt between God and Baal, not knowing, or
not determined, which of them to follow. Of al these sorts, innumerable many
are since the garboyle departed out of this life: where they find every one of
them, who here was right, and who was wrong. And we must also follow: it is
the way that all flesh passes. An heavy and a miserable case when a man has
passed over this life (as he thought) in security, then in a moment, for his
wilfulness, negligence, or ignorance, to be plunged into everlasting fire,
where he shall find no end, no comfort, no ease, no hope, but continual
weeping, and gnashing of teeth.

The like troubles, and soule-daungers, have bin (as we know) very often in
the world before: no age almost these sixteen hundred years, without such
misery: yea, most ages with many kinds and great heaps of such calamity
piteously afflicted, and grievously oppressed. Mat. 24. 2. Tim. 3. 2. Pet. 3.
Iud. Epist.
Which that it should come even so to pass, foretold it was, and forewarned by
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and his Apostles. Simon Magus and his
scholars, even in the Apostles time, what a business did they make? The
Scripture it self tells us of the Nicolaites and of the Pseudoapostoli.
Apoc. 2. Epistolae Pauli, and caeteroru^.
False-Apostles. Then what a rabble besides have the ancient writers recorded,
Clemens, Ireneus, Epiphanius, Philastrius, Euzebius, Augustine, and others?

In the flrst hundred years after Christ, were these false Masters aforesaid,
and moreover, Hymeneus, and Menander, Diotrepes and Cherinthus, Saturninus and
Basilides, the Ebionites, the Chiliastes, the Gnostikes. In the second hundred,
Cerdon, Marcion, and Apelles, the Valentinians, Tatianus and Seuerus,
Bardesanes, and Hermogenes, the Alogians, the Montanistes, the Angelikes, the
Apostolikes, the Quartadecimans. In the third hundred, the Originists, the
Nouatians, the Sabellians, Paulus Samosatenus, the Manichees. In the fourth
hundred, the Arians, the Donatistes, the Aetians, the Eunomians, the
Macedonians, the Anthropomorphites, the Aerians, the Luciferians, Apollinaris,
Iouinianus, Heluidius, Vigilantius, the Priscillianistes, the Messalians, the
Pelagians. In the fifth hundred, Nestorius, Eutyches, the Patripassians. In the
sixth hundred, Eutychius, the Iacobites, the Armenians, and relikes of very
many before rehearsed. In the seventh hundred, the Monothelits, Mahomet and his
adherentes. In the eigth hundred, the Image breakers, and Paulicians. In the
ninth hundred, Claudius Taurinensis. In the tenth hundred, the Schism of the
Greeks. In the eleventh hundred, Berengarius. In the twelfth hundred, the
Bogomili, the Petrobusians, the Apostolikes, Petrus Abailardus, the walde^ses,
the Albigenses. In the thirtenth hundred, Almaricus, and the Fratricelli. In
the fourtienth hundred, the Begards, the Beguini the Lolhardes, the
Flagellantes, the wicklifists, In the fiftienth hundred, the Hussites and
Bohemians. Finally in this sixtienth hundred, Luther, Zwinglius, Melanchthon,
Calvin, and an infinite number more. Besides very many more, that in every
one of these ages I have omitted. In so much, that skarce any piece or article
there is of our whole Faith, but by one or other, first or last, it has bin
called in question. And that with such likeing for the time, that they have all
in a manner drawn after them great heardes of followers, and brought many
others also to doubt and waver.

I say not here, which sort did well, nor which did ill. But gone they all are,
and have received, as they deserved, both they that with the several blastes
would not be moved, and they that removed. And now are we upon the stage, our
course also very nere at hand to be called of, and to give account how we
played our parts: yea every day and hour some of us served with such
citations. And no sooner any man appears, but by and by he hears his
judgment, full grievous (God knows) and importable, if such were his
deserts. Then to repent, too late: and to seek our wonted solace of wordly
things, in vain. No man then, that can make himself a cushine to lean upon
to ease his elbowes. Neither vain glory, that then can serve the turn, nor
brave apparaile, nor great livings, nor carnal pleasure, nor sumptuous
buildings, nor succession in lands or states: finally, no other earthly thing,
that any fool here imagines to himself, and for the transitory shadow
thereof lets go his handfast of eternity.

Which well and deeply considered are not they now happy who in those former
like perilous times did know the right way, and for to win nothing, nor to
leese nothing, would forsake it? And they again now most miserable wretches,
that for such shadows, contemned the right, or embraced the wrong? We then
also at this present standing in like peril, and everlasting danger of our
souls, have we not need to awake, to shake off our sloth, and to look about
us? I deal not now with them, which say in their foolish hearts, that there
is no God, no Christ, no soul, no heaven, no hell, no right way, nor no wrong:
of whom (God help) the world is too too full. Neither with them do I deal,
which think no way at all so wrong, but that it may serve well enough to
heaven. All which sorts of vain men, how wise soever that they seem in their
own conceits, have most certainly all good reason, all true wisdom, and
(which amongst Christian men is most irrefragable) all Divine Scripture, clean
against them, For wheresoever the said Scriptures speak of Nicolaites and such
like, who is there, that finds left for such any hope of salvation?

Therefore to leave these, vanishing away in their foolish fancies, and to
talk with others that believe the Scriptures, and therefore think well that
some in those forsaid ages found the way to heaven, and that other some by
walking bywaies are fallen into damnation: of these I demand (if at least wise
they care for themselves, more the^ for their pelf that soon will forsake
them) whether they would not be glad to know these ways, to walk the one, and
to avoid the other? the matter is past with those aforetime: it is we that are
in danger, that stand of making, or else of marring. If happily we could light
in the steps of them that are in Heaven, we were made forever. But if we
walk on the same paths that lead others to hell, then are we marred and
undone forever.

Here therefore it would be known, what way they that now are safe, did then
take when they were in peril. In their several times very many and very
great questions (as I have said) were moved by new deuisers: and some
allwaies there were, that could, and did try the matters with them by
learning: but these very few, if we compare them with the multitude, besides
that the said trial is very long: and many, before it can be made, pass out
of this world, to their certain damnation, if they go uncertain. What other
remedy, what better way is there than for such? Is there any, or is there none?
If there be none, let us eat and drink, and make good cheer: for we shall
die to morrow. But (thanks be to God) there is good remedy, there are also
other ways enough and not only for the unlearned and unskillful multitude, but
also for them that are of greatest learning, of deepest knowledge. Only
needful here it is, that a man be willing to be set in the right way, and to
hold him in it. Who better learned than S. Augustine? Who more surely now in
heaven? He then, besides learning, what other ways had he to hold him right?
To the Manichees, of whose sect once he was, thus he says.

Con. Ep. fund. Cap. 4.
In Catholica Ecclesia, vt omittam sincerissimam Sapientiam, ad cuius
cognitionem pauci spiritales in hac vita perueniunt, vt eam ex minima quidem
part, quia homines sunt, sed tamen sine dubitatione cognoscant: (caetera^
quippe turbam non intelligendi viuacitas, sed credendi simplicitas tutissima^
facit) vt ergo hanc omittam Sapientiam, quam in Ecclesia esse Catholica non
creditis, multa sunt alia quae in eius gremio me iustissime teneant. Tenet
consensio populorum atque gentium: Tenet authoritas miraculis inchoata, spe
nutrita, charitate aucta, vetustate firmata: Tenet ab ipsa Sede Petri Apostoli,
cui pascendas oues suas post resurrectionem Dominus commendauit, vsque ad
praesentem Episcopatum Successio Sacerdotum: Tenet postremo ipsum Catholicae
nomen, quod non sine causa inter tam multas Haereses sic ista Ecclesia sola
obtinuit, etc. In the Catholic Church: to let pass most pure wisdom and
knowledge, to the perceauing whereof, a few spiritual men in this life do
attain, so that they perceive it in a very little piece pardie, because they
are but men: but yet without all doubting: (for as touching the other
multitude, it is not quickness of understanding, but simplicity of believing,
that makes the^ most safe) that I omit therefore this wisdom, which in the
Catholic Church to be you (Manichees and other Heretics) do not believe:
many other things there are, which in her lap most worthily do keep me. There
keeps me consent of peoples and nations: There keeps me authority, by
Miracles begone, nourished by hope, by Charity increased, by Antiquity made
firm and sure: There keeps me Succession of Priests from the very See of
Peter the Apostle (to whom our Lord after his resurrection committed the
feeding of his sheep) even to the Bishop that now is: There keeps me
finally the very name of Catholic, which not without cause amongst so many
heresies this Church alone has obtained, etc. And in an other place to the
same he retiks he says again: Christo esse crede^dum, credidi famae,
celebritate, consensione, vetustate roboratae. Vos autem and tam pauci, and tam
turbulenti, and tam noui, nemini dubium est, quin nihil dignum authoritate
praeferatis. That Christ must be believed, I believed fame (or authority)
fortified with universality, consent, and antiquity. But you (Heretics) being
both so few, and so dissentious, and so new risen, no man doubts, but that
you show nothing that deserves authority.

Here (as we see) this most learned, most holy, most renoumed Father allegeth
many most worthy reasons (as he terms them) to hold him still a Catholic.
As indeed upon that matter he wrote his whole said book De vtilitate credendi,
Concerning the vtility of believing. So did Tertullian of the same matter write
his book De praescriptionibus Haereticorum, Of exceptions against Heretics.
And also Vincentius Lyrinensis, his book Contra prophanas omnium haereseon
nouationes. Against the profane innouations of al Heresies. These their books
they wrote of the most just and worthy reasons, which there are to move any
man to forsake al Heresies, and to live and die a catholic* which books I
wish all such my dear Countrymen to read, as will know the truth, and
specially the holy Scripture of the acts of the Apostles, with Saint Beedes
Ecclesiastical History of our own Nation.

What such reasons may to that purpose be gathered out of those Authors, and
their like, grounded all upon most certain and divine authority, I in this
Treatise have in part declared: showing particularly, in every one of them,
some undoubted cause to move any man to believe us, and not the Protestants,
Puritants, nor other Heretics: and in all together, that nothing there is to
be demanded of a Christian man, but with us it makes plainly, and against
them plainly: no such thing against us, no such thing with the^. What those
things are, S. Augustine a little before did partly utter: and by reading over
this Treatise thou shall more fully know. Which whosoever will vouchsafe to
do with any crumme of the fear of God, I marvel much, but he will
confess in his mouth or heart, that the truth of Christ is on our side. So
plainly shall he here perceive, that our religion it is, which was delivered
to the world by Christ our Lord and his Apostles, which also ever since has
still continued, and which is also most sure hereafter to continue always to
the end: no might nor man no crafts nor wiles ever able to cast^ down.
Whereas all other Religions, which before in part I rehearsed out of all Ages,
as they had their beginning, so have they had also their ending: except only
these present Sects brought in by Luther: whose end also yet, no doubt, shall be
seen, as has bin seen their beginning, and that as it were but yesterday,
they never being so much as one Age, year, day, or hour, in any part of the
world before.

All this, and much more of like importance, shall he find here most clearly
proved. That and if they also, which please themselves in thinking that there
is no God nor Christ, will read the same: I hope, that thereby with the grace of
God they shall see, how fowly they deceive themselves. Howbeit unto them I meant
not this small labor of mine. For that which should have bin prepared for the^
directly, should have bin (I know) somewhat of another sort. which hereafter
might peradventure be done, but that it is a shame of all shames, only to
hear, that ^hristian stocks are grown such ^pes so out of kind. Yet because
the ^atholike faith and the faith of Christ stand both upon one and the
selfsame grounds (as in deed they be all one but only that Heretics
forsaking the Catholic faith, think yet that they have hot forsaken Christ
his faith) such a one shall in pervsing these grounds of the Catholic faith,
understand withal many grounds of Christ his faith: as, that he is now come
not to believe in Christ, he came thither by forsaking first the Catholic
faith. And therefore (as I have said) if it will please him to know these
grounds, and to consider well upon certain of them, he shall (with the help
of Christ) return again both to the Catholic faith, and to the faith of
Christ. And so I trust, that by the grace of god it shall do good to al sorts of
men, confirm Catholics, reclaim Heretics, and lighten even the Atheistes
themselves.

But and if any man will needs continue wilful and obstinate, as (no doubt)
very many will: Non enim omnium est fides, for faith is not for all men: yet
because Nemo perit, nisi filius perditionis, let others in the name of God
look up, and no more take darkness for light, night for day, poison for
medicine, death for salvation. Let no man, nor nothing make Christian men to go
from Christ. Let none keep the Children of the Church out of the Church. They
that needs will perish let them perish by themselves alone. Let the^ remain
alone without the Church, that will not return unto the Church. Let them alone
pay the price of their headines and rebellion, who for nothing that Moises
says or does, will be brought to yield, until God does show his might upon them,
as he did on Pharao. They that will not be drowned with them in Hell, come out
of Egypt in the name of God with the children of Israel. Christ has sent us
this time, to make the proved known and manifest, to see who loves him, or
the world, better: denouncing plainly to us al, that Whosoever loves Father or
mother, more then me, is not worthy of me: and whosoever loves son or daughter
above me, is not worthy of me, and whosoever takes not his Cross, and
follows me, is not worthy of me. Let us therefore both for his fear, and or
his love, take affliction for his sake. What avails it a man, to save or
get, say not a few akers of Land, a house or ^wo, yea a Kingdom or Empire,
but also the very whole universal world: and then a little after not only to
forgo all that again, but also to leese irreparably himself and his own soul?
If therefore it chance any man, to leese for his cause either house, or
brethen, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands and
livings: let such a one remember his fidelity and omnipotency, and that he
has said, He shall receive an hundredfold as much, and inherit everlasting
life.

If some mighty and trusty petson, king or Queen, should say unto any one of
his subjects, forgo for my sake to day thy living, and to morrow I will give
thee another as good or better: who would not, only to have his favor, accord
to his desire? what is it the^ else but lack of faith, or rather plain
infidelity, that for Christ's word, whose might, and trustines, and reward is
incomparably greater, his love infinitely better, we will do nothing? doubtless
either his promises, or his menaces, or both, we do not believe.

Verily, if we have but one grain of faith, then will we do not only with
those our exteriours, but also with our life it self as he requires. M^^. 10.
He that finds his soul, shall leese it, says he: and he that leeseth his
soul for me shall find it. Or do we think, that we deny not him, unless we
say expressly, I deny Christ? be not deceived. Does not Saint Paul say of some
factis autem negant, Tit. 4.
that they deny God by their deeds? and does not Christ himself say, Qui
recipit vos, me recipit. Mat. 10.
He that receaueth you, receaueth me? And again to Saul does he not say, Act.
9.
Quid me persequeris, why do thou persecute me whereof Paul himself says,
1. Cor. 15.
persecutus sum Ecclesiam Dei, I did persecute the Church of God? Mat. 5
Does not Christ again make these two al one, Beati qui persecutionem
patiuntur propter iustitiam, and, Beati estis cum persecuti vos fuerint propter
me, Blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousness, and, Blessed ye
are when they persecute you for me? And again will he not say in his general
Judgment at the last day: Quamdiu fecistis vni ex his fratribus meis minimis,
mihi fecistis. Quamdiu non fecistis vni de minoribus his, nec mihi fecistis?
For as much as you did it to one of these my brethren the lowest, you did it to
me: and for as much as you did it not to one of these the lowest, neither to me
you did it? therefore think we not, but that there be diverse and sundry ways
both of confessing, and also of denying him. If we have but common wit with
us, we may consider, that it is extreme folly: the things which very quickly
we must forgo, whether we will or no, not to forgo them a little sooner for
Gods sake, who gave them unto us, and who will restore them again, yea, and
that so much more and better, as we have not seen, nor heard, nor cannot
think. Blessed be god our most merciful father, that daily gives into the
hearts of many for to suffer, and increase he, and multiply his gift
unspeakable. By that may we hope, that al shall be well: and that the sooner, the
more that he will stir to suffer. Which is so little to be abhored either of the
sufferers themselves, or of their brethren, that in respect thereof we rather
may, and (...) say with S. Cyprian, as he said of Afr^ his Country in like
time of persecution O beatam Ecclesiam nostram, quam sic honor diuinae
dignationis illuminat, quam temporibus nostris glorosus Martyrum sanguis
illustrat. Erat ante in operibus fratrum candida, nunc facta est in Martyrum
cruore purpurea, floribus eius nec lilia nec rosae de su^t. O happy is our
Church, whom the honor of Gods grace does so lighte^: whom in our days the
glorious blood of Martyrs does glorify. She was in the works of our brethren
white before: but now she is become in the blood of Martyrs of purple color.
Neither lillies nor roses are wanting to her flowers.

And so with his words in the same place I conclude this Preface: Certent
nunc singuli ad vtriusque honoris amplissimam dignitate^, vt accipiant coronas
vel de opere candidas, vel de passione purpureas. In coelestibus castris and
pax and acies habent flores suos, quibus miles Christi ob gloriam coronetur.
Let each man now labor to attain the most noble dignity of both honors: to
get Garlandes, either white by working: or purple by suffering. In the heavenly
camps both peace and the field have their flowers, whereof to make for Christ
his souldiars garlands of glory.

^he approbation of this Book, according to (...) order of the Council of
Trent. Sess. 4.
HIC Tractatus a familiari meo Richardo Bristow S. Theologiae Licentiato,
vulgari Anglorum idiomate scriptus, illustrissimas quas^ue notas, quibus
Ecclesiae Catholicae vera in Religi^ne sententia ab Haereticorum falsa vanitate
discerni possit, magna perspicuitate, ordine, and art complectens, est per
omnia Catholicus, doctus, and lectione ac pralo dignus: quem solum si
dulcissima mihi Patria grauiter and attente legate, mirabitur se ab omnium
Temporum, Gentium, Doctorum firmata fide, a tam paucis, tam nouis, tam
turbulentis, tam malis, tam indoctis, tam inter se pugnantibus hominibus posse
dimoueri.

Ita Censeo Guilielmus Alanus, S. Theol. apud Duacum Professor Regius. 30.
April. 1574.

Which is thus in English.
THIS Treatise written in the English tongue by my loving friend Richard
Bristow Licentiat in Divinity: containing with great perspicuitie, order, and
art, diverse most excellent marks, whereby to discern in Religion the true
judgment of the Catholic Church from the false vanity of the Heretics; is
in all points Catholic, learned, and worthy to be read and printed. Which
alone if my country most sweet unto me, will earnestly, and diligently read,
it will marvel, that from the grounded Faith of all times, Nations, and
Doctors, it can be removed by so few, so new risen, so busy, so evil, so
unlearned fellows, and so at variance amongst themselves.

So do I give my censure, William Allen, the Kings Professor of Divinity at
Douay. 30. April. 1574.

A TREATISE OF DIVERSE PLAIN, AND SVRE WAYS TO FIND out the truth, in this
dangerous time of Heresy: containing sundry Motives unto the Catholic Faith,
or Considerations to move a man to believe the Catholics and not the Heretics.
IT is a thing very well known to most me^ of understanding plainly perceived
of all that have made inquiry thereof, and by the effect (also thanks be to
God) in the reclaiming of many thousand souls, evidently declared: that as
touching the controversies of this unhappy time, the Catholics have in every
point sufficiently and manifestly proved to the world, the truth to be of their
side, by books written of the several matters, not only in the latin
tongue, but also in the common vulgar tongues of most Nations: namely in our
English tongue, ^onsider whether this alone be not a sufficient motive.
so substa^tially, that their adversaries the heretics knowing they have
nothing to gainsay, have not dared, once to go about the answering of most of
the said Catholic books, but feign to get them forbidden by proclamation,
although themselves provoked confidently the Catholics to write them. And for
those few that they have gone about to answer, they have made such numbers and
heaps of shameless and open lies in their answers, that very many of al
degrees have by examining their said answers, bin to the Catholic Faith
converted: which, as it is like, by the Catholic books alone had never bin
converted.

All this is, or may be plain enough to all that have desire to know the truth,
or care to save their souls. Others, which will not see the same, they are but
such, as Saint Paul speaks of, when he says: That and if our Gospel be
yet hidden, it is in them which perish, hidden, in whom the God of this world
^ath blinded their unfaithful hearts, that there shine not unto them the
light of the Gospel of the glory of Christ. Yet think I not all that are not
already turned to be such. For well I wot, that some there are, which have
not, nor cannot come by the said books: some, that lack leisure to peruse
them: some, that think it over tedious to read so many, or any one of them:
some that think many of them, either for the matter, or for the handling, too
hard for them: and yet these either desirous, or at least, content to learn,
if they might see a readier, shorter, and easier way thereto.

For such therefore I will, by the help of God, in this brief Treatise, open
and show very many such ways, most sure, most plain, and withal most short:
that whosoever would soon dispatch, shall in any one of them find his desire:
and yet who so that will walk them all over, shall not find it long. Yea, and
this I add moreover, that whereas by the reading of a whole book of the other
sort aboue-named, he shall learn but one truth, or not many more then one: nor
by reading them al, learn but only certain truths: as of the B. Sacrament,
of Purgatory, of Confession, of the Supremacy, and such like: and so having
learned them, may remain notwithstanding doubtful in others: he shall by
reading this treatise, yea or any part almost thereof, learn all truth, and
that not only that is this day in question, but also that either has bin, or
may be in question between the Christians.

I speak not this upon confidence of mine own wit, or in commendation of my
self, God is witness: But the truth is, that the preiudicies and evidences for
the Catholic faith against all Heresies, are innumerable, and insuperable: and
my chance it has been, through the merciful providence and goodness of God
to live certain years in company with Catholic men of great virtue,
wisdom, and knowledge, blessed of God most liberally with his graces, such as
our miserable Country is not worthy of: whose daily familiar talk of such
things I have used to hear, as to my great admiration: so likewise with all
diligence and attention.

And what I have through such communication at sundry times, or of my self at
other times, by means thereof observed: I purpose, as memory shall serve me,
and God assist me, being thereunto both justly moved, and earnestly required,
in this book at once to utter it in part, rather for a little taste, then for
a full and just discourse, and that only to Gods glory, lightning of mine
own sinful burden, and soule-health of my dear Countrymen, knowing both
their exceeding great need of such helps, and also the undoubted and present
virtue of the remedies to such as will receive them.

And therefore whereas again there be many, which for worldly fear, or
reachlesse negligence, or proud disdain, will not read books: upon whom yet
good may be done in talk and conference by Catholic charitable men that have,
or may have access unto them, knowing means and ways of persuasion: this
Treatise unto such Catholics may be a Manual or Enchiridion, ready always at
hand to minister unto them (for the persuading of such their friends) choice of
invention. Wherein I beseech all Catholics for the love and mercy of God to
be earnest and diligent, knowing, that as Saint James says, He that causes a
sinner to turn from his error into the way of truth shall save his soul from
death, and cover a multitude of sins.

Well then in the name of God to perform these premises: this first is
certain and generally confessed, that, whereas al which profess the name of
Christ, be (in respect of their belief) either catholics or Heretics: for
finding of the truth of Christ, as our Savior said then to the Samaritan
woman, Salus ex Iudaeis est, Salvation is of the Jews, and not of the
Samaritans: so now Catholics must be sought unto, and Heretics, as corruptors
of the same truth, must be avoided. For unto this purpose says Saint Paul to
Titus his Disciple and Bishop of Crete: Aman that is an Heretic after one or
two admonitions, do thou avoid: knowing, that such a one is subverted and
sins, being by himself condemned: even so as some malefactors in prison,
hang themselves before the Assise, being so their own judges, and not abiding
for the sentence of the ordinary Judge that comes in circuit. For so
Heretics cast themselves by running out of the Churches unity of their own
accord, whereas murderers, aduouterers, thieves, and such others abide within,
until by excommunication they be thrown out. And to the same purpose in an
other place he rekoneth up Heresies amongst the works of the flesh, together
with fornication, aduoutrie, idolatry, sorcerie, murder, and such like: saying
of them all in general, that who so do such things, shall not inherit the
kingdom of God. But on the other side, the Catholic Church we do all in the
Creed of the Apostles profess to believe, saying as the said Apostles have
taught us: I believe the Catholic Church. And the same with more words, in
the Creed of S. Athanasius: Whosoever has a will to be saved before all things
it is requysite, that he hold the Catholic faith: which unless a man keep
whole and sound, without doubt for ever shall he perish.

This profession make not we only but our adversaries also with us, publicly
and solemnly in their co^gregations. So that it is, as I have said, sure in it
self, and also of us both confessed, that as with the Catholics is truth and
salvation, so with the Heretics are errors and damnation. If therefore I
prove that we be Catholics, and they Heretics: it will follow thereupon
necessarily, that we have the truth, and the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth: and that they are far from the truth, and without, and against the
truth: we therefore to be believed and followed, they to be forsaken and
detested. This then with Gods help will I most plainly show diverse and
sundry ways: and every one way by himself so evident, so sure, so undoubted,
as the walker therein shall see, that there is no fear of misleading.

Name of Catholics.


Then first I say: that whosoever are in the world commonly called Catholics,
or known by that name, they undoubtedly are Catholics, and so at length have
always of all men been known and confessed to be, whatsoever smoke for a
while their enemies make against them, by putting other names upon them. Or let
our adversaries show the contrary: let them if they can, out of any History
bring forth a company of men, at any time since Christ's Asce^tion, known
commonly by the name of Catholics, which notwithstanding were not Catholics,
but proved Heretics. Certain it is, that they cannot bring forth any such
company. For never was there such, nor never shall there be.

And therefore was S. Augustine bold (in aledging to the Manichees the causes
that held him in the lap of the Catholic Church) after others thus to say:
Tenet me postremo ipsum Catholicae nomen: ^on. Ep. fund. ca. 4.
quod non sine causa inter tam multas haereses sic ista Ecclesia sola obtinuit,
vt cum omnes haeretici se Catholicos dici velint, quarenti tamen peregrino
alicui, vbi ad Catholicam conueniatur, nullus Haereticorum vel Basilicam suam,
vel domu^ audeat ostendere. In the Catholic Church there holds me finally
the very name of Catholic: which not without cause amongst so many Heresies
this Church only has so obtained, that whereas all Heretics would have
themselves to be called Catholics, yet to a stranger asking, where I pray
you, do the Catholics meet at service none of the Heretics dares to show
their own meeting place. As also at this day we see traueiling in Cities of
Germany, where are Churches of both sorts, that if we ask any Heretic
there, which I pray you is the Catholic Church, he directs us by and by to
the Church where Mass is said. And that this Motive of S. Augustines, leans
not only upon his authority (which yet were sufficient in this case to any
reasonable man) but also upon very good and true reason: it may be soon
perceived by this, that there he says: All Heretics would have themselves to
be called Catholics, which also at this day you see the Protestants do desire.
For why are they also desirous of this name, but only because that they which
indeed have the name, are also indeed evermore true Catholics: and so the name
alone sufficient to move any man to be of that side? As likewise, all Heretics
desiring to have it seem, that there makes for them Scriptures, Miracles,
Fathers, Martyrs, and such like (of which I will speak more hereafter) do
evidently thereby declare, that company, for whom in deed such things do
make, to have with them both truth and salvation.

Again in another place the same holy Doctor says: De ver. rel. c. 7.
Tenenda est nobis Christiana religio, and eius Ecclesiae communicatio: quae
Catholica est, and Catholica nominatur, non solu^ a suis, sed etia^ ab omnibus
inimicis. Velint enim nolintue, ipsi quoque Haeretici, and Schismatum alumni,
qua^do non cum suis, sed cum extraneis loquuntur, Catholicam nihil aliud quam
Catholicam vocant. Non enim possunt intelligi, nisi hoc eam nomine discernant,
quo ab vniuerso orb nuncupatur. We must hold the Christian religion and the
company of that Church, which Catholic is, and Catholic is named, not only
of her own, but also of al her enemies. For will they, nill they, the Heretics
also and Schismatikes, when not with their own, but with strangers they
talk, they call the Catholic nothing but the Catholic: for they cannot else
be understood, unless by that name they discern her, by which of the whole
world she is called. This therefore is proved, they to be the Catholics, that
Catholics are called.

Will they now deny, that we be called Catholics? The world does bear us
witness. For (besides the foresaid note of the Cities of Germany) I ask
them, when as in books written now a days we be named Catholics
eueriewhere, whether that the reader knows not straight ways, who by that
name are meaned? In this very book speak I not plainly enough, when I so call
our selves? Or thinks any man by that name, that I am some Lutheran,
Protestant, or Puritan? Why else do they mock at the very name of Catholics
(and not at us only) nicknaming it Cacolikes, and Cartholiks? Or why else did
Luther Luther.
in Germany cause the Creed to be turned, I believe the Christian Church, and
not, I believe the Catholic Church? What else meant Jewel, Jewel.
to entitle his Reply to D. Harding, A Reply against the Roman Religion,
which of late has bin accounted Catho^ike?

Finally, any indifferent man may see, and will acknowledge as much to be
confessed in the new Legend set out of late by Laure^ce Humphrey Hu^phrey the
Puritan. Jewel a new saint of Pope Hu^phries own making. How er^d he, ^o,
whose History Hu^phrey him-^elfe here unawares confirms? For Catholikess
says he, were present, as lookers on and earnest defe^ders. What then but
none such were moderators, save only lay lords and unlearned Heretics. Ergo.
(although not greatly liked, I dare say, of his fellow-Puritans) for the
canonization (and please you) of Saint Jewel. Where he says thus: Errauit,
qui Pontaco suggessit, Londini solum praesedisse laicos, neque doctos, neque
Catholicos. He erred, which infourmed Pontacus, that at London (in the
pretensed Disputations at Westminster, were moderators only lay men, neither
learned, nor Catholic, An. 1. Eliz. Aderant non solum homines Catholicissimi,
id est, Papisticissimi, qui spectatum venerant, sed alij eiusdem Catholicissimi
acerrimi propugnatores, etc. Present there were not only men most Catholic,
that is to say, most Papisticall, who came to look on, but other most earnest
defenders of the same Catholikedome. And again: Primam causam, and primaeriam,
and fere solam, omnium malorum, contentionum, deformationu^ and quasi Equum
Troianum intra Ecclesiae muros nobis omnibus insidiantem, fuisse hactenus, and
esse hodie, Catholicam a Scriptura sancta defectionem; and praecipue vestrum
Papismu^. The first cause and foremost, and only in a manner, of all evils,
contentions, deformations, and as it were the Trojan horse, which within the
Churches walls lies in wait for us all, has been hither-vnto, and is at this
day, Catholic reuolting from the holy Scripture, and specially your Popedom.

Where what he means by Catholic reuolting, who sees not? Although to
help his cause he would seem to distinguish from it the Popedom (as he
terms it) contrary to his own interpretation before, but in deed to his
marvelous disadvantage: whiles that in the same his distinction, whether we be
Catholics or no, he charge the Catholics with reuolting, as well as us,
whosoever they be. True it is, that in the same place aforegoing he terms
us Pseudocatholicos, falsenamed Catholics. But even so have I with mine own
ears heard him (which many more also may remember) in the Divinity Schole at
Oxford in his fond unlearned Readings, term S. Augustine also himself and
his fellows: being not ashamed in his controlling of our worshipping of
Saints, to allege this as good authority, that Faustus the Manichee Heretik
for the same did say in his time Pseudocatholicis, to the false catholics:
Apud Aug. eo Faus. li. ca. 4.
Idola vertistis in Martyrs, The Idols you have turned into Martirs. These
Pseudocatholici, who they were, Saint Augustines words declare: Li. 20. ca. 21.
Hinc nobis calu^niatur Faustus quod Martyrum memorias honoramus, in hoc dicens
nos idola conuertisse. With this does Faustus entwite us, because we honor
the Martyrs memories, saying, that into this we have turned the Idols. Neither
can Humphrey or any other prove, that either now, or then, or ever, were or
shall be in the world any Pseudocatholici at al, any (Isay) commonly named
Catholics, but only true Catholics. Wherefore in calling us Pseudocatholicos,
he grants unto be true Catholics, such as were also those Pseudocatholici
in Faustus time.

So the^, both these have I inuinciblie proved, that the generally named
Catholics be Catholics: and that we be so named catholics, and for that
name mocked at by our Adversaries. whereof it follows, that we be catholics;
and therefore, that we have the truth. A most certain demonstration, which no
Adversary of ours can with any reason gainsay, and sufficient by it self
alone, to satisfy any man that will be satisfied. But yet of abundance will I
show the other ways.

Name of Heretics.
Arrians in their time were commonly called Heretics: which we see every where
in the works of the holy Fathers then written against them, and to this day
extant. So in their time the Nestorians, the Macedonians, the Eutichians, the
Pelagians, the Donatistes, and in breife all others that Heretics were called,
Heretics are proved. Gal. 5.
For which cause Saint Paul says Manifesta sunt opera carnis. The works of
the flesh are manifest: which are fornication, Heresies, Murder etc. For as
Fornication, Murder and the rest, straight upon their naming, are abhorred: so
the very name of Heresies and Heretics is a manifest word of naughtines.

will they now say, that Heretics is our name? Yea, so much as in their own
Laws, Books, Sermons, and common talk of us? Or will they deny, that they
be known themselves by that name? But who, I pray you, in reading the
Catholic Books of this time, there finding them commonly so named, sticks
at that term, not knowing or doubting who are named? Or else why feared they in
their Inglish translations of the Bible to set the name of Heresies and
Heretics where Saint Paul so has it, specially in the Greek, out of which
they pretend to make their translations: putting for it, the word Sects, and,
a man that is author of Sects? Is it not evident hereby, that they know well,
that the reader finding in Saint Paul the word Heresies or Heretics, would by
and by think upon them?

Again, why else did they in their Apology of their Inglish Church allege for
their defense, that S. Paul's doctrine also was by the Jews called Heresy?
Act. 14.
As though that, because the unbelieving and blinded Jews so termed the faith
of our Savior Christ, S. Paul would have us not to think ill of them, that by
the Christians should so be called: nor to regard what he wrote to the
Galathians, that heresies be works of the flesh, keeping a man from the
kingdom of God; no less the^ murder it self, and fornication: and to Titus
likewise, that an Heretic must be avoided as a most perverse sinner. Finally,
unless it had binne to to evident, that they are named Heretics, and known
immediately by that name: Luther their Grandsier would never in his book
entitled: Notae verae Ecclesiae: Marks of the true Church, have given us for
the seventh mark, that the people of God are (spite of their teeth) commonly
called Heretics: Coguntur audire Heretici. I stand to long upon things that be
plain.

Name of Protestants.
of some man's name, or otherwise taken up, whereby they commonly term them
selves, and in the world generally be termed, and immediately known thereby:
they undoubtedly are Heretics. And therefore Lutherans, Caluinistes,
Protestants, Precisians, Unspotted Brethren, and Puritans, most certainly are
Heretics: as were the Nicolaites of whom the Scripture it self makes
mention. Or let them give me an example to the contrary. Sure I am, that they
can not. It is a rule that the Ancient Fathers in their times with great
consent always gave the people, to know Heretics thereby: as out of diverse of
them I could show, but that I mind not here no more but briefly to inscinuate
unto such as are desirous to learn or to teach the truth, what ways they may
with ease, and without error come to their desire.

Here after, if any of the Heretics more obstinat and venturous then his
fellows, shall endeavor to make me answer: I will with Gods help more
largely prove and declare this and other my conclusions. Now may Saint Hierome
alone suffice: Sicubi audier^ (says he) ^os, Aduer. Lucif. Vide Chrisost. hom.
33. in Acta. and Ius^^n. ^n Tr s^^^ne and Opt. li. 3. con. Parm. and Ire. c^n.
Haer. li. 1. ca. 20. and Lact. li. 4. de vera sap. ca 30 et Aug. de vtil. cred.
cap. 7.
qui dicuntur Christi, non a Domino Jesus Christo, sed a quopiam alio nuncupari,
vtpu^e, Marcionitas, Valentiniano^, Monte^ses, sieve Compates: scito, non
Ecclesiam Christi, sed Antichristi esse synagoga^. If any where thou he are
the^, which are said to be of Christ, to be termed, not of our Lord Jesus
Christ, but of some other: as Marcionites, Valentinians, Hil-brethren, or
Field-brethren: be thou sure, that they are not the church of Christ, but the
synagogue of antichrist.

Here I know, they are wont to answer, that amongst us also some be called
Benedictines, Franciscans, Dominicans, Hieronimians, Augustinians, and such
like: But who sees not, that those some are not so called for profession of
any special Doctrine brought up by those holy me^, Saint Benet, Saint Francis,
Saint Dominicke, Saint Hierome, and S. Augustine? but only because they
profess to live after a special rule of life delivered unto them by those
Fathers, to the better keeping of Gods commandments: so as in the old
Testament, in figure of these Religious men, Iere. 35.
did the Rechabites. But our Adversaries have their names, I say, for
doctrine: and that is it, that Saint Ierom and the other Fathers do give us as
an undoubted mark of Heretics.

Well, but we are called Papists, they will say, for doctrine. To that I
answer: we do not so call our selves, neither be we so called in the world
abroad, but Catholics every where, as in Italy, Spain, France, etc. Which
they that travail, can bear me witness but it is a name put upon us by the
Heretics: as their use has always binne to do, to term the Catholics by
certain odious names So did the Arrians term us Homousians and others
otherwise. For, that these be not our names, it is most evident by this, that
we were many hundred years, as they know themselves and confess, before
those names were invented: and all that time were we not without a name. Let
them name their eldest author or witness of that name, and if I prove not, that
we were then above a thousand year old: let Papists be our name. I say
therefore with Saint Augustine: Quod quaerentibus satis est, vna est Catholica,
cui haereses aliae diuersa nomina imponunt, cum ipsae singulae proprijs
vocabulis, quae negare non audeant, appellentur. There is one Church Catholic,
upon the which diverse Heresies put diverse names, whereas they, every one,
themselves are called by propre and special names which they dare not to
deny. And this is sufficient for such as seek of whom to learn the truth.

If last of all they say, that yet by our own Confession we are called
Catholics which is an other name then Christians, and therefore in danger of
Saint Hieromes sentence above pronounced: they trouble me sore, I grant, and
put me to my shifts to answer it well. But they do withal, ye wot, as a man
that would refuse to be sticked by me with my sword, and would run upon my
spear. For you know pardie, by my first note, that the name of Catholics
serves well my turn, quite to dispatch them, what soever exception they
pretend thereby to make against this third note. For, that it is no good
exception, you may hereby perceive, because the Fathers make both notes, as I
have declared. Wherefore the one destroys not the other, but they stand both
well together. The cause thereof is this, for that christians and catholics
are both but one name, and so of the Fathers used and accounted: who therefore
commonly deny Heretics to be Christians, because they are not Catholics, that
is to say, Christians of all Christendom, but only of some piece. The
difference only is, that the name Catholic is plainer in this case, and
invented to be joined, as a very singular Epitheton, with Christians, so to
put all out of doubt, in saying Catholic Christians. For if they were not all
one, a man might as well say, Heretic Christians, which no man uses to say.
And so have I by the very common names, both of them and us, made three most
easy and most certain probations, impossible of them to be co^trolled, that
we are of the truth, and they out of the truth.

Old Heresies.
TO proceed now to another like probation: whatsoever was Heresy in time
past, the same is Heresy now also, and the holders of it, Heretics, as they
were of old: unless any man be so unfaithful, or rather mad to think, that
truth of Religion changes with the time, and that it is false which Saint
Paul says: Christ Jesus yesterday, and to day, the same also for ever. Heb.
13.
As certain therefore as this is, that Christ and truth changes not: so
certainly shall it be proved in this part, that these men be Heretics, and
their doctrine Heresy. Which may be done, and (God willing) shall be done
hereafter, if need be, in very many points of their doctrine. But because any
one point is sufficient to show, that we must avoid them, as in the Arrians,
Sabellians, and in manner all other old Heretics it is manifest, who always
for only one point were accounted damnable: it shall be enough, specially in
this my brevity, to bring forth one or two examples.

Well then: Heresy it was aforetime to deny, as these men do, that prayer or
offering may be made for the dead. And that we plainly show out of all Records
of Heresies, left unto us by the writing of most approved Notaries. For the
Greek Church let Saint Epiphanius Epip. her. 75. Aug. haer. 53.
be seen, for the Latin Church, Saint Augustine, who both have recorded it
for the Heresy of a certain Arrian named Aerius, Saint Augustines words are
these: In Arrianorum haeresim lapsus, propria quoque dogmata addedit nonnulla
dicens, orare vel offerre pro mortuis oblationem non oportere. etc. This Aerius
being fallen into the heresy of the Arrians, joined also thereunto certain
positians of his own, saying, that we must not pray, or offer oblation for the
dead, etc. Our men therefore having the same Position, it follows plainly
that they are Heretics, as holding that which before was heresy, and so
accounted in all Churches, both Greek and Latin. And this were they never nor
never shall be, able to answer.

For another example, I choose that cruel Heresy of theirs against the
necessity of Childrens Baptism, through the which they have suffered, and
still do suffer to perish many thousands of those poor souls, not able to
help themselves. It was of old the Heresy of the Pela^gians, that children
might come to life everlasting without the Sacrament of Baptism, Aug. haer.
88. and de pec. mer. lib. 3. ca. 5 Cip. lib. 3. Ep. 8. de i^fant. baptiza^d.
as Saint Augustine in sundry places witnesses, mightily by the scriptures
confuting the same: allegeing also against it, the testimony of Saint Ciprian,
with a Council of 66. Bishopps in his time, that they which suffer children to
die without Baptism, Deny Gods mercy and grace to men, and destroy souls:
Whereas Filius hominis non venit animas hominum perdere, sed saluare. Luke. 19.
The Son of man came not to destroy souls of men, but to save them. And in
another place S. Augustine says, De orig. can. lib. 3. cap. 8. Ep. 28.
that if a man will be a Catholic, he must not so believe, speak, nor teach.
Again in another place, that whosoever so says, Tanquam pestis communis fidei
detestandus est: he must be detested as the pestilence of common faith. Qui
profecto and contra Apostoli praedicatione^ venit, and totam condemnat
Ecclesiam. He verelie both goes against S. Paul's preaching, and condemns
the whole Church.

Therefore our Protestants and Puritans for this their unmerciful opinion,
are not Catholics, they are contrary to the Apostle, they condemn the
universal Church of GOD, they are to be detested as corrupters of our Faith,
as Heretics, as Pelagians: and in deed far worse than Pelagians. For we
read not, that they upon their Heresy leaft any child unbaptized, as these
do great numbers: because they, although they promised them without Baptism
life everlasting, falsely: yet not the kingdom of heaven also, foolishly (for
they thought, that one might be in life everlasting, without the kingdom of
heaven) and therefore thought they good to baptize them, for the getting of
that kingdom, though not for everlasting life: whereas our Heretics much more
falsely than those, promise them both life everlasting, and the kingdom of
heaven and all: and therefore suffer them very often to go away without
Baptism, as a thing for them at all unnecessary. O unmerciful and cruel
Heretics.

All good people for the love of God, and for pitties sake, see better unto
them: be every man with his acquaintance (who so has any amongst them)
diligent, earnest, and instant, that their poor babies die not unchristened.
Thus have I by two examples of old Heresies most undoubted, proved most
plainly, that they are Heretics: being both able, and ready (as I have said)
if need be to do the like by many examples more. Which examples for this time
omitting, leaving them to the remembrance of every man that is but meanly
read in Divinity: I will now show forth some other ways.

Miracles Dogmaticall.
yet will I say very little, as my purpose: and yet sufficient, as my promise
requires. Being then for us (as it has pleased God our Lord) two sorts of
Miracles, the one that may be called Dogmaticall, the other Personal: Of the
first sort I set this Conclusion: whosoever have at any time set themselves
against any Doctrine confirmed by Miracle, they have been against the truth.
There can to this no instance be given. So that if it be showed, our Doctrine
(which these men resist) to have been so confirmed: plain it is, that they
are enemies of the truth. But that can I easily show in diverse and sundry
points of that our doctrine: as that, with Miracles has been confirmed, and
with great numbers of Miracles, our doctrine of the Sign of the Cross, our
doctrine of Images, our Doctrine of Relics, our doctrine of Pilgrimage, our
doctrine of praying to Saints, of the necessity of Baptizing children, of
Confirming by a Bishop, and of very many other things by us taught and
believed, by the Heretics denied and derided. But because about so many
points I should be too long, I will be content with one or two, and them out
of such Authors as the Heretics cannot deny, nor answer with their peevish
scoffing at some uncertain or false Miracles, which they read in I know not
what Legenda Aurea, and such other obscure apocryphal writings: As if that,
because of certain Gospelles fained in the name of Saint Thomas, Nicodemus,
the Twelve, the Hebrews, etc. they would think therefore to scoff out the
authority of the undoubted Gospels of S. Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John.

And because about the holy Sacrifice of the Mass is our greatest variance,
they having by open Edict set thereon the loss of an hundred marks to every
one that freque^teth the same: the Mass shall be my first example, and
Purgatory my other, because that is of them no less contemned, then the holy
Mass, and one Miracle will I aleadge proving them both. And first for the
Sacrifice of the Mass. Saint Augustine is witness of a notable Miracle
wrought thereby in his own time, in his own Dioces, by a Priest of his own.
Which thus he writes: De ciuit. Dei li. 22. ca. 8. See there a number of
miracles for us
Vir Tribunitius, Hesperius, qui apud nos est, habet in territorio Fussalensi
fundum Cubedi appellatum. Vbi cum afflictione animalium and seruorum suorum,
domum suam spirituum malignorum vim noxiam perpeti comperisset, rogauit nostros
me absente presbyteros, vt alquis eorum illo pergeret, cuius or ationibus
cederent. Perrexit vnus, obtulit ibi Sacrificium Corporis Christi, orans
quantum potuit, vt cessaret illa vexatio: Deoque protinus miserante cessauit.
Hesperius a man of good worship, who is here with us, has nere about Fussala a
Farm named Cubedi. where finding by the affliction of his cattaile and
servants, that his house was ill troubled with wicked spirits: he besought our
Priests (for I was absent) that some one of them would go thither, The
forfait of an hundred marks was not then as yet enacted.
with his prayers to drive them away. There went one: he offered there the
Sacrifice of the body of Christ, praying with all his power, that the same
vexation might cease: and straight ways through Gods mercy, it ceased.

Now another Miracle for both the Mass and purgatory together, Hist. Angli.
li. 4. ca. 22.
I will recite out of our own Countrie-man Saint Bede, which chanced in his
time, in our own Country, no less certain, then merueilous. A notable thing
(he says) is Constat
certainly known to have bin done in the battle, wherein was killed King
Elbuine: which I in no wise think should be least untold, but that it will be
profitable to the salvation of many to rehearse it.

In that battle was slain amongst others of Elbuines soldiers, a young man
named Imma, who having that day and the night following amongst the bodies of
the slain, lain as dead, at length receiving breath again, revived and
sitting up, bound his wounds himself as well as he could. Then resting
awhile, gat him up, and began so to go his way, where he might find
frindes to see unto him. In so doing found he was and taken by him of his
enemies host, and brought to their Lord an Earl of King Edilredes, of whom
being asked what he was, he feared to confess that he was a soldier: and
rather answered, that he was a poor man of the country, and one that had a
wife, saying that he came with others such as he was into the Camp to bring
victuals to the Soldiers. But the Lord for all this took him to him, bidding
his wounds to be seen unto: and when he waxed whole, in the night for
running away he commanded him to be bound: but yet bound he could not be, for
straight, as they were gone that had bound him, the same his bonds were loosed:
for he had a brother, whose name was Tunna, a Priest and Abbot of a Monastery
in the City, which unto this day of his name is called Tunnacester. Who
hearing him to be killed in the fight, came to seek, if perhaps he might
find his body, and finding another in all points very like unto him, thought
it had bin he, and brought the same unto his Monastery, buried him honorably,
and for the loosing of his soul was diligent often to say Mass. By the saying
whereof was done the thing that I have told, that none could bind him but
straight he was loosed. In the mean time, the Earl that kept him, began to
marvel, asking how it was that he could not be bounden: whether perhaps
he had about him loosing letters, such as fables speak of, for which he might
not be bounden. But he answered, that he knew nothing of such sorceries: But a
brother I have (said he) a Priest, in my country, and sure I am, that he
thinking me to be slain, says often Mass for me. And if I were now in the
other life, there should my soul by his intercessions be loosed from pains.
After this when he was thoroughly recovered, the Earl sold him for London to a
certain Frisian: but neither of him, nor in the way thither could he by any
means be bounden, but still his enemies laying on him sundry kinds of bonds,
still were they loosed. When then he that had bought him, saw that in bonds
he could not be holden, he gave him leave to ransom himself, if he could.
For after Counting from the sunrysing.
the third hour, at which the Masses were wont to be said, very often were
his bands loosed; So then he found means to pay his ransom. And after this,
returning into his country, and coming to his brother, he up and told him in
order all the adversities, and comfortes in adversity, that had chanced unto
him. And by that his brother told him, he knew, at those times specially his
bands to have bin loosed, at which for him the Masses were celebrated. And
other things also, which to him in danger had happened profitably, and
prosperously, he understood, that by his brothers intercession and offering of
the Saving Host they had from heaven bin given him. And many hearing these
things of the foresaid man, were in faith and godly devotion enflamed to pray,
or to give alms, or to offer to our Lord, Victimas sacrae oblationis, pro
ereptione suorum, qui de saeculo migrauerunt, Hosts of the Sacred oblation*
for the delivery of their friends that were departed this world. For they
perceived, that the Saving Sacrifice was effectuous to everlasting Redemption
both of soul and body. Hanc mihi historiam, etiam quidam eorum, qui ab ipso
viro, in quo facta est, audiere, narrarunt: vnde eam, quam liquido comperi,
indubitanter historiae nostrae Ecclesiasticae inserendam credidi. This story
told me even some of them, which of the very man, in whom it was done, heard
it, and therefore finding it to be clear: I thought good without any doubt to
put it into our Ecclesiastical History.

After these two miracles, the one of Saint Augustines, the other of Saint
Bedes time, knowledge, and telling, I think it not amiss, to tell yet another
of our own time, and knowledge (as of the same, and of all times I might do
many) the rather because it was so late done, and that upon an English woman,
although in a strange country: God thereby greatly comforting, and confirming
all our hearts, and plainly declaring, that he thinks upon us unworthy
vvretches, and that (as I trust) he will surely cure our poor country,
specially if we seek to him for help in such manner as she did. Thanks be
to him for his unspeakable gift. Thus it was: Margaret Iesope borne at
Long-wicke in Risborough parish in Buckingamshire, after that from the twelfth
year of her age she had in London served diverse honest Citizens by the space
of sixteen years, entered in the year of our Lord. 1568. into the service of
Samuel Rogers a Dutchman dwelling in the Old Baylie. Where between her and a
man servant in the same house named John Mastene, a dutch man also, of
Bruxelles here in Brabant, upon mutual liking, passed a contract of
Matrimony, the day also of solemnizing the marriage agreed upon between them
both, named and appointed. But the friends of John at Bruxelles hearing
thereof, and much misliking it, induced him to come over to Bruxelles before he
proceeded further: there tendered him another woman, and persuaded him to agree
unto the^. Margaret in the mean time looking long for his return, and seeing
that he came not: upon confidence of their former contract and copulation also
which thereof ensued, came her self to Bruxelles at Alhallowentide in the year
1569. to seek for him. Where finding him married already to another, and stiffly
denying that he had made any contract at all with her: what for sorrow of
mind, what for lack of language, friends, harbor, and of all helps and
necessaries, both then, and ever afterward through bashfulnes refrayning from
her countrymen, like she was to have perished, until at length a poor woman
for pity and compassion took her in. In whose house falling in travail, and
very hardly escaping with her life, she was made so lame therewith, that for a
quarter of a year she was feign to keep her bed: remaining upon her delivery
a deep hole in her right side, like as if some of her ribs had bin suncken
far within her body, the skin yet continuing whole, the sinnowes also in
the hamme of her right leg being so much shrunken and contracted, that from
the hip downward it was shorter then the other leg by more then half a foot.

In which miserable state she continued about three years and four months,
lying (as I have said) one quarter of a year, and going abroad the rest by
help of a Crouch, with great difficulty and no less deformity: her right
foot not coming at the ground by a large half foot. Insomuch that after
she was able thus to walk, suing the said John both for the contract, and
for the maime: he alleged for himself in court, that she was borne with that
infirmity, and halted eue^ so before that ever he did know her, which not
withstanding was there openly proved contrary, as also contrary it was to
his own conscience. Whereat she greiued so sore, that she praid God most
earnestly, that he might again know her, as before he knew her. And he also
touched with remorse (as it seems) within that first year of her infirmity
hearing of a woman that was named to be very skillful in healing all diseases,
offered her five pounds to make this Margeret sound and whole. But the woman
after well viewing of her body, and examining of the circumstances of her
lamenesse in the first beginning that she fell into it, answered plainly,
that it passed her power and skill to heal her. A man likewise very skillful,
that two years after her said mischaunce undertook for eight pounds to help
her, when he had well considered her condition, answered, that she had
tarried to long, and that she was now past all help. She for all this
dispayred not of recovery, but two years before her restitution, conceived a
sure hope in God, that he, when it pleased him, would help her In the foresaid
town of Bruxelles, and in the head Church of the same named of S. Cudila, are
three miraculous holy Hoastes, of whom this is the story.

In the year of our Lord 1369. a certain Jew called Ionatha^, a man of great
riches, and chief of all the Jews then dwelling in the coasts of Brabant,
hired at Bruxelles for threescore pieces of gold, another Jew named John, who a
little before was christened, to steal for him out of some Church the Pixe
with the holy Hoastes that in it were kept according to the manner. By whose
means having obtained his desire, he returned with the Pix home to Angy,
distant xv. English miles from Bruxelles: there he called his fellow-Iewes
together: before them opened the Pixe, poured out the Hoastes, with great
laughing of all those traitors, scorning, railing, reuiling, and blaspheming of
the faith and Christ of Christian men, not only a^ that time, but at sundry
other times also of their wicked meeting for that Jewish exercise. Ionathas
shortly after, as he walked to his garden a little out of the town of Angie,
fell by the just judgment of God into the hands of thieves, of them was
spoiled, and finally killed. His wife thereby brought into great misery, came
from Angie to dwell at Bruxelles, bringing with her the Pixe, and offering it
to the Jews there. Who gladly receiving it, and putting it in their Sinagogue
(which is now a Chapel) sent diverse of the holy Hoasts into diverse Countries
where the Jews were then dwelling, for the likewise to mock thereat, and at
the Christians for their faith therein.

After this, upon Good Friday, as the Christians assembled themselves to honor
Christ our Lord, and his bitter Passion our sweet Redemption, so those
perfidious Jews of Bruxelles met together in their Sinagogue to do after
their former custom: there in contempt of Christ, and despite of his
Christians, they cast out of the Pix the holy Hoasts upon a Table, blasphemed
them most horribly, drew out their knives and daggers, therewith foyned and
pricked them (as to this day we see) like frantike mad men. Whereupon issued
blood out of them immediately, and the Jews thereat so amassed, and astonished,
that straight ways to the ground they fell, and there did lie so as if they
had been dead: Joan. 18.
But he that at the time of his Passion first laid them on the ground with his
mighty word, and after suffered them to rise again: now likewise permitting
them to receive their strength, up they rose again with much fear and
trembling, not knowing what to do. At last they agreed thus to do: to bid to
a banquet an old woman named Katharine, a Jew borne, but then a Christian, to
warm her well with wine, and so to hire her for money, to convey the said
bloody Hoastes away to the Jews of Cole^, for fear least the matter should
come to the ears of Christian men at Bruxelles. She agreeing to their request
taking home with her the Pixe, and minding the next day after to take her
journey, was the same night in her sleep admonished by an angel, to leave off
her enterprise, and to deliver the Pixe to her Ghostly Father the Curate of the
Chapel Church. Which she did on the morrow, in the presence of two other
Priests. And sone after, the matter being known all abroad, there came in
solemn Procession the Bishop of the Dioces, the Canons of Saint Gudilaes
Church, the Duke of Brabant, his wife and Nobles, and all the people, to the
Chapel Church, to translate from thence those three Sacred Hoastes to the great
Church of S. Gudila, where to this day they are reverently kept, openly showed,
and devoutly honored with great and daily concourse of people: but most
singularly upon the Sunday after Saint Margarets day in the month of Iulie.

To omit here the Dukes just severity showed upon that wicked rabble for
their manifold villainies, and to return to our Countriwoman: She now living at
Bruzelles, with the foresaid infirmity befallen unto her, and there both
hearing much of others concerning this B. Sacrament of Miracle, and seeing also
herself the great seeking of people unto it: conceived her foresaid sure hope,
that God Almighty by it would help her. But then again considering with her
self, that such as look for mercy at Gods hands, must with his grace prepare
themselves so as man's poor fragylitie will permit: she labored all that
she might to fly from sin, to approach unto God: and to that purpose she
served him every day very devoutly at his Altar in the Church, as the people
do give her very good testimony. But specially the last year at Shroftide
she gave herself most earnestly to all spiritual and godly exercises. An.
1573.
For then did she take order with herself to fast weekly from that time
forward, wednesday, Friday, and Saturday: and that in bread and water, taking
also thereof a very small quantity: to come likewise in no bed at al, but to
lie on the ground: which she yet observes until at least the year of her
healing be first expired: to use moreover no linen next her body, to go every
week to Confession, and as often also to receive the blessed Sacrament.

And as she proceeded further and further in the exercise of these most godly
works, so Gods goodness drawing nearer and nearer unto her, she grew likewise
more and more in hope: in so much, that a few days before her healing, she
said plainly both to her ghostly father, and to diverse her familiars, that
she had now no doubt at all, but that her healing was so near at hand, that
she looked for it every day: and that the more assuredly, because the great
solemnity of the blessed Miraculous Sacrament was now likewise at hand. Well,
the Saturday came, and that Solemnity should be the Sunday after. The same
Saturday she went a great league out of Bruxels (not regarding her exceeding
pain in going) to her accustomed Ghostly Father, who a little before was gone
so far out of the town to dwell, and she very loath at that time to go to
any other Confessor but to him only, who by long hearing of her Confession,
knew so well the state of her soul. And being come home again, the same
Fuening, it chanced her in talking with a certain woman that ought her
money, to be angry with her for disapointing of her, and besides to threaten
her, that she would have her in the Law for it. Where in suspecting afterward
that she had broken her patience, and therefore fearing to receive on the
morrow the B Sacrament without confessing of herself again. Again to
confession she went on the Sunday morning to the Pastor of the Chapel Church
(her Parish Church) a very singular good man, Lord Suffragan to the Archbishop
of Mechlin, and Orderer both of me most unworthy, and of other Englishmen for
the most part that in these Countries are made Priests. He giving her (as it
may seem, by reason that she was at confession the day before) but short
Penance, rose up out of hand, leaving many gentlewomen which waited at his
stoale (as they do ordinarily every Sondaie) to be confessed of him: leaving
them all, I say, he rose immediately for her cause, and came himself to
minister the Blessed Sacrament unto her being neither desired thereto of her,
nor looked for, nor yet accustomed to communicate any, both because he is
otherwise detained by reason of the great number of them that resort every
Sondaie to Shrift unto him, and also because one of the Chaplains gives
always attendaunce to serve the Communicantes as they come. Having in this
order received the Blessed Sacrament and afrerward heard the Sermon, she went
her then forthwith to S. Gudilaes Church, to hear the solemn Mass of the B.
Miraculous Sacrament, which was there to be song that day by the said L.
Suffragan, as in place of the Archbishop: and after Mass, to go with the
general Procession, in which the said B. Sacrament should be carried about
the streates, as the manner is there every year as upon that Sunday.

So it was that the evening before she determined with two widow,
sisters, good virtuous women with whom she dwelled in house together, to go
that night three times the Procession-way in pilgrimage, as devout people do
there commonly use to do. But when she had one of the three times so gone,
behold, so weary she was and sore in her body, that she was forced to go home
to rest her: the two sisters laughing at her for so doing, and saying merrily:
why Margeret? what is this? you said, that you doubted not, but God would this
time of this great Procession make you that you should not need your staff at
al: which seems so far off from happening unto you, that it is rather
needful for you to use yet one ffaffe mo to that one which you have already.
She notwithstanding this new acccident of greater lamenesse ryseth early up
the Sonday-morning: and using as it were violence upon her self, goes the
Procession-way yet once again the second time.

Well, being come (as I said before) to hear the solemn mass, kneling within
the Quiere nere to the Altar (as here the use of people is, by reason of the
exceeding great multitudes which resort to such solennities) and Mass being
now begone she fealt immediately such an-horror and trembling in all her
body, such stretching and strayning, such haling and pulling, cold sweat
following also thereof in much abundance, and her memory and senses beginning
thereupon to fail her, that it seemed unto her nothing more like then death it
self to be near at hand. Yet bearing it a while the best that she could, for
reverence of the place and company, and resigning herself into the hands of
God: after the Epistle was read, she began to feel some more ease both in
mind and body. And at the time of the Gospel standing up with others, by help
of her crouch, she seemed to her self, when she was stood up, that she had
not as then needed that help, but that she could have rise^ without it, and
began to think within herself that, she now stood upon both her legs
without it, her short leg touching now the ground no less the^ her other.
Well, the Gospel being ended she kneled her down again in silence after the
manner, until the end of Mass and the Bishopps blessing. Then for greedines of
Holie-water, which there is wont at the end of every Mass to be sprinkled, up
she rose suddenly, because she would leese no spiritual help which at that
Mass might be had, and did forgett for have both her crouch, her hat, her
beads, and her handkerchef. Her hat an husband man that stood by her at Mass,
brought by and by unto her: the rest in the throng, except her staff, were
lost.

She feeling herself fully and wholly delivered both from all pain, and also
from all cause of halting and lamenesse) for this her strange chance, first
being sore amassed and half crying out withal, but anon remembering better her
self and much reioysyng for that which had happened: going, or rather runnyng
out of the Church before the Procession, as she met in the multitude here and
there with her acquaintance, they wondering to see her go vpryght, and
without her crouch, she told them with great joy, that by virtue of the B.
Sacrament of Miracle, she was (as they saw) wholly restored. Which while she
told thus to very few, thinking still that it had been secret, the fame
thereof did immediately so increase, specially by the means of the^ that at
Mass time kneeled about her, and marked well the whole order of her strange
moods, that her staff by and by was taken up in the place where she left it,
and hanged up forthwith after the manner there beside the place of the said
blessed Miraculous Sacrament, by the Chaplain that has the custody of the
same.

Afterward, the miracle of her healing being more famously known, and
proclaimed in pulpits, to the hearing also of other Cities round about:
certain Englishmen that lay at Mechlin, twelve miles off, understanding of it,
thought it good, for the honor of God and in respect of her poverty, to call
her to Mechlin, unto their service. Which journey she went so lustily, that
certain of our cou^trymen very good on foot had much a do to keep her
company: as ever since in deed her agilitie is such, that she rather seems
to fly, or at least to run, then to go as others do. As touching her
unfaithful husband, of whom before I spoke, he very shortly after this Miracle
of her healing, falling out with another young fellow, received of him a very
grievous wound, whereof within a few days after he died. And this much have I
said of Do^maticall Miracles.

Miracles Personal.
them shall venture to give any. For what they can do, I am not ignorant: Only
this, that some miscreantes have made boast and show of Miracles, Trac 13. in
lo.
as Simon Magus, Mahomet, the Donatistes, whom for that cause Saint Augustine
terms Mirabilarios, Meruailousers (so to say) and as certain Heretics of
this time do, Fox, Humpherie, and others: and as Antichrist shall do
hereafter in his lieing signs and wonders, 2. These. 2.
in omni virtute and signis and prodigijs mendacibus, being able none of them
(but such only as some-time they have wrought in plain confirmation of our
Catholic truth, being therefore Dogmaticall, and not personal) to abide the
touch or examination, no better then the Iugglings of Iannes and Mambres, Exo.
7.
the Magicians of Pharao, whose rods were straight devoured by the rod of
Moises: Exo. 8.
and they at the third plague of Ciniphes or gnattes compelled to confess,
Digitus Dei est hic, The finger of God is this: and so their folly (as Saint
Paul says) manifested to all men: 2, Tim. 3.
Moses and Aaron proceeding yet still and multiplying their strange and mighty
wonders. So I say, true Miracles last and continue: fained tricks do vanish
sone away, as the sluttish feate of Lane the Minister at Westchester.

But yet because for a time they may chance to deceive some fools, and others
also that know not the power of Nature and of the Devil, S. Augustine has
noted unto us out of our Saviors words a very good, ready, present, Mat. 13.
and certain rule, saying: Tene amus ergo vnitatem, In Io. tr. 13. vide de
unit. Ec. cae. 16.
fratres mei: praeter vnitatem, and qui facit miracula, nihil est. Let us
therefore keep the unity my brethen: out of the unity, he also that works
Miracles, is nothing. So as S. Paul also said: Gal. 1.
Sed licet nos aut Angelus de coelo euangelizet vobis, praeter quam quod
euangelizauimus vobis, praeter id qu^d accepistis, anathema sit. But although
we or an Angel from heaven should gospel unto you contrary unto that which
we have gospelled unto you, contrary unto that which you have received,
accursed be he. Not because there is any such danger of an Angel of Heaven, but
because folish and light persons are always ready to cry, as they did at
Poules, when they saw Bradford the Heretic, after their seditious hurling of
the dagger, step up in M. Bournes place (my Lord afterward of Bathe and
Wells) an Angel, an Angel.

I say then, that innumerable holy men of our unity, have in all ages had the
grace of working true Miracles, not disprooued not able to be checked: as S.
Thomas Aquinas, Saint Bonauenture, Saint Bernard, Saint Thomas of Canterbury,
Saint Frauncis, Saint Dominicke, and in^in^te others. Wherefore I conclude,
that it was the truth which they preached. Hereunto what can they answer?
truly nothing but only that which the blasphemous Pharisees answered of our
Savior, Luke 11.
that by the Devil he worked his Miracles, no man being able to put any
difference between the miracles of Christ with his Apostles, and of these holy
men: the one sort to be defended with no reason, but with the same reason the
other sort may be likewise defended: For that these holy men were of our side,
it is so well known, that they confess it: that they were of God wonderfully
commended by the gift of Miracles, even to the healing of desperate disseases
by the touch of their g^rments skirts, and to the raising of the dead also, it
is so manifest in all stories, that it cannot be denied.

One example will I here allege of Saint Bernard, but that such a one, as may
rather be called many, and as may suffice for all, being both Personal, and
Dogmaticall, so commending his person, that it also directly confirmed his
doctrine, and the same our doctrine, and that not in one or two points, but in
all almost that at this day the Heretics have called in question.

So it was, that in Saint Bernardes time there were certain Heretics named
Henricians of one Henry, who of a Monk became an Apostata. Pet. Clun. in
opere suo con. illos. Ber. in Ca^. Ser. 66.
These Heretics burned Images, destroyed churches, denied the real presence
of Christ's Body in the Blessed Sacrament, Transubstantiation of the B^ead into
the same, the Sacrifice of the Mass, praying for the dead, praying to Saints,
and many other articls, which also the Protestants and Puritans do now deny
They reigned much in the Country about Tholousa in France. For which cause
Saint Bernard being desired often, and at length brought thither to preach
against them, did the same with great working also of most wonderful Miracles,
De vita S. Ber. lib. 3. cap. 5.
as writes Godfridus a Monk, and Disciple of Sa^^t Bernards. Amongst many
others, of that which I would aleage, thus he writes.

Est locus in regione eadem, Sarlatum nomen est illi, vbi sermon completo
plurimos ad benedicendum panes, sicut vbique fiebat, Dei famulo offerebant.
Quos ille eleuata manu and signo crucis edito in dei nomine benedice^s: in hoc,
inquit, scietis vera esse, quae a nobis, falsa quae ab haereticis suadentur, si
infirmi vestri gustatis panibus istis adepti fuerint sospitate^. Timens autem
venerabilis Episcopus Carnotensium magnus ille Gaufridus (siquidem praesens
erat and proximus uiro Dei) si bona, inquit, fide sumpserint, sanabuntur. Cui
pater sanctus de domini virtute nihil haesitans: Non hoc ego dixerim, ait, sed
vere qui gusta^erint, sanabuntur: vt proinde veros nos, and veraces Dei
ministros esse cognoscant. Tam ingens multitudo languentium gustato eodem pane
conualuit, vt per totam prouinciam verbu^ hoc diuulgaretur and vir sanctus per
vicina loca regrediens, ob concursus intolerabiles declinauerit, and timuerit
illo ire. A place there is in the same country of Tolousa, the name of it is
Sarlatu^, where after the Sermon was done, they offered to the servant of God,
as every where the use was, many loaves to bless. Which he by lifting up his
hand, and by making the sign of the Cross, in Gods name blessing, said thus:
In this shall you know, Miracles by Holy Bread.
that the things are true which we, and that the things are false, which the
Heretics labor to persuade you, if your diseased persons by the tasting of
these loaves shall get their health. Whereat fearing the Reverend Bishop of
the Carnotians that same great GAVFRIDVS (for he was present, and stood next
to the man of God.) If quoth he, they take it with a good Faith, they shall be
healed. To whom the Holy Father nothing doubting of our Lords power, said:
It is not this that I would say, but verily, whosoever they be that taste it,
they shall be healed, that thereby they may know, us to be the very and true
Ministers of God. And there, so huge a multitude of diseased persons by tasting
the same bread, recovered, that over all the country this word was talked, and
the holy man returning over the places which were there by, was feign to go
out of his way for intolerable concourse of people, and feared to go thither.

Ep. 241.
And of the same does Saint Bernard himself in his Epistle afterward to those
Tolousians, make mention in these words: We thank God, for that our coming
to you was not in vain. Our tariance in deed was short with you, but not
unfruitful. Veritate nimirum per nos manifestata non solum, in Sermon, sed
etiam in virtute, deprehensi sunt Lupi. The truth being by us made manifest not
only by preaching, but also by working, the Wolves were deprehended, etc. In
which his writing he imitateth S. Paul to the Thessalonians, 1. These. 2.
where he says: Euangelium nostrum non fuit ad vos in Sermon tantum, sed in
virtute, etc. Our Gospel was not unto you in preaching only, but in working
of Miracles, etc. And unto the Corinthians he says, touching their false
Apostles: Veniam autem ad vos cito, si Dominus voluerit: 1. Cor. 4.
and cognoscam non sermonem eorum qui inflati sunt, sed virtute^, etc. I will
come unto you quickly, and if it be Gods will, and then will I consider, not
of the preaching of those proud Masters, but of their power in working, etc.
For these true Ministers of our Savior Jesus Christ, Saint Paul, and Saint
Bernard, knew well, that the same our Lord had given such a token to know his
Ministers saying: Signa autem eos qui crediderint, haec sequentur: Mar. 16.
In nomine meo daemonia eijcient, linguis loquentur nouis, serpents tollent,
and si mortiferum quid biberint, non it is nocebit. These Miracles shall follow
such as believe in me: In my name they shall cast out Devils, they shall speak
new languages, they shall take up Serpents, and if they drink any poison, it
shall not hurt them.

For which cause Saint Paul in his second Epistle to the Corinthians,
threatening to come again unto them, and then to Excommunicate the offenders,
without sparing of any: 2. Cor. 13.
Praedixi, and praedico vt praesens, and nunc absens i^s qui a^te peccauerun^,
and caeteris omnibus, quoniam si venero iterum, non parcam: proves this
authority of his to excommunicate with the power of Christ, unto such as would
perhaps not fear it, by his working of Miracles amongst them with the power
likewise of Christ: An experimentum quaeritis eius qui in me loquitur Christus:
qui in vobis non infirmatur sed potens est in vobis? What, do you seek a
proof of him that speaks in me, Christ? who in you ^s not weak, but mighty
he is in you.

Whereby it is manifest, that they do miserably forget themselves, who fear
not the excommunications of Pius Quintus, of holy memory: in whom Christ
himself to have spoken and excommunicated, as in S. Paul (unless
peradventure they believe not, neither in Christ himself: needing therefore,
that S. Paul say to them also: Vosmetipsos tentate, si estis in fide: ipsi vos
probate, etc.) they might consider by the miracles, that Christ by him, as by
S. Paul did work: he with his prayers and signing of the Cross, casting
Devils out of five women in open procession, Vide Epistolas Germanorum
quorunda^. Surius and Chronologia edit. 1572.
as very many oculati testes do to this day bear witness, some of them also
having put it in print: and the Chronicles of this time commonly recording it.

And in consideration of this, that God must needs be confessed to be with
them, that by his power do thus work Miracles, the Apostles and other
Christians in the first beginning prayed thus: Et nunc Domine, respice in minas
eorum, Act. 4.
and da seruis tuis cum omni fiducia loqui verbum tuum, in eo quod manum tuam
extendas ad sanitates, and signa and prodigia fieri per nome^ sancti Filij tui
Jesus. And now Lord, look to the threats of our enemies, and grant thy
servants to speak thy word with all confidence, by this that thou stretch
forth thy hand to healing, and Miracles and wonders to be wrought by the name
of thy holy son Jesus. Which even so to have bin done, Saint Mark
witnesses, saying: that the Apostles after Christ's sending of them, Mark 16.
Went and preached every where, our Lord woorkeing with them, and confirmeing
their preaching with Miracles that followed

Whereupon it is most certainly inferred, that we, who have for our Preachers
and Religion such confirmation from God, are of Christ our Lord, and that the
Protestants, and Puritans, which utterly are destitute of all such
confirmation, are not of Christ's sending, but that they come of their own
head, by the instigation of Inimicus homo. The enemy man, Mat. 13.
to destroy the seed sown before by the true Sower in every Christian
Country, with the mighty operation of marvelous Miracles, such as by our men
were wrought (and still are wrought) in all Nations, specially at their first
conversion, which is a thing well known to all that are any thing read in
Histories.

Visions.
side were those persons, of ours, or of the Protestants, and of what side
were and are those doctrines, of ours or of the Protestants, which persons and
doctrines, or also doctrines alone, and not the persons (as sometimes has
happened) God in any age has commended with heavenly Visions. For that way
does Saint Paul himself use, to comme^d both himself and his doctrine unto
the Corinthians, against the deprauing of their false Apostles, and Heretykes:
Veniam autem ad visiones and reuelationes Domini: scio hominem in Chriflo etc.
2. Cor. 12.
Now will I come to Visions and Revelations of our Lord. I know a man in Christ
fourtene years ago (whether in his body, I know not, or out of his body, I
know not: God knows) the same man to have bin rapt even unto the third
heaven. And I know the same man (whether in his body, or out of his body, I
know not: God knows) that he was rapt in Paradise, and heard secret words,
such as a man may not tell. Pro huiusmodi gloriabor: prome autem nihil
gloriabor, nisi in infirmitatibus meis. Of such a man will I boast: but of my
self (by name) will I nothing boast, but only in mine infirmities.

2. Pet 1.
Saint Peter likewise alleging his Vision (for so it is called in the Gospel)
of our Lords Transfiguration in the Mount, Mat 17.
is nothing afeard of that kind of argument, but says boldly: For we have
not followed crafty fables in preaching unto you the power and presence of our
Lord Jesus Christ, but beholders we were before of his Majesty. For receiving
of God his Father honor and glory, coming down unto him such a voice from the
magnificent Glory: This is my beloved Son in whom I have pleased my self: him
do you hear. And this voice heard we brought from heaven, when we were with
him in the Holy Mount.

Also for the Christening of us that be Gentiles, Act. 10. et 11.
he had a Vision of a Sheet with all kinds of beasts in yt, both clean
and unclean: a voice bidding him from heaven kill and eat of them all, which
Vision he eftsoon alleges boldly in defense of that his doing. He allegeth
also in the Acts of the Apostles for the truth of Christ's Religion, Act. 2.
a Prophecy of Joel, in the which amongst other signs and arguments of the
truth thereof, this also is promised to be one: Joel. 2.
And your sons (says he) and your daughters shall prophecy: and your
yong-men shall see Visions, and your elder sort shall dream dreams, etc.

Finally, of this sort we have one whole book of the new Testament, named
the Apocalipse, or Revelation, or Visions of Saint John. Now then for a few
examples, consider ye of Saint Monica the mother of S. Augustine, a woman very
much accustomed to marvelous Visio^s sent her of God, as Saint Augustine
himself witnesses in many places of his devout Confessions: Co^fes. l. 3. ca.
11.
namely, how on a time, beginning to detest and abhor her son being yet a
Manichee, and to refrain from eating with him for his blaspemies, she had a
dream, in which she saw herself stand upon a wodden ruler as straight as a
line, and a young man coming unto her shining, pleasant, and smiling upon her,
she being then heavy, and with heaviness a most spent. Who after that he had
asked of her the causes of her heaviness and daily weeping, she answering that
it was for my perdition (says Saint Augustine) bad her to be without care,
willing her to ma^ke and behold, that where she was, there was I also, which
when she had marked, she saw me standing by her upon the same ruler, says
he: in sign that he should turn to be of her Religion, although not before
that time nine years.

Consider now (I say) of what Relygion was this holy woman (for of the same,
you see, was S. Augustine himself afterward: and the same in him by God
himself both promised and performed) whether she were a Protestante or a
catholic such as we be. She believed and knew, Co^fes. l. 9. ca. 4. Co los. 2.
that from of the Altar was ministered and dispensed Victima sancta, qua
deletum est chirographum quod erat contrarium nobis, the holy host or
sacrifice, whereby was stricken out of the bill of our hand which was against
us. Ad cuius pretij nostri Sacramentum ligauit animam suam vinculo fidei. To
the Sacrament of that our ra^some she tied her soul with the band of faith,
worshipping so that blessed Sacrament with Religion, and making of it God him
self. For as S. Augustine says in an other place: Dever. re. ca. vlt. et 1.
Ret. 13.
we must tie our souls to God alone, and thereof Religion is thought in
latin to be named, Deo vni religantes animas nostras, vnde Religio dicta
creditur. And therefore this blessed woman in her lifetime served or
worshipped the Altar, without omission of any one day: cui nullius diei
praetermissione seruierat. And at her death, ta^tummodo memoriam sui ad Altar
tuum fieri desiderauit, she desired nothing of her frindes touching her burial,
but only that she might be remembered at thy Altar. Co^fe l. 9. ca. 12.
Which also was done: Offertur pro ea sacrificium pretij nostri. For her was
offered the Sacrifice of our ransom, says Saint Augustine, and that at her
burial: Li. 9. ca. 14.
but again when he wrote his Confessions, see what he says: Inspire, O Lord
unto al Priests that shall chance to read this book of mine, Vt meminerint
ad altar tuum Monicae famulae tuae cum Patritio quondam eius coniuge, that
they remember at thy altar, Monica thy servant, with Patrike once her housband
by whose flesh thou broughtst me into this life. Were these folk Proresta^ts,
trow you?

Consider moreover, what doctrine, and which of our two sides is commended by
the most certain Visyons, that Saint Gregory writes, himself being a
party in one of them two that I will recite: Dial l. 4. ca. 55.
in his monastery a Monk named Iustus, at his death told his natural brother
Copiosus, a secular man, where he should find and take three Crounes which he
had hid, against his Rule forbidding all propriety, that al should live in
common Which Saint Gregory hearing of, invented a most wise devise, whereby
both Iustus might be, and was in deed brought to repent him of his sin, and
the other MONKS warned never themselves to do the like. It was that only
his brother should be with him at his departure, and none of the mo^ks come at
him, and that after his death they should bury him in a dounghil and his money
with him, crying all together: Pecunia tua tecum sit in perditione: Act. 3.
thy money be with thee in perdition: Thirty days after, considering the long
and grievous pains of the soul in purgatory, I called (says S. Gregory)
unto me Preciosus the Prior of my Monastery, and said unto him: Go, and from
this day offer for him sacrifice 30. days together etc. But we being busy
about other things, and not counting the days, the same our brother that was
departed, on a night appeared to his brother Copiosus in a Vision, who seeing
him, asked: how do you brother, how is it with you? He answered: until now I
have bin ill, but even now presently I am well. For this day I am absolved
from my excommunication, Communionem recepi. Which thing the same Copiosus came
by and by and told our brethren in the Monastery. They then exactly counted
the days: and behold it was the very same day, that the thirtith oblation for
him had binne fulfilled. And so Copiosus, not knowing what the brothers had
done for him: and the brothers again not knowing, what Copiosus had seen of
him: by this that at one self time he knows, what they had done, and they
again know what he had seen, Concordante simul visione and Sacrificio, res
aperte claruit, by the agreing together of the Vision and of the Sacrifice, the
matter proved clear and plain, that our brother departed, by the Saving
Host was escaped his punishment.

After this immediately, he tells an other Vision, Cap. 56.
which that we may not mistrust the words of the dead, confirms them by the
deeds of the living. Cassius (says he) a man of godly life, Bishop of Narnes,
who used to offer unto God daily Sacrifice, and at the Canon of the Mass,
Inter ipsa sacrificiorum arcana, Sacrificed himself in tears, received on a
time our Lords Commandment, by the Vision of a certain Priest, or Chaplain
of his, saying: Do as thou do, work as thou workest, let not cease thy
foot, let not cease thy hand: Natali Apostolorum venies ad me, and retribua^
tibi mercedem tuam, upon Saint Peter and Saint Paul's day thou shall come to
me, and I will pay thee thy wages. Qui post annos septem, ipso natalitio
Apostolorum die, cum Missarum solennia peregisset, and Mysteria sacrae
communionis accepisset, e corpore exiuit: Who seven years after, upon the
very day of Saint Peter and S. Paul, when he had done Mass after the manner,
and had received the mysteries of the Sacred communion, went out of his body.

For what Religion make (I pray you) these Visions? Whose doctrine and doing
do they confirm? Or were these men that I have named, some simple souls, that
could not discern between true Visions, and false illusions? Or can any but
God alone, tell things before, hand, so as here the conversion of Saint
Augustine was fore-tolde: so as here the death of Cassius, and the very day
thereof, was likewise foretold: the one nine years, the other seven years
before they chanced?

And therefore, as in the last Chapter, I willed Miracles to be considered,
and not iugglinges, or things that may be done by reason: so here I propose
not illusions, but Visions to be considered. And by them (I say) so certainly
may the Truth be tried, how sure it is, that GOD himself neither does, nor
can deceive us. Which any reasonable man may well enough perceive by this
also, that as Miracles: so Visions likewise be all with us alone, and not one
at all that the Protestants can for them aleadge. For if they were not sure
arguments and undoubted, who sees not, that unto us both they would be common?

Therefore being all for us, and none for them, it is easy for any man to see
thereby, that will not be blind, that truth is on our side, and not on their
side. Whosoever therefore after this plain warning, by so many arguments,
all most certain, every one alone sufficient, sticks yet still to them, and
returns not to us: he plainly declares, himself to care no more, yea
nothing so much, to save his poor soul from everlasting damnation, as he
would do to save his dog from hanging.

The Vision of Judas Machabeus, which the canonical Scripture it self
records, 2. Mac. 15.
and calls fide dignum somniu^, a dream worthy to be believed, wherein he
saw Saint Jeremy the Prophet praying for the people: makes it for the
protestants? Makes it not so evidently for Intercession of Saints, that they
have no shift to answer it, but by denying the Book? Whereby they do
plainly show forth to all men which be but indifferent, that the cause why
they deny not the other Scriptures, yea the Gospel it self, is not for any
reverence that they bear thereto, but only because they think, that they have
invented stuftes good enough to blind the world, and to make show of answer to
the places which out of the same we aleage against them. To be brief, the
Visions most certain which might be here brought forth, and that for very
many other points of our doctrine besides the foresaid, are innumerable, in
every age since Christ's time, in great abundance, certain of our own time
and country, I may not omit.

A man there is in England, that having been very long a Protestant, although
much solicited to the contrary, and being on a time about five years ago at
the point of death, ventred in that extremity, to tempt God, and to ask for a
sign, that he would be merciful unto him, show him the true way, that (...)
Quanquam sci^m, somnia ridicula, and visiones ineptas quibusdam videri: sed
vtique illis qui malunt contra Sacerdotes credere, quam Sacerdoti: Sed nihil
mirum, quando de Joseph fratres sui dixerint: Cyp. lib. 1. Epi. 9. seu Epi. 66.
in noua edit.
Ecce somniator ille venit, etc. Howbeit I know (as Saint Cyprian says) that
dreams to certain seem ridiculous, and Visions foolish: but verily to such
as had rather to believe against Priests, then to believe the Priest. But no
marvel, seeing that of Joseph his brethren said: See, yonder comes the
dreamer, Genesis 27.
etc.

Scriptures.
whatsoever they were, and how soever for a time they deceived some wretched
persons or Countries, Heretics they were undoubtedly, and evermore in the end
so proved. Read the ancient writers against Heresies: Ireneus, Epiphanius,
Philastrius, Saint Augustine, with all the Ecclesiastical Histories: and see
whether that all that so did, were not such as I say, namely Simon Magus,
Basilides, Carpocrates, Valentinus, Cerdon, Marcion Apelles, Seuerus, the
Manichees, the Ebionites, the Helchesites, the Arrians, the Aetians, and such
others: all detestable Heretics, by the judgment now, and many hundred years
before, of the whole world, and all stubborn deniers of certain approved
Canonical Scriptures, such especially, as to their wicked doctrine were most
plainly contrary.

For example, the Ebionites: Iren. 1. ad hers. ca. 26.
because they would have us to be both Jews and Christians, Eus. 3. Ec. hist.
ca. 27
circumcised and baptized together, denied stiflie, and most impudently all S.
Paul's Epistles, as directly written against that Heresy, Epiph. 1. haer. 30.
plainly testifying, that by Christ we are all delivered from that law. The
Manichees likewise, because they would that the holy Ghost, Aug. de vtil. cre.
Cap. 3.
which Christ promised to send unto his Disciples, came to us by the Author of
their Sect named Manicheus, they denied the acts of the Apostles, for that in
them Christ's promise is said to have been fulfilled ten days after his
Ascension, certain hundred years before that Manicheus was borne.

And do not the Heretics of this time play us the very same part? Do they not
deny the Canonical most certain Scripture of the Machabees, Aug. 2. doct.
Chr. cap. 5.
for none other cause, but for that they cannot otherwise avoid the most
plain testimonies thereof that are there against their Heresies? As concerning
praying for the dead: Sancta and salubris est cogitatio, pro d^functis exorare,
2. Macc. 12.
vt a peccatis soluantur. An holy and an wholesome meaning it is, to pray for
the dead, that they may be loosed of their sins. Likewise concerning prayer of
Saints for us: Multum orat pro populo and vniuersa sansta ciuitate, 2. Macc.
15.
Ieremias Propheta Dei: Jeremy the Prophet of God prays much for the people
and for all the holy City. To whom in defense of this book we say, De praen.
Sa^ct. ca. 14.
as Saint Augustine said to certain that denied a testimony of the book of
wisdom, Tanquam non de libro Canonico adhibitum, as taken by him out of a
book that is not Canonical. Thus he says: Non debuit repudiari sente^tia
libri Sapientiae, qui meruit in Ecclesia Christi, de gradu Lectorum Ecclesiae
Christi tam lo^ga annositate recitari, and ab omnibus Christianis, ab Episcopis
vsque ad extremos laicos, fideles, poenitentes, catechumenos, cum veneratione
diuinae authoritatis audiri. They should not reject the saying of the book of
wisdom, which book in the Church of Christ has deserved so long a rue of
years to be recited, out of the step whereon the Lectours of the Church of
Christ do stand to read the lessons: and with worship belonging to a book of
divine authority to be heard of all Christyan men, from Bishopps, even to the
lowest sort, of laymen, faithful, penitents, and Catechumenes. Etiam
temporibus proximi Apostolorum egregij tractatores, eum testem adhibentes,
nihil se adhibere nisi diuinum testimonium crediderint. Also the notable
Interpreters or Fathers, that lived next to the Apostles times, when they
brought forth that book for witness, nothing did they believe themselves to
bring forth, but Gods own witness.

Do they not again deny the Epistle of Saint James, in Luther their man of
God, because it is against their Heresy of Justification by faith only, and
not by works, Iac. 1.
saying most plainly: Ex operibus iustificatur homo, and non ex fide tantum. By
works a man is justified, and not by faith only Do they not likewise in
Beza, Beza in Lac 22.
now their Oracle at Geneua, say, that Saint Lukes Gospel is falsified, where
it has, Hic est Calix, qui pro vobis fundetur, This is the Chalice, shed for
you: because it most manifestly witnesses against the^, the Real presence of
Christ's blood in the Chalice: the chalice being therefore of Saint Luke said to
be shed for us, because that which is in the Chalice, is shed for us: and not
wine, nor none other thing shed for us, but only Christ's most precious blood.

If in these points they like not their Beza, nor their Luther, why will they
seem to be their folowers? why do they not, as we do, for the same condemn
them? Is not one false point of the Arrians, sufficient to us to condemn the
Arrians? will they, nil they, a false point this is, and to be found (as I have
said) in none but Heretics. And therefore they do well to be good to their
companions, in the case of S. James Epistle, Saint Lukes Gospel and others more:
because they are plainly under the same judgment themselves, specially for the
books of the Machabees. We on the other side most obediently receive and
believe all Scriptures Canonical.

Whereby to any reasonable man yt may be manifest (which in it self is most
certain) that of the same there is no part to our doctrine repugnant, but all
without exception to us agreing, all against heretics undoubtedly, and that in
some parts so openly, that they have no other shift, but by denying.

Traditions most certain.
Saint Paul to the Church of the Corinthians: Laudo autem vos fratres, 1 Cor.
11.
quod per omnia mei memores estis, and sicut tradidi vobis, praecepta mea
tenetis. I commend you, brethren, that in all things, you remember me, and even
as I delivered unto you, you keep my Traditions, Tas paradoseis. And to the
Church of the Thessalonians: Itaque, fratres, 2. These. 3.
state: and tenete Traditiones quas didicistis, sieve per sermonem, sieve per
Epistolam nostram, Therefore be constant, brethern: and hold fast the
Traditions, which you have been taught either by our word, or by our Epistle.

And for the same cause says Saint Basile: Dogmata, De Spiritu san. ca. 27.
quae in Ecclesia praedicantur, quaedam habemus e doctrina scripto tradita:
quaedam rursus ex Apostolorum traditione, in mysterio, id est, in occulto
tradita recepimus, quorum vtraque parem vim habent ad pietatem. Nec his
quisquam contradicet, quisquis sane vel tenuiter experous est quae sunt iura
Ecclesiastica. The matters of doctrine and preaching, which in the Church are
kept, some of them we have by teaching committed to writing: some again we
have received by the Apostles tradition in mystery, that is to say, in
secret, delivered unto us, both which are of like weight touching Gods service.
Neither will any man gainsay these, whosoever surely has any sight in the
Churches orders.

And that Saint Basile herein is not singular, it is manifest by this (besides
much else that might be said) that the whole Church, Aug haer. 84. Epiph.
haer. 78.
and the Protestants also themselves hold for Heretykes the Heluidians, for
the denying the Apostolical Tradition of our Blessed Ladies Euer-more
remaining a Virgin: to say nothing of many other lykevvise condemned Heretics,
for the like denying of Traditions. So then has the Church bysides Scripture,
certain Traditions, and them always in great estimation. But Heretics
contrariwise have had the custom to make exception against Tradition, allowing
nothing but only Scripture. Thereupon said Maximinus a Bishopp of the Arrians
to Saint Augustine: Con. Max. li. 1.
Si quid de diuinis Scripturis protuleris, quod commune est cum omnibus,
necesse est vt audiamus. Hae vero voces, quae extra Scripturam sunt, nullo casu
a nobis suscipiu^tur, etc. If thou bring any thing out of the Divine
Scriptures, which is common with all: we must needs hear it. But these
words which are without Scripture, in no case are of us received. And to the
same effect did Constantius the Arrian Emperor give out an Edict, Epiph. hae.
72. Hila li. con. Constable.
Vt Episcopi nihil praeter diuinas Scripturas Ecclesiasticae fidei addere^t.
That Bishops should besides the divine Scriptures, put nothing to the Churches
faith.

Many other Heretics might here be brought forth with the like sayings: but
that my purpose is here rather to set short Conclusions, plainly directing the
meek and humble into the truth, and mightily co^founding the stubborn enemy,
than with heaps of examples to make great Volumes. Now then, that these
Traditions be with us, and against the Protestants, although it be manifest
enough, by this that we obediently embrace Traditions, and they unfaithfully
refuse them: and also otherwise well known to most men, neither of themselves
denied: yet to satisfy all men, it may, for examples sake be remembered, that
S. Chrysostom says: Ho 69. ad populum Antiochenum.
Ab Apostolis haec sancita fuerunt, vt in tremendis Mysterijs, defunctorum
agatur commemoratio etc. It has been by the Apostles decreed, that at the
dreadful Mysteries (so he calls the holy Canon of the Mass) there should be
made a commemoratio^ of the dead, etc. And that Saint Jerome calls it Munus
quod necessitate offertur, Ep. 54.
an oblation which we are bound to offer, vnam quadragesima^ secundum
Traditionem Apostolorum toto anno ieiunare, to fast one forty days in the
year according to the Apostles Tradition. And that Saint Ciprian says it is
Dominica Traditio, Li. 2. ep. 3
our Lords Tradition, that in offering the Chalice the wine be mingled. Epi.
118. cap. 6.
And that Saint Augustine says of Saint Paul, Totum illum agendi ordinem, quem
vniuersum per orberi seruat Ecclesia, ab ipso ordinatum esse etc. That by him
was ordained this order of doing, which through the whole world, the Church
does keep, in doing of Mass with sundry other Traditions, which I omit,
plainly witnessed by antiquity, to have come from the Apostles, and in our
Church to this day used, and of the Heretics quite rejected. A plain
Argument that ours is the Church that follows the steps of Christ and his
Apostles, and theirs to be the heir of the Arrians, and other damned
Heretics, a lymne and Messenger of that lost son Antichrist.

The Churches Commandment.


That such is their talk of the Church who knovveth not? who is ignorant,
how they labor to show, how long endured the Visible Church by the Apostles
gathered, and when it failed: some of the^ setting the age of it at two
hundred, some at three hundred, some at five hundred years: and Jewel more
large then his fellows, at six hundred years. And therefore by the Church
that then was, they will (say they) be tried, and not by that which was
afterward for a thousand years together until the rising of Luther, and which
yet holds on still against Luther and his Adherents. By this Church in no
case will they be tried, because it is not (they say) the same which was
before in the beginning, and which lasted only a certain term of years,
and which now is restored again by Luther.

This very same was of old the talk of the Donatistes, whose manner was (as S.
Augustine writes) to gather ignorantly or deceitfully certain places out of
the Scriptures, De unit Ec. Cap 12.
and ea detorquere in Ecclesiam Dei, vt tanquam defecisse ac perijsse de toto
orb videatur, and them to wreast against the Church of God, to make it seem
that she had as it were failed, In ps 102* con. 2.
and out of the universal world perished. And in another place they say:
Apostatauit and perijt Ecclesia de omnibus Gentibus: the Church has played the
Apostata, and is perished out of all Nations. Hoc dicunt qui in illa non sunt,
says Saint Augustine. This say they, which are not in the Church. O
impudentem vocem etc. Vocem abominabilem, and detestabilem, praesumptionis and
falsitatis plenam, nulla veritate suffultam etc. O impudent saying, etc. A
saying abominable and detestable, full of presu^ption and falsehood, stayed
upon no truth etc. Such was the saying of those Heretics than: and therefore
such is the same saying of these our Heretics now. They Heretics then for it:
and therefore these Heretics now for it.

On the contrary side therefore, as the Church was not failed then, before
Donatus rose: so was it not failed now, before Luther rose. And therefore, as
Saint Augustine and the rest that then withstood those Heretics, were of the
Church: so we that now vvithstand these Heretics, be likewise of the Church,
and they against the Church. And therefore unto every one that will hear
Christ's voice, must they be sicut Ethnicus and Publicanus, Mat. 18.
as Ethnikes and Publicans, no credit to be given unto them, no company to be
kept with them. It was also the familiar saying, as Saint Hierome witnesses,
Adu. Lucif
of the Luciferians, Factum esse de Ecclesia lupanar, that the Church was
become a stews. Which was as reasonably said of them by Saint Hieromes
judgment, as if one would say, Christum sine causa mortuum fuisse, that Christ
dyed in vain.

Sundry other Heretics might be here brought forth, with the like
blasphemous saying: as in deed yt must needs of all Heretics so be said who
if they should say well of the Church, should ever speak against themselves.
And therefore we marvel the less at the fear they have to name the Church.
Castaleon thereupon in steed of Dic Ecclesiae, Mat. 18.
Tell the Church: translating unto us, dicito Reipublicae, tell the common
wealth: others in their common talk, for the Church having in their mouths the
Congregation: as in our country it is common. We marvel not at this their
fear, I say. For Gods Church is most certainly always that, which commonly in
the world is known by the name of the Church: as they always most certainly
be Heretics, who are commonly called Heretics.

And so evermore is the advice of S. Hierome to be followed of them that will be
saved: Ibidem.
In illa est Ecclesia permanendum (says he) quae ab Apostolis fundata vsque ad
diem hanc durat. In that Church must we keep our-selues, which once being
founded of the Apostles, endures even to this day. For certain it is by the
Holy Scripture, that as Christ fails not hym-selfe, so neither his Church
ever fails, Psalm. 2.
being his Inheritance, of God his Father given once unto him, and he never
deserving again to leese it. Upon these two Christ (I say) and his Church,
Read S. August. de vni. ec
runs all the Scriptures of the old Testament, either by Promises, or by
Figures, or by Prophecies: and plainer upon the Church, then upon Christ. As
worthylie has Saint Augustine noted: Puto proterea, quia videbantin spiritu,
In Psalm. 30.
contra Ecclesiam homines facturos esse particulas, and de Christo non ta^tam
litem habituros, de Ecclesia magnas contentiones exitaturos: ideo illud, vnde
maiores lites futurae era^t planius praedictum and apertius prophetatum est, vt
ad iudicium illis valeat, qui viderunt and fora^ fugerunt: I think for this
cause (says he) because they (the Prophets) savv in spirit, that against the
Church men would make parts, and of Christ they would not have so much strife,
but of the Church they woluld raise great contentions: Plainer Prophecies for
the Church, then for Christ.
therefore that, whereupon greater debates would be, was more plainly
forespoken and more openly prophicied, that it might serve to their damnation,
that saw, and yet ran out.

And this may he easily perceive, that will begin at Genesis, Genesis 22.
where God saying to Abraham: In semine tuo benedicentur omnes Gentes, In thy
seed shall be blessed al Nations: in the Seed we have Christ, in the Blessing
of all Nations, we have the Church: and so go on to the end of that part. Then
the Scryptures of the new Testament, specially that be historical, what be
they else, but certain records of the fulfilling of the said former Promyses,
Figures, and Prophecies: touching Christ, the Gospels: touching the Church, the
Acts of the Apostles? And all this so plainly, that as the Jews not seeing
of Christ therein, so the Heretics not seeing of the Church in the same, can
not possibly be to any thing else imputed, but only to wilful blindness for
damnable lack of lightsome faith. And therefore as the Jew to have his
blindness taken away, must turn to our faith, Cum autem co^uersus fuerit ad
Dominum, 2. Cor. ^.
auferetur velamen: so must the Heretic likewise turn him to the Catholic
faith: and then shall he see undoubtedly as plain Scriptures for the Church,
as the faithful Jew shall see for Christ, and plainer to, as before Saint
Augustine witnessed. Such as we that be Catholics, do see for both in every
leaf almost, so many, so mighty, so evident, that we perceive the Jew and
Heretic to see no more, then a man that sees not the Sun at noonedaies,
Psalm. 88.
nor the Moon in the full.

Well, join with me issue upon this who will: They were always
Schismatikes and Heretics, I say, that pretended the common known Church at
any time to have failed, and that stubbornely resisted the same. And therefore
Protestants and Puritans be such, and for such of our Country and of all the
world will one day be taken Which God grant of his mercy spedily, that they
bring no more poor souls to hell.

The Churches Practice.
use and practice. Which way is so certain and so undoubted, 1. Cor. 11.
that S. Paul himself, after that to prove that women should not be bare
headed and uncovered in the Churches, he had used all kinds of arguments taken
out of their creation, of significations, of similitudes, of Scriptures, of
natural reason: to put the matter out of all peradventure, if any man
perhaps would contentiously deny the said his arguments, to this invincible
Fort he recoyleth, saying: Si quis autem videtur contentiosus esse: nos talem
consuetudinem non habemus, neque Ecclesiae Dei: But and if any man do seem to
be contentious, we have no such custom (for women to pray uncovered) nor the
Church or Churches of God,

And conformably to this said S. Augustine likewise for the same cause: Ep.
118. cap. 5.
Si quid tota per orbem frequentat Ecclesia, hoc quin ita faciendu^ sit,
disputare insolentissimae insaniae est. If the whole Church throughout the
world do use any thing, only to call it in question, whether that thing should
be so done, is a point of most proud, or most strange madness. And therefore
against the Pelagians he makes very commonly his arguments out of the
Churches Practice, Ep. 105.
proving that children be borne in sin, because the Churches Practice is, to
Baptize them for remission of Sins. And this Practice he calls Pondus
veritatis, weight of truth: apertissimam molem veritatis, a most plain huge
great bigness of truth.

Because likewise by the Churches practice exorcizantur and exufflantur
infantes, in the ceremonies of Baptism, children are exorcized and blown
upon, quiae Diabolus eis dominatur: and per quid nisi per peccatu^? because the
devil has power over them and by what, but by sin? And of this practice he
boldly says: Secundum suam calliditatem non inueniunt, quid ad hoc
respondeant, the Pelagians with all their craft find not what to this to
answer. Non audent dicere haec in Ecclesia mendaciter geri, they dare not say,
that these things are done in the Church fainedly.

He proves likewise against them by practice of the Churches prayers, that a
man can neither come to Christ our Lord in the beginning, nor continue in him
till the ending by his own power, De bo. pers. cap. 23.
but by the grace of God: Quando enim non oratum est in ecclesia pro
infidelibus atque inimicis eius, vt crederent? For when (says he) was not
prayer made in the Church for Infidels and for her enemies, that they might
believe? Quando fidelis quisquam amicu, proximum, coniugem habuit infidele^,
and ei non petiuit a Domino mentem obedientem in Christiana^ fidem? When had
any christian a friend, a kinsman, a wife that was an Infidel, and asked not
for him of our Lord a mind obedient unto our christian faith? Quis autem sibi
vnquam non orauit, vt in Domino permaneret? And who ever prayed not for
himself, that he might continue in our Lord? Aut quis Sacerdotem super
fideles Dominum inuocantem, si quando dixit, Da illu Domine, in te perseuerare
vsque in finem, non solum voce ausus est, sed saltem cogitatione reprehendere,
ac non potius super talem eius benedictionem and cord credente, and ore
confitente respondit, Amen? Or the Priest making invocation of our Lord upon
the faithful, if at any time he said, give the^ O Lord to continue in thee
unto the end: who has dared not only in word, but as much as in thought to
reprehend him: and has not rather upon such his benediction both with heart
believing, and with mouth confessing answered Amen? As if we now should against
the Heretics of this time, reason out of private men's beads, and out of the
public prayers which are in the Portuise or Breuiary, in the Missal, and
other Church books. Eus. Ec. hist. lib. 8. ea. 24. 27. Amb. de virgin. li. 3.
Hier in Iou* 1. Aug. de Ciui. Dei li. 1. ca. 6. Note they this that for causes
nothing so just contemn other Saints of the Church.


I omit for desire of brevity, what many of the ancient Fathers have
written of certain holy women, which in time of persecution being sought for
to be abused, killed themselves: constantly and uniformly holding them for
Martyrs, because of the Churches practice in most solemn honoring of them:
and thinking rather, that the Church did know, the said women to have had some
plain revelation from God so to do, then that she erred in her practice. But
and if any man here be so folish to say, or to think, or to fear, that now
the case is altered, because we live so long after the saying of those words
by Saint Paul, and S. Augustine: let him consider first, that S. Augustine also
lived almost four hundred years after S. Paul, and yet so thought he not the
case then to be altered, that he uttered the matter with more weight of
words by a great deal, as you see.

Secondly, that if it were a case, which by any space of time might be altered,
then had both Saint Paul's, and Saint Augustines foretresse been pregnable,
and not invincible, as they made it, and therefore would neither Saint Paul in
all the Churches of God, nor Saint Augustine in the whole Church throughout the
world, have put more confidence, then in any one particular Church of some
special place. Or, let any man give me a reason, why they did stick to say as
much of every particular Church which they did see then to be in the right way,
but only because that although such a particular Church were then in the right
way, no less then the whole Church: yet did they know, that the particular
Church might afterward stray out of the way, but the whole Church might never
go astray.

Thirdly, let him consider, that no Adversary of ours is able well to charge
the Church, since Saint Augustines time with any alteration made all this while:
but we will show, that the same pretensed alteration was not an alteration, but
even so observed in that time also that ran or passed between Saint Paul and
S. Augustine. As presently you heard him speak of Exorcization and Exufflation
of children in Baptism: and In the 5. motive
before I alleged out of him a practice likewise of his own time, and of a
Priest of his own, that offered (as we do in the Mass) the sacrifice of
Christ's body in a certain form, to deliver it from the vexation of wicked
spirits. In the 7. motive
In another place I showed, that his mother worshipped the Blessed Sacrament of
the Altar with Religion every day, as very God and Christ himself: desiring
at her death, to have it offered to God for her soul, and for her sins, which
he also then caused to be done, and long after in writing desired all Priests
to do for her the like.

In another place he witnesses the practice of the Church about the same
Blessed Sacrament to have then been such, that children, when they should
afterward come to years, if they were not otherwise taught by other men's
admonition, or by their own experience, would verily think, that our Savior
was never in other form upon the earth, but in that form only which they see
at Mass. His words are these: De Trin. lib. 3. cap. 10.
Infantes non nouerunt, quod in altari ponitur, and peracta pietatis
celebratione consumitur, vnde vel quomodo conficiatur, vnde in vsum religionis
assumatur. Et si nunquam discant experimento vel suo, vel aliorum, and nunquam
illam speciem rerum videant, nisi inter celebrationes Sacramento^^ ^um offertur
and datur, dicaturque illis authoritate grauissima, cuius Corpus and Sanguis
sit: nihil aliud credent, nisi omnino in illa specie dominum oculis apparuisse
mortalium, and de latere tali percusso liquorem illum omnino fluxisse. Infantes
know not that which is laid on the Altar, and being ended the celebration of
piety (so he calls the Holy Canon) is consumed, whereof or how it is
consecrated, from whence into use of Religion it is assumpted. And if they
never learn by experience either of their own, or of others, and never see
that form of things, but at celebrations of the Sacraments (so he calls
Masses) when it is offered, and given, and be told them with authority most
weighty, whose Body and Blood it is: no other thing will they believe or
conceive, but verily in that form our Lord to have appeared unto the eyes of
men, and out of such a side being stricken, that liquour verily to have issued.

Then touching the practice of other things also, as going a pilgrimage to
Holy places, worshipping of Relickes, praying to Saints, praying for the dead:
it is so plain by all the writers of those times, that they were then no less
used, then now they be, that no thing there is which can more copiously be
showed, as all that read Antiquity know right well. My purposed brevity (as I
have often said) suffers not the allegatio^ of many testimonies: but one
short saying will I aleadge of S. Augustines, which in very few words does
manifestly witness unto us the practice of all those four things at once
which I have named. De cur. pro mort. in fine.
Thus he says: Quod vero quisquam apud memoriam Martyrum sepelitur, hoc
tantum mihi videtur prodesse defuncto, vt commendans eum etiam Martyrum
patrocinio, affectus pro illo supplicationis augeatur. That any man is buried
at some Memory (or Relicke) of Martyrs: unto me it seems, in this only to
avail the departed, that commending him also to the patronage or intercession
of the Martyrs, the devotion of his friend which makes supplication for him,
increased may be.

Here have you expressie Relickes of Martyrs: for so he means by a memory, as
if you doubt, you may gather out of another place, where he says: De Ciui. Dei
li 22. cap. 8.
Memoriam Martyris Episcopus in manu portabat. The Martyrs Memory did the
Bishop bear in his hand. You have also here praying to Martyrs, praying for
the dead, and Pilgrimage to Relickes, so lively, that you see the practice
thereof was (as I may say) infinite, people not being content only in their
life time to use it continually, but also after their death to make such
Pilgrimage once for ever, there to rest both their own bodies, and their
friends with the holy Relickes until the worlds end.

In so much that bold I am to say, and prove it well I can, that whereas
Christian people of those first ages are counted, as they were indeed, far more
Godly and more holy, and more devout then we, for no other cause it was, but
only because they practiced the things aforenamed and such like, much more
often, more religiously, and (as the Heretics would have it falsely called and
counted) much more superstitiously, then we do: more going a Pilgrimage, more
kissing of Relikes and kneeling unto them, more crying out to Saints, and all
other such things much more in those days, then in these: and therefore (I
say) people then more devout and religious, then now. Such going then a
pilgrimage to Jerusalem, that S. Hierome says of the Holy places of our
Saviors Nativity, Cross, Resurrection, and Ascension: ad quae de toto orb
concurritur, In Isa. 19
unto which holy places there is concourse of people out of all the world: even
the very holy earth of our Saviors sepulcher brought home by Pilgrims, and
given to their friends, and used to hang in their chamber, to save them from
evil: yea so reverenced, that they would not keep it in their chambers, but
build Churches to lay it in, for people at it to serve God, to come to it a
Pilgrimage, and that with following of great Miracles: De Ciui. Dei li. 22.
cap. 8.
all which S. Augustine writes of his own time, being himself a party
therein. Such going a Pilgrimage to Rome likewise, and at Rome, In Ezech. 40.
that S. Hierome writes again: Solebam puer Romae cum caeteris eiusdem
aetatis and propositi diebus Dominicis Sepulchra Apostolorum and Martyru^
circuire, crebroque Cryptas ingredi, etc. My use was being a boy, at Rome with
others of the same age and meaning, upon Sondaies to go about the Apostles and
Martyrs Sepulchers, and often to enter into the Cryptes, etc. Which are places
under the ground full of Martyrs bones, and ashes, still to this day visited
much of Pilgrims.

Finally all Antiquity is full of such practice: bearing plain witness to the
practice of the other points also of our Religion, as might easily be showed,
if breuity did permit, or if these foresaied were not sufficient. And yet as I
proved before out of S. Augustine and S. Paul, for finding and knowing of the
Truth, suffices the practice alone of the church that now is. And diligently
is it to be noted, that so plain and undoubted a thing is the Churches
Practice, that the old Heretics never ventured for to change it: as the
Arrians, the Nestorians, Pelagians, etc. But all their Heresies consisted only
in some matter of erroneous judgment and false opinion: but the face of
religion they never changed.

Whereby who sees not, that the Protestants, who are convinced so plainly by
the practice of the Church, both that now is, and that ever was, and who have
changed the whole practice, the whole form and face of religion, are of all
other Heretics most gross and palpable, altering the whole use of the Church
almost in all points, whereas only to call in question but any one point, is
(as you have heard S. Augustine say) the point of a most strange kind of very
madness? And will they not yet see, acknowledge, confess, and repent their
fault, to return home again, and to be saved? Or will people take no warning
of them? well* that they may have yet more warnings, although these are enough,
and more then enough, let us in Gods name proceed to others.

See-Apostolike.


Example can there be none to the contrary well alleged: but for it there are
in all ages and countries examples most certain and innumerable. As in S.
Augustines time the Doctrine of the Pelagians being by that See condemned, was
then and ever Since, of all Catholics accounted Heresy. In so much that
Saint Augustine says thereupon: Ep. 106.
Ipsum nouellum and perniciosum errore^, sic Ecclesiastica authoritate
compressum, vt multum miremur, adhuc esse quosdam, qui per quem libet errorem
Gratiae Dei conentur obsistere: That new and pernicious error is so restrained
by the Churches authority (he speaks there of the Bishops of Rome) that we
marvel much, to see certain as yet that follow the same. In vita Augustine.
cap. 18.
And touching the same, Possidonius writes: Et hoc tale de illis Ecclesiae Dei
Catholicae prolatum iudicium, etiam pijssimus imperator Honorius audiens ac
seque^s, suis eos legibus damnatos, Note the Roman Church, the Catholic
Church.
inter haereticos haberi debere constituit. Also the most devout Emperor
Honorius hearing and following this judgment of the Catholic Church of God
given upon them, by his laws condemning them did ordain, that they should be
counted in the number of Heretics. Which S. Augustine himself very well
allowed, saying: De pet. or. ca. 17. 10. 7.
In tam nefandi erroris authors, Episcopalia Concilia, and Apostolicam sedem,
vniuersamque Romanam Ecclesiam, Romanumque Imperium, quod Deo propitio
Christianum est, rectissime fuisse commotum. Against the Authors of so wicked
an Error, very just indignation did there take Councels of Bishops and the Sea
Apostolic, and the whole Roman Church, and the Roman Empire, which through
Gods mercy is now Christian.

Then for example of Catholics purging themselves unto that See, when they
had of their enemies bin infamed, making supplication withal, that unjust
sentences of their deposition, by it might be revoked: there are to be seen
the Epistles of Saint Chrysostom Patriarch of Constantinople in Greece to
Saint Innocentius Bishop of Rome, and of S. Theodoret Bishop of Cyrus also in
Greece to S. Leo Bishop likewise of Rome, and many others the like. Theodoret
there says: Epist. ad Leon.
Ego autem Apostolicae vestrae Sedis expecto sententiam: and supplico and
obsecro vestram sanctitatem, vt mihi opem ferat, iustum vestrum and rectum
appellanti iudicium, and iubeat ad vos accurrere, and ostendere meam doctrinam
vestigia Apostolica sequentem. I expect the sentence of your See Apostolic:
and I make supplication and beseech your holiness to help me, appealing to your
just and right judgment, and that you will command me to come over unto you,
and show my Doctrine to follovv the steps Apostolic. Supplicationem meam,
quaeso, ne respuatis, nec miseram meam caniciem despiciatis: quae post tot
labores aff^cta est contumelijs. Ante omnia autem rogo, vt sciam a vobis, an in
iniusta hac depositione me oporte at acquiescere, an non Vestram enim expecto
sententiam, and si iudicatis me stare iusseritis, stabo, nec vlli deinceps
homini molestiam exhibebo: sed, quod flecti non potest, Dei and Seruatoris
nostri expect tabo iudicium. My supplication I beseech you refuse not, neither
despise my miserable hoarenes, which after so much pains taken for the
Catholic Faith, is now misused And first I desire to know of you, whether I
must agree to this unjust disposition, or not. For I expect your Sentence, and
if you command me to stand unto that, which has bin judged against me, I will
stand unto it, neither any man will I here-after trouble about it: but the
inflexible judgment of our God and Savior will expect

Whereunto S. Leo says in his answer: Benedictus Deus noster, In fine operum
Theodoret et Leo ep. 63.
cuius inuincibilis veritas ab omni haereseos macula mundum te, secundum Sedis
Apostolicae iudicia demonstrauit. Cui dignam retribues pro tot laboribus
gratiam, si talem te, qualem probauimus ac probamus, pro vniuersalis Ecclesiae
defensione seruaueris. Blessed be our God, whose invincible truth has
according to the judgment of the Sea Apostolyke declared you to be clean from
al spot of Heresy. To whom you shall render vvorthie thanks for so much
pains, if what a one we have taken and do take you to be, such a one you keep
yourself for defense of the universal Church.

To this purpose also may be seen the short learned and notable Epistle of S.
Hierome to Pope Damasus written by him to Rome out of Syria, To. 2.
a Country very far distant, in the East Church, to know the Popes pleasure,
whether he should say three Hypostases to be in God, whereunto certain
suspected persons did there require him to subscribe: he not sticking to say
three Persons, but fearing some Heretical poison to lie hidd in three
Hypostases. Because (says he) by means of Division of people here in the
EAST it is hard to understand, where is the true Church: Ideo mihi Cathedram
Petri and fidem Apostolico ore laudata^ censui consulendam, Therefore I thought
it good or necessary for me to ask counsel of Peter's Chair, and of the
faith praised by Saint Paul's mouth, etc. Noe sticking at the monstrous space
of sea and land that is between. Vbicunque fuerit corpus, Mat. 24.
illuc congregantur aquilae: Wheresoever is the carkase, thither will the
egles gather, etc. Ego nullum primum nisi Christum sequens, Beatitudini tuae,
id est, Cathedrae Petri, communione consocior. I following none but Christ
first, am joined in communion to your Blessedness, that is, to the Chair of
Peter. Super illam Petram aedificatam Ecclesia^ scio. Upon that Rock I know the
Church is builded etc. And because I am so far of from you, Ideo hic Collegas
tuos Aegiptios confessores sequor: therefore here I follow them of your side,
the Confessors of Egypt, etc. Quicunque tecum no^ colligit, spargit hoc est,
qui Christi non est, Antichristi est. Who soever gathers not with you, he
scatters: that is to say, who so is not of Christ's side, he is of
Antichrists side, etc. Obsecro Beatitudinem tuam per Crucifixu^, mundi salutem,
per homousion Trinitatem, vt mihi epistolis tuis, sieve tacendarum, sieve
dicendarum hypostaseon detur authoritas. I beseech your Blessedness for his sake
that was crucified, the Salvation of the world, and for the Consubstantial
Trinities sake, that by your Letters, authority may be given me, to say or not
to say these Hypostases. Read the whole Epistle.

Finally, true it is (I say) generally without exception, that always as
Catholics have earnestly kept, and dilygently sought the unity and communion
of the Sea of Rome, so were they ever Heretics or Schismatikes that contemned
the same, especially after that they were by it condemned, and for such were
they at the length by the whole world taken, if they continued wilful and
obstinate in the said rebellion.

Therefore the Protestants and other Sectaries of this time, who have binne by
so many worthy Bishops of that holy See accursed, and have notwithstanding so
many years desperately continued in their disobedience, are Schismatikes and
Heretics, and so will they one day be accounted of all Christian men: when, as
in all Heretics that were before our time, so in these shall be fulfilled Saint
Paul's most certain Prophecy: 1. Tim. 3.
Insipientia eorum manifesta erit omnibus, their folly shall be known of al men,
as (thanks be to God) it has of late years well begone to be, and namely in
our Country, where notwithstanding their continual preaching for these sixtene
years, and the Catholics all that while being put to silence, yet have they
now fewer folowers without comparison, then they had when they began: for no
other cause, but for that the folly of Heresy (as Saint Paul has told us) is
such, that through Gods working, men of their own accord in time will see it,
and seeing will forsake it. Which when as by the mercy of God Catholics shall
have there again their liberty, will no doubt much more, and in short time
generally of al men be done.

For, certain it is (as I have said) that none have bin from Christ's
Ascension to this our age by the Apostolyke See condemned in manner aboue-sayed,
but they have binne also after-ward by all Chtistian men with one consent
abhorred and detested, howsoever they have for a time abused their vile tongues
against the said See for condemning the^, calling it Cathedram pestilentiae the
Chair of pestilence, as did the Pelagians, Augustine con. lit Petil. li. 2.
cap. 51.
or the seat of Antichrist, or by such like terms of blasphemy.

Councels.
deed, and as such they were at length forsaken of all men, howsoever for a
time Emperors, Kings, or Queens, multitude of folowers, show of learning,
opinion of holiness, or any other man or thing did uphold them. Neither against
this can there be brought any exception.

Remember all the times, who so that will, that were before us. The Nycene
Council condemned the Arrians, for denying the Godhead of Gods Son: the
Consta^tinopolitan condemned the Macedonia^s, for denying the Godhead of the
holy Ghost: the Ephesine Council condemned the Nestorians, for dividing Christ's
own person into two: the Council of Chalcedon condemned the Eutichians, for
making but one of Christ's two Natures: an other Council of Constantinople
condemned the Monothelits, for leaving in Christ but one will only: and other
Councels condemned others. And the end always was, that the Council
prevailed, the Heretykes were suppressed. For, those Heretykes, which I have
rehearsed, which in their time reigned each one very far, and infected
meruaylous great multitudes of sinful and unconstant souls, yea and many
Emperors also and Empresses, Kings and Queens, States and Countries, etc.
now at this time and many hundred years before this time, what one follower
have they had? Have they not bin generally forsaken? Have not those Councels,
which condemned them, of al Christendom bin embraced? Yea, by the very
Parliament law (Si Dijs placet) of our Protestants in England, have not four
of them bin allowed with the Scriptures for good touchstoanes of Heresy? So
mighty is the authority, so undoubted is the verytie of such a Council. And
that well worthy: as being a thing wonderfully commended unto us by the Example
of the Apostles and first Christians, in the acts of the Apostles, where we
have the first lineaments of Christ's Church, and the orders of the same.

There we see, how that a very great Question being raised by certain
Prechers saying, Act. 15.
that we Gentiles without circunciding of our selves after the manner of Moses
law can not be saved, although we believe in Christ the matter was referred
unto a Council of the Apostles and other priests at Jerusalem. Who after great
searching and debating of the matter determined it, with Visum est Spiritui
sancto and nobis, it has pleased the holy Ghost and us, that Christian men of
the Gentiles should not be bound to the law of Moises: making also certain
Decrees, of such to be observed. And after this what effect took the Council?
Mary S. Paul and Silas went over many Countries and Cities, Act. 16.
preaching and delivered unto them to keep the Decrees that were decreed by
the Apostles and Priests, that were at Jerusalem. And this same order ever
since that time in like cases has the Holy Ghost the guide and leader of the
Church into all Truth, caused the Church always to observe, making by his
divine power Councels to be assembled, to be furdered, to be agreed, to be
finished, to be received. That we do worthily refer this proceeding and
prospering of Councels in the Catholic Church to God almighty, any reasonable
man will sone confess, that co^sidereth out of how many countries, languages,
manners, wits, and persons, about how many matters and questions, with how long
preparation and continuance, with how great disturbance and resiste^ce offered
and made by their enemies, they are assembled, holden, and concluded, namely
this late Counsel of our time, which was gathered and kept at Trident. But on
the other side, for the Heretics of our time, lacking Gods asistance, it has
bin a thing so impossible, out of their so many corners where their infection
lurketh or reigns to assemble themselves, yea or so many persons of the
basest ministers, as at Trent were very Bishops, into any one place for the
like purpose, that (to my knowledge) they have not hitherto so much as gone
about it, or once thought thereupon. And in some pieces of Germany alone, where
with great diligence and charges of their deceived Princes, some few of them
for a short time about not many matters have binne assembled and kept together,
what agreement could there ever be made between them more then between your
Protestants and Puritans, cattes and dogs, as the world well knows and
plainly sees? And in old time, when the Arrians were able by means of their
Emperor to hold certain Counsels, what one of them ever took place? and
that, because they lacked the B. of Rome his confirmation. In so much that
Constantius the Arrian Emperor, having by a Synod of his Bishops deposed Saint
Athanasius, and also thrust him actually out of his Bishoprycke, yet labored
tooth and nail, and desired it most fervently, to have the same confirmed with
the Bishops of Romes authority: Ammia. Marcel. li. 15.
as witnesses also an heathen writer of that time, in these words: Id enim
ille Athanasio semper infestus, licet sciret impletum, tamen authoritate, qua
potiores aeternae vrbis Episcopi, firmari, desiderio nitebatur ardenti. The
matter of casting Athanasius out of his priestly See, although Constantius his
mortal enymie for evermore, knew that it was fulfilled, yet to have it
confirmed with the authority, in which the Bishops of the eternal City are
better, he labored with fervent desire.

But now the Council of Trent was in all respects like to those old Catholic
and General Councels, so called together, so proceeded, so confirmed. Such
Councels (I say) always in the end prevailed, ever were of Catholic men
obeyed, never of any stubbornely resisted but only of Heretics: Therefore
Protestants and Puritans be Heretics: they be not Catholics: and so will all
men at the length take them to be, for resisting of the Council of Trent, as
they have taken al other resisters of other like Councels. But what say I, for
resisting of the Council of Trent only? Whereas they resist also (and that by
their own confession) so many other General councils, as the second of Nice,
the Florentine, those of Lateran, of Vienna, and finally all that these thousand
years have binne holden, allowing none but only the first four, of Nice, of
Constantinople, of Ephesus, and of Chalcedone. And trow ye that them also they
allow in deed? will they be content by them to be tried in the matters that
are between us? you may be sure they will not, knowing that they were of the
very same faith that the Councels afterward, and that they make against them no
less, then these, as (if need be) I can and will by Gods grace most clearly
show. But it needs not, they confess as much themselves. For else, why
suffered they one Lewis Euans of late years to set out a naughty book, wherein
amongst many others his blasphemies and abominations, he called one of those
four Cou^cells, that same of Chalcedon, a blasphemous, proud, sacrilegious,
Antichristian Council, with many more words of like detraction.

If therefore, going against any one such lawful Council, as I have said, has
always binne a most certain and peculiar property of open Heretics: the
Protestants that stand against all such Councels, as well within these thousand
years as before, are they not plainly prouen Heretics? Is there any man, that
so little cares for his soul, as to venture it with such Masters condemned
and co^demners of al holy Councels, no Council, new nor old, being on their
side? God of his goodness deliver all men, and namely our dear Countriemen,
from such blindness. It was the manner of blind Heretics, it was never the
manner of Catholics so to do. For example, Eutyches the Heretic condemned the
Council of Ephesus, as witnesses Flauianus Patriarch of Constantinople: In
ep. ad Leonem*
but Catholics ever had the manner, with al reverence straight ways to yield,
yea and that not only several persons, but whole Countries with their
Provincial councels, when a general Council had otherwise determined. De
bap. con. Don. li. 2. ca. 3.
Et ipsa Concilia (says Saint Angustine) quae per singulas Regiones vel
Prouincias fiunt, quis nesciat, plenariorum Conciliorum authoritati, quae fiunt
ex vniuerso orb Christiano, sine vllis ambagibus cedere? Who knows not, also
the very Counsels which are holden of several Countries or Provinces, without
any exception to yield unto the authority of plenary Councels which are holden
of al Christendom?

We therefore, that obediently receive, al such Councels, rejecting no one of
them, in no one point what so ever: is it not manifest, that we are of the
same one catholic Church and society that they were of? And the Protestants
believing no one of them indeed, at least in all points, and very few of them
also in word: is it not evident, that they dravv in one line with Eutiches, and
all other Heretics that were before them? who soever will consider this much
with the fear of God, with care of his soul, with advise of true reason, must
neeeds, confess it.

The Fathers.
and Pastors there assembled, reporting in their Epistle his manners and
fasshions for which they condemn him, and would have all others to condemn
him likewise, do tell amongst others, Eus. li. 7. hist. ca. 24
that his manner was in his open sermons, without honesty or shame to rail
against the Interpreters of Gods word that were departed: In verbi Dei
interpretes qui e vita excessissent, dum in hominum frequentia palam
praedicaret, petulanter and importune debacchari.

Of Nestorius also Socrates writes, Li. 7. ca. 251.
that the cause of his Heresy in denying our B. Lady to be Gods Mother, was
that he despised the reading of the Fathers writings, thinking himself
because of his fine and rolling tongue to pass all men. Veterum Interpretum
scripta perdiscere dedignatus est, etc. Contrariwise true christians and
Catholics ever thought them selves bound to believe the Fathers, to stick to
their doctrine, to walk in their stepps. And therefore says Saint Ambrose:
Absit vt tradam haereditatem Patrum, Li. epist 3. de. Bas. trad.
etc. God forbid, that I should betraie the inheritance of my Fathers, the
inheritance of Dionysius, who died in bannishment for cause of our faith, the
inheritance of Eustorgius the Confessor, the inheritance of Mirocles, and of
all faithful Bishopps that were before our time. Li. 1. con. ^^l. ca. 2.
S. Augustine likewise: Quod credunt, credo: quod tenent, teneo: quod docent,
doceo: quod praedicant, praedico: I believe, that they believe: I hold that they
hold: I teach that they teach: I preach that they preach. And the same to be
the duty of all Christian people, in these words spoken to a Pelagian, (...)
^^. li. 2. (...). 1^ l.
he declares: Quos oportet, vt populi Christiani vestris prophanis nouitatibus
anteponant, eisque potius eliga^t adhaerere, quam vobis. It is necessary for
christian people, to prefer the holy Fathers before our profane novelties,
and to choose to stick rather to them, then to you, Pelagians, and other
Heretics.

And thereunto what reasonable man will not agree, considering the manifold
prerogatives, both human and divine, of those ancient Fathers, above all
Heretics: as their excellent wits, continual study, wonderful learning,
fervent prayer, holy conversation, favor in Gods sight, mighty working of
infinite Miracles (besides living long before these controversies arose between
us, and therefore being without all suspicion of partiality.) By which his
great gifts and passing graces with many more of like condition, most liberally
and most singularly bestowed upon them, the holy Ghost, God himself, has so
commended them unto the world, and set them in such irrefragable authority
with all Christian hearts, that the very Heretics also themselves, although
they have forsaken walking with the Catholics in their steps, yet in their
preaching and writing think it necessary to allege their testimonies, and
triumph not a little, when out of them they can wring any little word that may
seem to make for their errors: whereas yet, there be certain other Authors as
ancient as the Fathers, but against the Fathers, and far more plain
witnesses for the Heretics assertions, then the Fathers, which notwithstanding
they never dare so much as once to name. As against praying for the dead, what
Protestant has been heard to allege Aerius, that was most certainly and
most plainly of that opinion? And who yet has not heard them against the
same allege S. Augustine, Aug. hae. 51.
that for the same opinion amongst condemned Heretics has noted Aerius?
Neither allege they ever Vigilantius, Iouinianus, Eunomius, Simon Magus, and
other old Heretics, for those several opinions, that they before these
evidently did hold: but they allege S. Hierome, Saint Epiphanius, Saint
Basile, Saint Irenee, Saint Clement, and our other Catholic Fathers, for the
very same opinions, which yet those Fathers in those Heretics noted and
condemned as Heresies.

Is it not by this manifest unto all men that will not shut their eyes
wilfully against the light, that we must believe the Fathers, that we must
glory to be accounted their followers, their disciples, their children? when as
the very Heretics themselves, that bear false hearts toward them, dare not
yet for fear of God, or shame of the world, but make fair countenance unto
them? Who knows not, that Jewel in that famous chalenging sermon of his made
at Poules Cross, would seem to make the Fathers so good grounds to build
upon, that if the Catholics could out of them bring one sentence, or half
sentence, word or half word, for many Articles in controversy there by him
proponed that the^ he would subscribe to our Religion? So then it is touching
the Fathers authority: But now on whose side they stand indeed, ours, or the
Protestants, although no wise man, or of mean experience in these matters, can
be in doubt thereof: yet if need be, thus may it briefly be showed, that they
be on our side, and that most certainly.

Let any indifferent man consider this with himself, who they are, we or the
Protestants, that are feign to defend the Fathers, that are put to maintain
their credit, that are compelled to uphold their authority. Plain it is,
that to this not the Protestants be driven by us, but that we thereunto are
driven by them. And therefore plain it is, that the Fathers stand with us, and
against the protestants. As if any man were so ignorant to doubt, on whose side
stands the Sea Apostolic, the Council of Trent, the Scripture of the
Machabees, Traditions of the Apostles, with many others that might be named:
that the Protestants rail at them, that we defend them: were not this a
sufficient and an evident demonstration, that they be on our side?

So then, by the like doing of us, both in the matter of the Fathers, they
impugning them, we defending them: it is most certainly declared, that they
be on our side. As if at this time a man did doubt whether the said Fathers be
with the Protestants, or with the Puritans, would not his doubt very soon be
answered, if it were showed unto him, that the Protestants are driven by the
Puritans to defend the Fathers, calling them also Papists for their labor?
Whereby again it is manifest, that the Fathers are with the Catholics, and
neither with the Puritans, nor with the Protestants. And hereupon it was, that
Jewel in his foresaid challenge did set a certain number of Articles, as of
the Mass, of the Pope, of the Eucharist, with some others: leaving out
purgatory, praying for the dead, praying to Saints, Merit of works, with a
great number of many mo: because (I say) in his very conscience he did know as
they do all, if they read the Fathers, that they are so plainly on our side,
that in most matters of controversy it can not with any color be denied, or
called in question. For if in all points they be not with the Protestants
(which by this you see they are not) then undoubtedly in all points be they
with us, because there is not, nor never was, but one only true Religion, not
one then true, and now another true: but the same that then was true, the same
now true. Which (as I have said) cannot be the Protestants, because of their
plain and in so many points confessed difference from the Fathers.

Hereunto what can they say? Certainly nothing, but only this: that we are
out of the way, and that the Fathers were out of the way, and that they only
are in the way. By which their saying it is yet again more plain, that by
their own confession they are not in the Fathers way, which also out of their
own writings might easily be showed, that they stick not to say, the Fathers
all to have been in error, but that it needs not, being a thing otherwise
well known to all such as hear their Sermons, or be in place to hear them
talk boldly and familiarly together amongst themselves, where they are not
afraid plainly to confess, that the Fathers all were Papists: as I have
already sufficiently proved, and will with the help of GOD, more largely prove
hereafter, if it be required, desiring the Reader for this time to hold
himself content with this one fresh saying of Laurence Humphrey. Libel. de
vita Jewel.
speaking of Jewels famous chalenging Sermon aforementioned, wherein he
provoked the Catholics to try with him the matter by the Scriptures,
Councelles, Fathers, and examples of the first six hundred years of Christ's
Church. Thereupon thus says Humphrey. Nimium largitus est, and vocis plus
aequo concessit, and sibi nimium fuit iniurius, etc. Et seipsum, Et Ecclesiam
quodammodo spoliauit. Siquidem Daemoniacorum quaestio est: Quid nobis and tibi
est, Jesus fili David? Sed interrogatio Sanctorum est: Quid nobis rei cum
Patribus, cum carne and sanguine? Too much he gave, and to you he granted
more then was meet: and to himself he was too injurious, etc. Both himself
and the Church after a sort he spoiled. For it is the question of men
possessed: what have we and thou to do, O Jesus the Son of David? But the
demand of Saints it is: what have we to do with the Fathers, with flesh
and blood? Such Saints as you heard a little before, were not S. Ambrose, not
Saint Augustine, nor any other Saint of Heaven: but the Saints of this
Canonizers new Calendare, such as Saint Paulus Samosatenus, Saint Nestorius,
and other Heretics of accursed memory, who were in their life time, Ranae,
and Cyniphes, Exodus 8.
and Muscae moriturae, quales sunt Pelagiani, Frogs and Gnats, Libel.
aduersus prophanas omnium haeresum innouationes.
and Flies that shall not last, such as be the Pelagians, as Vincentius
Lirinensis for this their croking against the Fathers very aptly terms
them, in that passing fine book of his, written by him above a thousand years
ago of the same argument that this our treatise. Nobis, inquiunt, authoribus,
nobis principibus, nobis expositoribus, damnate quae tenebatis, tenete quae
damnabatis, reijcite antiquam fidem, paterna instituta, Maioru^ deposita, etc.
Take us (say they to the Catholics) for your Authors, us for your Leaders, us
for your Interpreters: and upon our word, condemn ye the things that you
held, hold ye the things that you condemned, cast away the old faith, the
fathers teachinges, the things that your Elders left you to keep, etc. This
(I say with him) was the croking of those Egyptiacall frogs, while they were
living, which now are quackling and yalping with the Devils in Hell, from
whence they came, as Saint John's Apocalips bears witness. Cap. 16.


Now therefore let any reasonable man, any that would save his soul, yea any
that thinks himself to have a Soul, weigh and consider with himself, what
he has to do, whether to venture his soul with such frogs of Hell, men
utterly destitute of all things wherewith preachers of Truth should be
commended, and found to have all the marks of false Masters and Heretics: or
to bestow it in the way of the old Holy Fathers, men most learned, most
gracious, most miraculous, and their way so sure, that it has brought them
unto heaven, where they be now Saints most glorious, by the confession of all
men, most undoubtedly. Certain it is, that none ever have left their way, but
only Heretics: and therefore Protestants, and Puritans be Heretics. Their
followers then, can not look for any other place after this life, but that
which is prepared for Heretics, which by the witness of S. Paul himself cannot
be the Kingdom of Heaven: Gal. 1.
For aduouterers (says he) murderers, sorcerers, heretics, and such like,
regnu^ Dei non consequentur, shall not possess Gods kingdom.

Martyrs.
acknowledge to be true Martyrs in deed (that here I say, nothing of other
orders of Saints in heaven confessed by us both) consider, I say, whether all
those, which by our Church are enrolled in the number of Martyrs in the common
Calendare (who to Laurence Humphrey, now that Jewel has in learning, life,
and Miracles so far passed them al, are al but Sanctuli) hold heaven by any
Church but ours. Or whether any one of them all were of any other faith then
ours. Name any one of them all, and prove it by good record, that he was of
your Church, or of your faith, and let my name be blotted out of heaven for
ever. But the contrary, that they were not of your Church undoubtedly, thus I
prove most evidently: presupposing first, that no man will doubt, but that they
were all of one Church: so that it shall be sufficiently proved, that none of
them all were Protestants, if I prove that some one of them were not a
protestant, which I may easily do by many kinds of strong arguments, and will
hereafter with Gods help, if need be. But now may one plain argument well
suffice, and that common to all the old undoubted martyrs, but it will I only
in one exemplify. This it is.

All those holy martyrs were of the same Religion, that they were of which
prayed unto them, which worshipped their Relikes, which went a Pilgrimage to
their Churches, and that, whether it were our Religion, or the Protestants,
who knows not? my example shall be S. Steven himself, of whose true
martyrdom no man can doubt, that believes Saint Luke, S. Paul, the
Scriptures, Act. 6.7, 8. and 22.
and God himself. Now that he (as all other Holy martyrs) was and is of the
same Religion that the persons aforesaid, it is manifestly, and inuincibly
proved by this, that he (as all other holy martyrs) did with the power of
God Almighty hear and help those persons that in manner aforesaid sought unto
him: to the same purpose also revealing by visions the place where his Relikes
were hidden, with the Relikes of Saint Gama^iel, Gennad. in Catalogo.
Saint Nicodemus, and others, to Lucianus a Priest of Jerusalem, who wrote in
Greek the History of his invention, to the same purpose, I say: for these are
the very words of S. Gamaliel appearing the third time unto Lucian: Exurge
igitur, and vade, In Ep. Lucia. ^i.
and dic illi, vt aperiat nobis, and faciat locum orationis, vt intercessione
nostra misereatur Dominus populo suo. Up therefore, and go to the Bishop, and
say unto him, that he open unto us, and make a place of prayer, that by our
intercession our LORD may have mercy upon his people. And all this may be
proved by such certain witness of so many ancient undoubted writers, that no
man can possibly with any reason make answer unto it, or exception against it.

Vide sermones nouos Aug. editos, 1564. Louanii. cum Epistolis Aniti, and
Luciani, and du^bus libris Euodii de signis. S. Stephani.
In S. Augustine alone may be seen examples very many of such help done to
such men by this Martyr, if any man please to read his two and twentieth Book
De Ciuitate Dei, the eight chapter, and his Sermons De diuersis, in the tenth
Tome, from the Sermon 34. to the Sermon 40. of which Sermons he makes mention
himself De Ciuitate Dei, in the place which I have said, and also Pos^idonius
in Indiculo operum Augustini. There shall you find, how that by S. Steuens
Relickes was cured a Bishop of a Fistula: by the same was revived and perfectly
restored a boy, that with a wheel was killed and crushed: many likewise
revived by things that had but touched his Relickes, Six revived there.
as by oil, clothes, and flowers. One of those examples, because it serves
well to many good purposes, I think it good to recite here at large, in Saint
Augustines own words.

Such a Miracle do we know (says he) amongst many others to have been done
at Vzalis a city here in Afric. Ser. 38. in Diuer. To. 10 qui est Ser. 10.
in noua edit.
A certain woman lost in her lap, her son by sickness being a Catechumen (or
one appointed to be christened) a sucking babe. Who seeing that he was lost,
and irreparably perished, began to weep for him more of faith, then as a
mother. For she did not desire the life of her Son, but in the world to come:
and that life, she bewailed the losing and the perishing of it, and full of
confidence, up she took him dead as he was, and ran to the Memory of the
blessed Martyr Steven, and began of him to require her Son, and to say: O
holy Martyr, thou see that I have no comfort left. For I can not say, that my
son is gone before: whom thou know to be perished. For thou see, why I
do make this lamentation. Restore unto me my Son, that I may have him in the
sight of God that crowned thee. As she in these and other like words made her
petition, with tears after a sort not desiring, but (as I said) requiring
him, her son revived, and because she had said: thou know wherefore I
seek him: God would also show forth the truth of her mind and meaning. By and
by to the Priests she brought him: baptized he was, sanctified he was,
anointed he was, Imposition of hands was done upon him. Completis omnibus
Sacramentis assumptus est, and all the Sacraments being so fulfilled, he was
assumpted, or taken out of this life up to Heaven. But she then with such a
countenance followed him, as though she brought him, not to the rest of
burial, but to Steven the Martyrs bosom. Probatum est cor fidele mulieris,
and so was proved faithful the heart of the woman.

Here have we, that children, although their Parents be Christians perish
without Baptism. We have also, that in baptism they must be anointed: after
baptism also an other Sacrament of confirmation by a Bishop, or Imposition
of hands. Finally, we have here praying to Saint Steven, and by the two
strange miracles, of the childs both reviving and assumpting, we have the
same confirmed both by Saint Steven, and by God himself. Whereupon who sees
not how plainly it follows, that Saint Steven was no Protestant, but clean
of the other side all against them? And certain it is, I say, that Saint
Steven, and all the other Holy martyrs were of one Religion. Therefore certain
it is also, that no one of all those martyrs was a Protestant. Which is so
plain a demonstration, that the simplest of all may see it: and so sure a
knot, that not the cunningest of all our Adversaries can ever possibly either
undo, or break it. As the party, I say, which prays to the martyrs, so
likewise the martyrs themselves, that with such miracles answer such prayers,
be both against the Protestants. And therefore be all the true Martyrs of old
time against the Protestants, Quia per totum orb^m in locis sanctis, quae
frequent at nostra communio, tanta mirabilia vel exauditionum v l sanitatum
fiunt, etc. Seeing over all the world in the Holy places, which our company
does frequent, so great Miracles of hearinges and healinges be wrought, etc.

Aug. de vni. Ecc. cap. 10.
So that all men may easily see, that if they desire to be with those Martyrs,
they must not be with the Protestants. Whereby again may all men see, what
are these new Martyrs of theyrs, of whom they are wont so much to brag, whose
worthy Acts and Monumentes Fox the Martyrmaker has put in writing. For a
full answer to them all, although the very naming of our Catholic Martyrs,
even of this our time, to any reasonable man may suffice, as the Bishop of
Rochester, Sir Thomas More, the Monks of the Charterhouses, with very many more
under K. Harry: and now of latter time, all our holy Martyrs, that have been,
and daily are made up, by loss of their livings, Let El^^^ remember his
Tragedy of the Scottish friar at Lincol.
by prison, by poison, by whipping, by famishing, by bannishment, Bishops,
Priests, Deanes, Archdeacons, Canons, Ecclesiastical persons of all sorts:
Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, Laymen likewise of all sorts: so many likewise,
that have openly suffered, the good Earl of Northumberland, D. Story, Felton,
the Nortons, M. Wodhouse, M. Plumtree, and so many hundreds of the Northernmen:
such men, both in their life, and at their death, that neither the enemies have
to stain them, as their own consciences, their own talk, and the world it
self does bear good witness: many of them also (and therefore all of them,
because of their own cause) being by God himself approved by Miracles most
undoubted: although (I say) no reasonable man will think, those stinking
Martyrs of the Heretykes, worthy in any respect to be compared with these most
glorious Martyrs of the Catholics: yet supposing, that otherwise they were
equal, and ours not sensibly better then theirs, this one consideration were
notwithstanding enough to declare most plainly, that ours are Gods Martyrs, and
theirs the Devils, because that ours (as you see) died in the faith of S.
Steven the first Martyr and of all his fellows, and theirs clean against the
same.

If a man be an heretic, although he suffer death even for Christ, yet goes
he unto damnation, as S. Paul does plainly say: 1. Cor. 18.
If I deliver my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profits me
nothing. what then must we think of them, that burn against Christ, and
against his truth? No doubt, as they that suffer death for him, have the
greatest croune in Heaven: so they that hold against him, and that to leese
their life in his defiance, are the worst sort of damned souls in Hell. But
contrariwise let all Catholic men that suffer, rejoice in Christ and be of
good comfort, being assured, that they are persecuted for the right faith (as
by this Tretise they see) for the very same that was the faith of all holy
Martyrs before this time.

And therefore to them pertayneth, no less then to the Thessalonians, this
saying of Saint Paul: You brethren, 1. These. 2.
are made imitators of Gods Churches, that are in Jury: because the same
things you have also suffered of your own countrim^n, as also they of the
Jews. To them belongs this saying also to the PHILIPPIANS Phil. 1.
Be ye for nothing afeard of your adversaries. Which to them is cause of
perdition: but to you of Salvation, and that of God: Faith and suffering both
Gods gifts.
because unto you it is given for Christ, not only to believe in him, but also
to suffer for him: having the same fight, as both you have seen in me, and now
you hear of me. Finally the same fight, that al Christ's martyrs have
sustained, God by his wonderful miracles well declaring, that they which pray
unto the Martyrs, and the Martyrs that we pray unto, be all of one faith:
verily not the Protestants faith, as themselus must needs, and will confess,
but our only Catholic Faith.

Their Own Doctors.
Names of Catholics and Heretics, by Miracles and Visions, by the Scriptures,
by Traditions, by the Church, by the Sea Apostolic, by Councels, by the
Ancient Fathers and Martyrs: which all I have briefly, but to any indifferent
man sufficiently and clearelie showed, to make for us most certainly, and to
stand all in open field against our adversaries: now for the next Motive, I
would have it considered by any man that is not wilful, that the Protestants
and Puritans are out of the way, even by the judgment also of their own
adherents, such as themselves do in word and heart like well of, as men of God*
and therefore consequently condemn them selves. Which if I shall prove
inuincibly against them, will any man be so folish, mad and desperate, to walk
their way, a way (I say) contrary to so many good guides above rehearsed,
condemned by their own Masters, by themselves in heart misliked?

First then let their Graundsier Luther come forth, and say his mind of these
his whealpes, who in their Apology call him a man Diuinitus datum ad
illustrandum orbem, Apol. Eccl. Anglic.
given by God to lighte^ the world. He falling first himself from the Church
of God about the year 1517. and seeing shortly after in the year 1524. his
own Disciple Carolostadius fall again from him, to be the author of the
Heresy against our Saviors real presence in the Blessed Sacrament, who
afterward of Zuinglius were called Zuinglians, and now of Calvin be named
Caluinists: after that he had many years together written much and full
bitterly against the said Heretics of his own descent, many means also of
agr^^ment making between them being att^^pted but al in vain and to no
puopos^^ their discord daily more and more increasing: two years before his
death, in the year 1545. gave he them his blessing, wherein amongst other
words, thus he said: Quicunque credere nolunt, Libel. in. Zuinglia^.
panem Domini in caena illius esse verum ac natural corpus, quod Judas and
impius non minus percipiat ore, quam Diuus percipiat Petrus and Sancti omnes:
h^c, inquam, quisquis credere no^ vult, is a me abstineat Epistolis, scriptis
vel sermon: neque vllam meam expectet communionem. Oleum enim operamque
perdiderit. Who soever will not believe, the Lords bread in the Supper to be
his true and natural body, which Judas and the wicked receaueth with his
mouth, no less, then Saint Peter receaueth it, and all that be holy: this, I
say, whosoever will not believe, let him refrain from me, for Epistls, for
writing, or for talking: neither let him look for any communicating of me with
him.

And a little after he says further: Suermeris nihil contulerit, quod circa
Sacrame^tum pius unum illi nugantur de spirituali esu and potati te Corporis
and Sanguinis Christi, and de Chris^^ orum charitate atque vnitate Et frustra
qu^que illi in Deum Patrem, and Filium, and Spiritum sanctu^, and Christum
Seruatorem credunt. Omnia inqua^, haec nihil illis prosunt, qua^tumuis sane and
incuipate ea mendaci ac blasphemo ore pronunciant: quando hunc vnum negant
articulum, eumque falsi in simulant, dum de Sacramento Christus ait: accipite
panem and manducate, hoc est corpus meum. It shall nothing help the
Suermerians, that about the Sacrament they trifle very much upon the spiritual
eating and drinckyng of Christ's body and blood, and upon Christian men's
charity and unity. Yea they also in vain believe in God the Father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost, and in Christ the Savior. Al these things, I say, nothing
avail them, how soundly so ever, and vnblamedly they pronounce them with
their lying and blasphemous mouth: seeing that they deny this one Article, He
corrupts the Scripture, to help his Heresy of the bread to be Christ's body
and lay falsehood to his charge, whereas Christ says of the Sacrament: take
bread and eat, this is my body.

Thus you see, what this man of God, this light of the world, makes of our
English Caluinistes, Liars, Blasphemers, void of his felowshipp, men without
our Savior Christ and the Blessed Trinity. Have they not (trow you) in so
praising Luther, showed men a candle to see by it their own foul faces, and a
light whereby to run out of their company? Let them look well therefore, what
excuse they will pretend at the last day to the Judge of al, that remain still
with them, that fly not from them.

For another example of their comdemnation by their own folowers, read who list
the Compilers of the Centuries named Magdeburgenses, Magdeburgenses
in their Epistle dedicatorie of the seventh Centurie. There shall he see a
long discourse against this, that the Ciuell Magistrate should have the
Government as well in causes Ecclesiastical as temporal. Which is the very
foundation of all our Protestants building in England, and the only key of
their whole Religion. After many other words, thus they say: Sint sane and
ipsi Magistratus me^bra, and parts, and ciues Ecclesiae Dei: imo vt ex toto
cord sint, omnes precari decet. Flagrent ipsi quoque zelo pietatis. Sed non
sint Capita Ecclesiae: quia ipsis non competit iste Primatus. The very
Magistrates also let them hardly be lymmes and parts and Citizens of the
Church of God: mary that with all their heart they so may be, it is meet for all
to pray. Let them also be inflamed with zeal of godliness, but let them not be
heads of the Church: because unto them is not due this Primacie.

If now against these Magdeburgians our Protestants will make exception, that
they are Lutherans: they must be put in mind of their own words in their
Apology, Apol. Ecc. Anglic.
Illi (say they) quos isti contumeliae causa appellant Zuinglianos and
Lutheranos, re ver a sunt utrique Christiani, and inter se amici, ac fratres.
Non de principijs aut fundamentis religionis, non de Deo, non de Christo, non
de sancto Spiritu, non de ratione iustificationis, non de aeterna vita: tantum
de vna, nec ea ita graui, aut magna quaestione inter se dissentiunt, nec
desperamus, vel potius non dubitamus, breui fore concordiam. They whom in
reproach these men (the Catholics) do call Zuinglians and Lutherans, are in
very deed both christian men, and friends together, and brethren. They do not
disagree about the principles and grounds of religion, not about God, not about
Christ, not about the Holy Ghost, not about the manner of Justification, not
about life everlasting: This prophecy is now fulfilled in the accord of the
Protestants and Puritans.
but only about one, and it no weighty nor great question. Neither do we
despair, or rather we doubt not, but there will shortly be agreement.

By that one small trifling question they mean no less a matter then the
Blessed Sacrament, of the weight whereof, and hope to be agreed about it, you
have heard what Luther not long before his death did write. As also to this
day the continual fighting with pen and sword, of the Lutherans, and
Zuinglians about the same, does bear plain record. But to our matter of the
Head Ecclesiastical: if that be not a Principle or ground of Religion: why was
it so obtruded to the Prince, as though neither God, nor Christ, nor the holy
Ghost, nor Justification, nor life everlasting, nor at al religion could stand
without it? Why has it bin so straightly exacted of men, and that with oath to
be professed, upon pain of perpetual imprisonment, forfaiting of lands and
goods, and loss of life?

Being then so weighty a matter, such a Principle and ground of Religion: it
is denied notwithstanding and condemned (you see) by such as themselves
confess to be christians, to be their friends to be their brethren. And will
not men yet look to themselves, Psalm. 4.
open their eyes, and see the truth? Filij hominum, vsquequo graui cord: vt
quid diligitis vanitatem, and quaeritis mendacium! O ye children of men, how
long will you be so heavy hearted, why be ye in love with vanity, and stick
to that which will deceive you?

At least wise if Gransier Luther, and the Lutherans be no body with them, yet
their Sire himself, of whom they are immediately descended, Calvin, I trust,
shall bear with them some more authority. For so I pray God, that with
themselves his witness may do good, even with the farthest gone of them all,
our greatest enemies, desiring nothing more, then their Conversion and
salvation. But if that may not be, 2. These. 1.
because that non omnium est fides, they be not of the number which must
believe: yet may it please God of his mercy, to open others eyes, and hearts to
see and take the truth: others (I say) that are not so obstinate, that have a
good will for to be saved. Such (I trust) when they shall see, that with most
certain danger yea loss of their souls, they believe the Protestants, even
by Caluins own judgment and sentence, they will be better advised, either for
the love of God, or fear of Hell.

This then is the saying of Calvin, forced thereunto by the very text of
Scripture, as in the Prophet may be seen: Qui initio tantopere extulerunt
Henricum Regem Angliae, Call. in Amos. 7.
certe fuerunt inconsiderati homines, dederunt illi summa^ rerum omnium
petestatem: and hoc me semper grauiter vulnerauit. Erant enim blasphemi, cum
vocarent ipsum sum mum Caput Ecclesiae sub Christo. Hoc certe fuit nimium. Sed
tamen sepultum hoc maneat, quia peccarunt inconsiderato zelo, etc. They that in
the beginning did so much extol Henry king of England, certainly they were
unwary men, they gave him power over all. And this has always wounded me full
sore. For they were blasphemous me^ to call him chief head of the Church under
Christ: this certainly was too much. But yet let this abide buried, because
they sinned by unwary zeal, etc.

In his words following he lays more freely at the Kings Commissioners, sent
by him after his Schism to the Diet of Ratispone, for their talk that there
they had upon the ground of the King his Headship. Now what would Calvin say
(think you) of our Protestants since that time in England, for taking up
again the Corpse, and carrying it all about the Realm to be adored, and that
with solemn oath, upon pain also aforesaid? How would he trounce them for
their Blasphemy? Are not Princes trow you, well served by such flatterers?
have they not good Pastors of them? worthy preachers, to commit unto them their
souls and salvation, that carry the^ into such brakes of perdition and
damnation, and with them the whole people, by the very witness of their own
confederates?

I am not ignorant, that going about in Parliament to give the Queen this
Title, and having objected by Catholics unto them this place of Calvin: to
save themselves from his blow (which they were ashamed of, although they
feared neither it nor God, nor man) they devised to call her not Head, but
Supreme Governor in all causes Ecclesiastical. But sone after being again
charged by Catholics, that that was much more absurd, as by which she might
take unto her the very administration of Sacraments, and what soever else that
is in the government of any Priest, or Bishop: then were they feign in an
Iniunction to interpret, that that was never her meaning, but only to have
such authority in Ecclesiastical causes, as the king her father had before
her: and so compelled, for a mollification of their new invented Title, to
run back again to that very same, from which before they fled for fear of
Calvin.

Let any man now that thinks to be saved, advise well with himself, whether
he do discreetly, to receive into the grounds of his salvation, with oath to
be confessed, such sandy Articles, so unsure for footing: and to take for the
sure builders of his soul, such light headed, unsure, and ignorant Masters.
God give his grace to all estates both high and low, Vt resipiscant a Diaboli
laqueis, 2. Tim. 2.
to rid themselves by repentance from the snares of the Devil, that all this
while has held them captives. And so for this Motive these few examples may
suffice: many more of like sort shall be brought if need be. As on the contrary
side, for their own confession of the truth of our Religion, not only in some
part (as in the two points before touched, of the Sacrament and Supremacy) but
also in the very whole well nere, much may be alleged out of their writings.

One place for this time may serve, and that out of Luthers book against the
Anabaptists written many years after his fall, where thus he says: An. 1528.
we confess that under the Pope-dome are many good Christian things, yea all
good Christian things, and that from thence we had them. We confess pardie,
that in the Popedom is the true holy Scripture, true Baptism, true Sacrament
of the Altar, true keys to remit sins, true office of preaching, true
Catechism, as the Lords prayer, and ten Commandments, and Articles of the
Faith, etc. I say moreover, that under the Popedom is true Christianity, yea
the true kernel of Christianity.

The Catholic Faith in England mightily planted, and lightly changed.
Paul's question to the Galathians changing their first religion from the faith
of Christ, to the law of Moses, Qui tribuit vobis Spiritum, Gal. 3.
and operatur virtutes in vobis: ex operibus legis, an ex auditu fidei? God
giving the Holy Ghost unto you, and working Miracles amongst you: did he it
by works of the Law, or by preaching of the faith? as if we would say now by
preachers of Protestancy, or (as they call it) of Pap^strie? according to this
example of S. Paul, I say, let it be first remembered, what Religion that was
in which was planted in our Country at our first conversion unto Christ by our
Apostle Saint Augustine the Holy Monk that Saint Gregory sent unto us about
a thousand years ago, at which time we Englishmen were first made
Christians, being before always, as other Paynims and Heathens, without hope
or knowledge of Christ and saluatyon, given wholly to the serving of Idols.

And to be short, this matter may be soon known out of the Ecclesiastical
History of our own Countryman Saint Bede, a man of great holiness and learning,
and of great credit and fame throughout the universal Church of God both in
his life and ever since his death, who lived shortly after the time of our
first Conversion, and vvrote the History of it in 5. books. a work very
worthy, S. Bedes Story.
very expedient, very profitable, and very necessary to be read of all
Englishmen that desire to have understanding of things belonging much to their
salvation. There shall you find it so plainly, that the Religion then brougt
in, was this very same that now the Protestants have thrust out, that no man
either can, or (as I remember) does deny it. For example, in the first Book,
Cap. 25. they came in with Cross, Image of Christ, and with Processio^, cap.
26. in Dover they used to say Mass: with many other points of our Religion
that may there be found.

Go on then, and consider, how the said Monk our Apostle with his fellows
persuaded our Nation to that Religion. In the first book, Cap. 26 you shall
find, that the King was brought to believe and to be baptized, by their working
of many Miracles: and namely in the second Book, cap. 2. how that he challenged
the stubborn Britons (who being Christians, yet dissented from the rest of the
Church in peculiar practice of some certain points of Religion) to try the
truth between them, by restoring a blind man to his sight, in such manner as
Elias upon sure confidence in God, challenged the false prophets of Baal. The
Britons could not do it, 3. Reg. 28.
but Saint Augustine did perform it: as he wrought also very many mo such
wonderful Miracles, In so much, that S. Gregory in an Epistle that he sent
him (which is to be seen, Lib. 1. ca. 31.) thought good to admonish him of
humility, knowing that S. Paul himself had need to have given unto him an
Angel of Satan to box and buffet him, 2. Cor. 12.
least that in the greatness of his Visio^s he might have chanced to take
pride. Likewise, that he had the gift of Prophecy, and thereby foretold the
destruction of those Britons, which even so came afterward to pass, you shall
find in the second Book, and second Chapter.

All this now well considered, whereas the Protestants, for that they see this
man of God to have been so evidently on our side, speak much horrible
Blasphemy of him, not fearing God at al, who so commended him for his true
servant: let us think that we here him say unto us in his own commendation,
compelled thereunto by these our corrupters, and his dispraysers, as Saint Paul
in the like case, and upon the like necessity said of himself unto his
Corinthians: 1. Cor. 9.
Si alijs no^ sum Apostolus, tamen vobis sum. Nam signaculum Apostolatus mei
vos estis in Domino. If unto other people I be not an Apostle, yet unto you I
am. For the seal of my Apostleship you are: put as it were, to my letters
Patentes by our Lord, through whose power I converted you to the faith of
Christ. 2. Cor. 12.
And again: Nihil sum: signa tamen Apostolatus mei facta sunt super vos in
omni patientia, in signis, and prodigijs, and virtutibus. Nothing am I in deed:
yet the signs of an Apostle were wrought by me among you in all patience, in
Miracles, and wonders, and deeds of power. What will we answer to this his
saying, or what can we answer? Can we deny his argument, but it is Saint
Paul's? It proved well, Saint Paul to have binne an Apostle, whether those
false masters of the Corinthians would, or no. It proves therefore, Saint
Augustine likewise to have been an Apostle, a man sent of God unto us, whether
our false Preachers will, or no: whereunto (no doubt) they shall never be able
to answer.

Let us then again consider, what causes or reasons have carried us away
from his true Gospel into the false gospel of these men, what Miracles, what
Visions, what Scriptures, what Catholics, what Traditions, what Councels,
what Bishopps of the Sea Apostolic, what other such things as before I have
shevved to make for his Gospel. If none of all these things lead us into this
new Gospel, but against them all we went into it: say then what else did the
deed. An odious matter it is to rip all up in particular, and wise men know
all well: only in general do I appeal to all men's consciences, whether any
thing else first lead, and now keeps our unhappy Country in this false
Gospel, but only the world, the flesh, and the Devil.

And therefore may our Apostle Saint Augustine say well unto us, as Saint Paul
the Aposte said to his Galathians: Gal. 2.
Miror, quod sic tam cito transferimini ab eo qui vos vocauit in gratiam
Christi, in aliud Euangelium. I marvel, that so soon and so lightly ye are
turned away from him that called you into the grace of Christ, to be a member
of his Church, into another gospel: which (God wotteth) is not another, is not
a gospel or good tidings of Salvation, but that some there are that trouble
you, and that will turn in and out the Gospel of Christ. He may well charge
us with leuitie, for being lightly turned away from the truth that he planted
so surely and so mightily amongst us, that it lasted nine hundred years
unchanged, as it does still also in them that be constant. For what lightness
could be greater, then from so sure a ground, whereon we were so fast set
with such divine Miracles, to remove our selves with every puff of wind
blown by none other, but by flesh and blood, and that to the so certain
perdition of our souls, and destruction of our Country, as was the former
standing to the undoubted Salvation of the one, and triumphant glory of the
other in all affairs, so many worlds and ages together.

And therefore may he yet say farther unto us, as it follows in Saint Paul: O
insensati Galatae, Gal. 3.
quis vos fascinauit non obedire veritati? etc. O ye senseless Galathians, who
has bewitched you, not to continue in obedience of the truth? Sic stulti
estis, vt cum spiritu coeperitis, nunc carne consumme^nim? Are ye so without
sense or understanding, that having begone in spirit, you will now make up your
selves in flesh? Currebatis been, quis vos impediuit veritati non obedire? Gal.
5.
you did run well: who has stopped your race, not to obey the truth? Ego
co^fido in vobis in Domino, quod nibil aliud sapietis qui au^t co^turbat vos,
portabit iudiciu^, quicunque est ille. I trust in you with the help of our Lord
that you will be of no other meaning then in the beginning you were taught* and
that they which be, will come home again. As for him that troubles you, he
shall sustain judgment or damnation whosoever he be, high or low, man or
woman, one or other.

And upon that damnation most intolerable, most certain, most nigh at hand God
give them grace to think them deeply, that they fall not in to it, 2. These. 2.
But to receive the truth, and to love it, that they may be saved: denying
every man wit^ Moises, to be the son of Pharaoes daughter, Heb. 11.
and choosing rather to be afflicted with the peeple of God, then to have the
sweet of Transitory sin esteeming for greater riches then the treasures of
Egypt, the reproach of Christ. As^^ciebat enim in remunerationem. For he looked
upon the reward in the end, says Saint Paul. Which that al men may yet more
plainly se, how many and how good causes they have to do, let us proceed yet
to more other Motives.

Going out.
Li. 1.
Videndum est, quis in radice cu^ toto orb manserit: quis for as exicrit, quis
Cathedram sederit alteram, quae ante non fuerat, quis altar contra Altar
erexerit, quis ordinationem fecerit, saluo altero ordinato. It is to be
considered, who has remained in the root with the whole world: who is gone
forth who is sitten him in another Chair, which Chair was not before: who has
erected an Altar against the Altar: who has placed Bishops there, where
others were placed before, which are yet alive.

In which his words, that he might not seem to speak them of his own head,
he alludeth to many Scriptures, which in many places liken the Church to a
tree, rooted in the Patriarchs, Romans 11. Joan. 15. Mat. 13.
Prophets, Apostles, and singularly in Christ himself, that grows from the
first pla^ting allwaies to the end of the world, spreading it self over all
Nations: the branches whereof, that stick not to it, but fall off, and break
themselves from it, are none but Heretics, Schismatikes, and Apostataes. They
do likewise in many places describe such unto us by the term of goers out, 1.
Joan. 22.
as where S. John says: Ex nobis prodierunt, sed non era^t ex nobis: nam si
fuissent ex nobis, permansissent vtique nobiscum: sed vt manifesti sint,
quoniam non sunt omnes ex nobis. They went out of us (that are in the church)
but they were not of us (that shall be saved:) for if they had bin of us (that
shall be saved) verily, they had remained with us (in the Church.) But that
they may be made manifest, because all be not of us (that shall be saved). And
again: Omnis qui recedit, 2. Johan.
and non permanet in doctrina Christi, Deu^ non habet. Every one that
departs, and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not Gods favor. S.
Paul likewise: 1. Tim. 4.
Dis^^ndent quidam a fide. Some will depart from the says. He alludeth also
to the story of Jeroboam the first king of the ten Tribes, 3. Reg. 12 and 13.
who in Dan and Bethel set up an other Altar against the only true Altar
which was at Jerusalem, and therefore was undoubtedly a Schismatike.

Now it is evident, that all this agrees no less to the Protestants, then to
the Donatistes and all other the like aforetime. Who knows not the Tree
whereon before they grew, and now divided from the root thereof, lie withering
by themselves? Who knows not the company out of which they are departed? Who
sees not the chair and preachers, both that were before, and that now they
have a new erected? Who is ignorant, that all the Bishoprikes, which they now
occupy, were before by Catholics possessed, who with wonderful consent, and
inseperable unity stood all, most constantly to the Catholic faith, as it
became true Pastors, not shrinking away at the Wolves invasion, and were for
that cause thrown out of their charges, cast into prisons, and there are now
all almost made up by Martyrdom? This (I say) is a plain declaration, that
the Protestants be Schismatikes, as the Donatists were before them for the
like cause. Finally let them show any person or persons of old, that did the
like, and were not Schismatikes: certain it is, that they can show none.

Rising afterward.
Article, the time, and person: and if I show not the same Article to have
been yet more ancient, before that time, and before that person, let me then be
accounted one that promise more then I can perform. And the^ let it be farther
considered, wether that ever there was any company other then Schismatic,
that can by good record be proved, long after that they were christians, to
have had their beginning, the Author whereof is known, the time of his rising
recorded in Histories, the Articles of his Doctrine before unheard of.

Consider well with your selves of all such Companies: as the Arrians, the
Sabellians, the Eutychians, the Pelagians, the Donatists, and briefly of all
the like, that we can tell when they first arose, and who began them. Is it not
manifest, that they were all Schismatic, and their Articles Heretical?
Neither can it ever otherwise be: because the holy Scripture can not be false,
wherein our Savior and his Apostles do give us this selfsame mark to know
such Masters. Multi pseudoprophetae surgent (says our Savior) and Mat. 24.
seducent multos. Many false Prophets shall arise, and shall lead many out of
the way. S. Paul likewise to the Bishops and Priests of Ephesus: Ego scio,
quoniam intrabunt post discessionem meam lupi rapaces in vos, non parcentes
gregi. Et ex vobis ipsis exurgent viri loquentes peruersa, vt abducant
discipulos post se. Propter quod vigilate, etc. I know that after my departure
there will enter in ravening Wolves unto you, not sparing the flock: and out
of your selves will arise men teaching peruerslie, to the end to draw away the
Disciples (or Christians) after themselves. Mat. 13.


And for the same cause our Savior in the Parable likeneth himself to a man
that sowed good seed in his field, homini seminanti bonum semen in agro suo,
and the Devil with his Ministers, to the enemy that came afterward, whiles
men were asleep, and sowed cockle amongst it. Cum autem dormire^t homines,
venit inimicus eius, and superseminauit Zizania in mediotritici: where the
Latin very aptly expresses the sense, making superseminans to answer unto
Seminans, although the Greek have not that agnomination.

Even so does Tertullian gather of this Parable, Tert. de praescrip. Haerot.
in that fifth book of his written upon the same matter that this our treatise,
how to stop the mouths of Heretics. Thus he says: Principalitatem
veritan, and posteritatem mendacit ali deput andam, ex illius quoque Parabolae
patrocinio, quae bonum s^^en frumenti a Domino seminatum primo constituit:
auenarum autem sterilis foeni adulteriu^, ab inimico Diabolo postea superducit.
Former doctrine is truth, and that which after rises, is lying: so we are
taught by the Parable, which first sets good seed of wheat to have bin sown
of our Lord, and brings after upon that by the spite of the Devil, the
corruption of baren cockle. Ita ex ipso ordine manifestatur, id esse Dominicum
and verum, quod sit prius traditum: id autem extraneum and falsum, quod sit
posterius immissum. So by the very order is that declared to be true, and of
our Lord, which was before delivered: that again to be false and of the enemy,
which was after brought in.

The Protestants then and Puritans rising of late with Luther, Zuinglius,
Melanchthon, Calvin, and Sampson, are (as you see) by our Savior, by Saint
Paul, by Tertullian, marked for Heretics. Let them if they can, bring us one
example for exception: But no doubt, they cannot, and therefore Saint Irenee
also took upon him boldly, to know by the same badge all the Heretics that
were before his time. Lib. 3. cap. 4.
Valentinus enim venit Romam sub Hygino, increuit vero sub Pio, and prorogauit
tempus vsque ad Anicetum. For Vale^tinus, says he, came to Rome under Hyginus,
and he increased under Pius, and he lasted unto Anicctus. Then of another he
says likewise: Cerdon autem, qui ante Marcionem, and hic sub Hygino, qui fuit
octauus Episcopus, etc. Cerdon, who was before Marcion, came also thither
under Hyginus that was the eighth Bishop of Rome, etc. And again of another:
Marcion autem illi succedens inualuit sub Aniceto, decimu^ locu^ Episcopatus
continente. Marcio^, that succeeded to Cerdon, waxed under Anicetus, who did
hold the tenth place of the Bishoprike. Furthermore, the like he notes there
of the Heretics also named Gnostici. And then of them all he concludes
together. Omnes autem hi multo posterius mediantibus iam Ecclesia temporibus
insurrexerunt in sua^ Apostasiam. All these much later, the Church having now
bin a certain time, in the mean while, did arise into their Apostasy.

Beginning with wondering and gainesaying of Christians then in unity.
by Saint Siluester, Saint Julius of Rome Osius of Corduba, Saint Athanasius of
Alexandria, and the whole Council of Nice: the Macedonians by the Council of
Constantinople, the Nestorians by the Ephesine Council, the Eutychians by that
of Chalcedon. Finally all others by some others. And by the same mark does S.
Irenee point out unto us Cerdon for an Heretic, saying: Li^ 3. ca. 4.
Ab aliquibus traductus, in bis quae docebat male, and abstentus est a
religiosorum hominum conuentu. Of some he was controlled, in the points that he
taught amiss, and commanded to abstain from the Church or excommunicated.

As our doctrine therefore, which eue^ from Christ and his Apostles is come
quietly to our hands without such contradiction, is sure and Catholic: so that
of the Protestants and Puritans, which was straight with the sword of Gods
Church sticked in Luther, and never since has ceased to be by learned
Catholic men confuted, and has binne by a General Council also examined and
accursed nor never shall be able to get one day of quiet possession, but ever
oppugned and assaulted, until it be quite again dispatched, as have al other
Heresies been before it: is most certainly without al doubt Heretical, no
example of no time being possible to be aleged to the contrary. For this does
S. Paul number amongst the singular gifts which Christ ascending gave unto us:
Ephesians. 4.
Pastors (I say) and Doctors, always to the end of the world. Vt iam no^ simus
paruuli fluctuantes, and circumferamur omni vento Doctrinae in nequitia
hominum, in astutia ad circumuentionem erroris: so doing their duty evermore,
that we be not now like children, wavering, and carried about with every puff
of Doctrine blown by naughty men, that have crafty ways to deceive us with
their errors.

The same vigilant zeal of our spiritual Fathers and Mother the Church
against all Heretics, straight to note them and cut them of, did God also fore
tell by his Prophet Zachary: Et erit in die illa, 3. Zac.
dicit Dominus exercitum, disperdam nomina idolorum de terra, and non
memorabuntur vltra: and pseudoprophetas and spiritum immundum auferam de terra.
Et erit: cum prophetauerit quispiam vltra, dicent ei Pater eius and Matter eius
qui genuerunt eum, non viues, quia mendacium locutus es in nomine Domini. Et
cofigent eum Pater eius and Matter eius, genitores eius cum prophetauerit. And
in that day shall it so be, says the Lord of hosts: I will destroy the names
of Idols from of the earth, and they shall not be any more remembered. And False
prophets and unclean spirits will I take away from the earth. And so shall it
be: when any man, shall any more play the Falseprophet, there shall say unto him
his Father and his Mother that did begett him, Thou shall not live, by cause
thou have spoken a lie in the name of our Lord. And there shall stick him his
Father and his Mother, even his own parents, when that he plays the
false-prophet.

Finally, he gave to Peter and to his Successors for ever, the charge and the
gift always so to do, whenever need should be thereof, saying: Lu. 22.
Confirma Fratres tuos, Confirm thy Brethren. For which cause also the Church
is of Saint Paul called, 1. Tim. 3.
Columna and firmamentum veritatis, the Pillar and proppe of truth, for that it
does continually hold up and maintain the truth against all such as at any
time go about to pull it down. So has it always done against all Heretics
before time: and they, against whom it has been feign so to do at any time,
were ever Heretics. The Protestants therefore and Puritans, against whom it
so does at this time, are likewise Heretics: and for the same cause we that
never were for any point of our Doctrine by men of the Church gainesaid, are
without al doubt true Catholics.

Unsent.
they can possibly, to be consecrated by one of our Order, least their might
some danger or doubt arise afterward of their right institution.

In figure of which their so doing and others the like, the History of Michas
the Idolatrer may be remembered, who said: Nunc scio, Iud. 17.
quod benefaciet mihi Deus babenti Leuitici generis sacerdotum. Now do I know,
that God will prosper me, having a priest of the Leuiticall kind. Contrariely,
what Church that is, whose Ministers are but very lay men, unsent, uncalled,
unconsecrated, and therefore executing their pretended office without benefit
or spiritual comfort of any man, yea to the certain and great damnation of
themselves and others unfit, and unworthy (by that only they be called to that
fond function) of any service in the Church of God: holding therefore amongst
us, when they repent and come again, none other place but the place of laime^:
in no case admitted, no nor loking to minister in any office, unless they take
our Orders which before they had not.

Is not this very practice both of us and them, a plain confession on their
part, that ours is the true Church of Christ, even that same Church, unto the
which after his Resurrection he said: Sicut misit me Pater, Joan. 20.
and ego mitto vos, As my Father sent me, so I send you? And consequently is it
not a plain declaration, that they are out of Christ's Church? What company
can they show us at any time since Christ's Ascension to this day, that took
upon them to preach and minister, not sent nor called thereto by their
Auncie^ts in those offices, but they were Heretics or Schismatikes?

We have in the Acts of the Apostls described unto us of purpose the form of
Christ's Church that the Apostles planted: there do the Apostles themselves
notify unto us false preachers, not only by the mark of going out (whereof I
have spoken before) but also by this that they were not sent, saying thus:
Audiuimus, Act. 15.
quia quidam ex nobis exeu^tes turbauerunt vos verbis, euertentes animas
vestras, quibus non ma^dauimus we have heard, that certain going out from us,
have troubled you with their preaching, goeing about to ouerturne your souls,
to whom we gave no commission.

Saint Paul likewise proves the same out of Esaie the prophet, that Preachers
(I say) must be sent. Romans 10.
Quo modo vero praedicabunt, nisi mittantur? sicut scriptum est: Isa. 52.
Quam speciosi pedes euangelizantium pacem, euangelizantiu^ bona? And how shall
they preach, unless they be sent? as it is written: O how fair be the feet
of such as preach peace, of such as preach good things? In the word feet
understanding, that they be sent as messengers. And therefore as he sent
himself Tite and Timothee, so he appointed them for to send others. Whereupon
he says unto Timothee: 2. Tim. 1.
Gratia Dei est in te per impositionem manuum me arum. The grace of GOD is in
thee by the Imposition of my hands. Grace was given unto thee, 1. Tim. 4.
cum impositione manuum Presbyterij, with the Imposition of Priests hands
And touching others he says unto him: 1. Tim. 5.
Manus cito nemini imposueris. Give thou Impositon of hands to no man rashly.
To Tite likewise: Huius rei gratia reliqui te Cretae, Tit. 1.
vt constituas per civitates Presbyteros. For this cause left I thee in the I Will
of Crete, that thou should make Priests in every city.

Such then was the order of Christ's Church which the Apostles founded,
Priests to be sent by Priests, and not by the letters Pate^s of King or Queen,
nor Priuilegio Altissimi, etc. And such has bin the order of the same ever
since that time, no example being able to be brought unto the contrary.
Wherefore the Protestants and Puritans, because they are not sent but come of
their own heads, are but as all other Heretics, they are not of Christ's
Church, they are as he, of whom Saint Paul in a brief description of a
false-apostle said: 2. Cor. 11.
Si is qui venit. If he that comes. They are as Christ has said: Joan. 10.
Qui non intrat per ostium in ouile ouium, s^d ascendit aliunde, ille fur est
and latro: who so enters not by the door into the shep fold, but gets
himself up another way he is a stealer and a robber. And therefore must the
sheep beware of them, not hear them, flee from them, remembering that fur non
venit nisi vt furetur and mactet, and perdat. The thief comes not but to
steal and to murder, and to destroy.

Unto this they never were, nor never shall be able for to answer: no example
being to be given in all this time of Christ's Church, but that the Preachers
still were sent in such order, and by such persons, as I have said: no ex^mple
of any sent our of order all this while: finally no example also of any
aforetime, that was sent out of order, that had not withal given unto him the
grace of Miracles, or Prophecy, or of both, as Moses, and some others in the
old Testament: our Heretykes being of those graces altogether destitute, and
therefore by no means to be accounted Gods ministers namly in this time of the
new Testament, where neither they work Miracles, neither any have bin ever
sent, but only by order.

Succession.
sound notorious Succession of Bishopes, Pastors, and Priests, with their
whole and several flocks ever since the Apostles time. Can not ours thus do?
Or can the Protestants thus do? Or was it ever the true Church that could not
so do? Or was it not ever the true Church that could so do? What one of al
these things can be denied, or with any exception be disproued? Who reads in
the new Testament, the Acts, the Epistles and other writings of the Apostles
with the Ecclesiastical Histories of the times that followed, which can be
ignorant of this, that the Church once begone by, and in the Apostles, did
afterward grow on, and spread it self over al places, and through al ages by
this Succession?

So that, whosoever will say at this day themselves to be the true Church it
is as necessary for them to be come of the Apostles by a certain Order of
Bisshoppes continually succeding one another from that time to this time, as it
is necessary for us that now are Adames children, to be come of Adam by a
continual petigrew of our Fathers and Gra^dfathers, and other progenitors even
till his time. So likewise as it is necessary for the feet to be referred to
the head by certain articles and joints one after another over all the whole
body, and not enough to say, that they hang and hold with the head, because
they come of the neck, unless they also have their depe^daunce by the
shoulders, and so douneward over all the body eue^ by the knees, legs, and
ancles.

And in this does S. Hierome note all Heretics to fail, where he says: In
Mic. ^.
Haeretici non habent diuitias de paterna hareditate venientes, Heretics have
not such riches as come to men by plain inheritance from their Fathers. And
namely to the Donatists upon the same says Optatus: De dotibus Ecclesiae,
Cathedra est prima: Lib. 2.
quam probauimus per Petrum nostram esse. Vestrae Cathedrae vos originem
reddite, quivobis vultis sanctam Ecclesiam vindicare. Missus est victor ex
Africa Roman^ Erat ibi filius sine patre, sequens sine antecedente. Of the
Churches dowries, the Chair (or See of Rome) is the first, which we have
proved by Peter to be ours: now the origin of your chair give you that will
challenge to you the holy Church. Sent in deed (by you) out of Afrike was
Victor to Rome (that you might say you had also on your side a B. of Rome) but
he was there as a son without a Father, a Successor without a Predecessor.
vvherby he gathers, that the Church of Rome was not for the Donatistes,
because this Victor, whom they sent thither to lurk in a corner as their B. of
Rome, was there the first of that sort, and came not from S Peter by
succession. For so did only Syricius the true B. of Rome at that time: and
because he so orderly succeeding to S. Peter was with Optatus and the other
Catholics in Afrik, and not with the Donatists: thereupon concludes Optatus,
that theyrs was the holy Church, and not the Donatists, for all their
fatherless and apish Bisshopp Victor by them sent thither. So sure an argument
of the true Church was it ever to have the B. of Rome Saint Peter's Successors
society: and so sure an argument of a false Heretical Church was it ever, to
sit without succeding. And therefore does S. Augustine amogest other most
certain Motives, that most justly kept him in the lap of the Catholic Church,
give this for one: Con. ep. Maen^. ca. 6.
Tenet ab ipsa Sede Petri Apostoli, cui pascendas oues su^^ post resurrectionem
Dominus comendauit, vsque ad praesentem Episcopatum Successio Sacerdotu^. There
keeps me in the said Church the Succession of Priests from the very sitting
of Saint Peter, to whom our Lord after his resurrection committed the feeding
of his sheep, even to this present Bishop.

And the same cause so moving him he proposes to the consideration of the
people of the Donatists, as a cause most certain, why they should forsake
those heretics and return unto the Catholics. Thus he says: Venite fratres,
si vultis, vt inseramini in vite. Dolor est, In ps. con. parte^ Den.
cum vos videmus praecisos ita iacere. Numerate Sacerdotes, vel ab ipsa Petri
Sede: and in ordine illo Patrum quis cui successit, videte. Ipsa est Petra,
quam non vincunt superbae inferorum portae. Come Brethren, if you will, that
you may be grafted in the vine. It is a grief to see you so lie cut of. Number
the Priests eue^ from the very sitting of Peter: and in that order of Fathers,
see who suceeded whom. That is the rock, which the proud gats of Hell do not
overcome. The very same likewise gives Tertullia^ for a most undoubted
prescription against such Heresies, as dare vaunt themselves to have been in
the Apostles time. Quae audent interserere se aetati Apostolicae. This is his
saying: De praescri. haer.
Edant ergo origines Ecclesiarum suarum, euoluant ordinem Episcoporum suorum.
Let them then show forth the origines of their Churches: Let them vnroll the
Succession of their Bisshopps. Finally it is without contradiction by the
witness of Scriptures, Doctors and Historyes, a most undoubted way to know at
al times who be Heretics, and who be Catholics: and therefore of such as will
not desperately cast themselves into Hell, deeply and earnestly to be
considered.

Apostolic Church.
believe Vnam, Sanctam, Catholicam, and Apostolicam Ecclesiam. One, Holy,
Catholic, and Apostolic Church, according to the Creed of the first
Constantinopolitan Council: it is our Church that is Apostolic, because it
agrees in the faith with the Church of Rome in which is the Sea of an Apostle
holding on to this day by Succession, and to which was written an Epistle by an
Apostle. What ca^ they here deny? does not our Church (the Catholics, I mean,
of England) agree in faith with the Romain Church? It is both confessed by the
Heretykes, who for that cause do call us Papists, and known to all men
bysides. Does not the Bishop of that Church succeed an Apostle in his See?

S. Peter was an Apostle and Prince of the Apostles, and the first Bishop of
Rome: which is as evident in it self, and as certainly may be proved by
undoubted witness, and as sensibly is seen with our very eyes, as that there
has been so long, and is at this present such a city in the world named Rome.
Had not the Church an Epistle written to it by an Apostle? S. Paul's Epistle to
the Romans is extant. Are not these the causes, why a Church is called
Apostolic? Hear Tertul^ians definition: De Pres. Haeret.
Age tam qui voles ^u^i^sitatem melius exercere in negotio salutis tuae,
pe^^urre Ecclisias Apostolicas, apud quas ipsae ad^uc Cathedrae Apostolorum
suis l^cis praesidentur, ^pud quas ipsae authenticae literae little recitantur,
sonantes vocem, repraesentantes facie^. well now, thou that would use yet
more curiosi^ie in the matter of thy salvation, run over the Apostolic
Churches, at whom the very Chairs of Apostles are yet in their places sitten
in, at whom the very authentical letters of them are recited, sounding their
voice representing their face.

Examples there he puts of the Churches of the Corinthians, of the
Philippians, of the Ephesians, and specially of the Romans, saying of the same
Videamus quid dixerit, quid docuerit. Cu^ Aphricanis quoque Ecclesiis
contestatur. Let us consider what it (the Romain Church) has said, what it
has taught. Mary, with our Aphrican Churches also it holds. Which he there
declares in all points. by the Heretics of that time denied, and by himself
with other Catholics of that country believed. Whe^eupon he will have it to
follow, that their African Churches are Apostolic, although not so as the
Roman Church and other like, yet in another right good sense because they
agree with those Apostolikes.

And in this he puts so strong an argument of the truth, that he ^g^ine
and again provoke Heretics to show the like. Edant origines Ecclesiarum
suarum: euoluant ordinem Episcoporum suorum, ita per successiones ab initio
decurrentem ut primus ille Episcopus aliquem ex Apostolis, v^l Apost^^icis
viris (qui tamen cum Ap^stolis perseuerauerit) habuerit authorem, and
antecess^rem. Hoc enim modo Ecclesiae Apostolicae census suos deferunt. Sicut
Smyrnaeorum Ecclesia Polycarpum ab Iohanne collocatum refert: Sicut Romanorum
Clementem a Petro ordinatu^: id and proinde vtique and caeterae exhibent, quos
ab Apost^lis in Episcopatu^ constitutos, Apostolici seminis traduces habeant.
Let the Heretics bring sorth the origines of their Churches: let them unfold
the rue of their Bishops, so from the beginning running down by successions,
as that first Bishop of theirs have had for his author and predecessor some
one of the Apostles, or Apostolic men, which also with the Apostles
perseuered. For after this manner do the Apostolic Churches bring down their
substance (to our time.) As the Church of the Smyrnians shows Polycarpus
placed by S. John: as the Church of the Romans, shows Clement ordered by
Saint Peter. And so verily do the rest also show whom by the Apostles ordained
Bishops, they have for the drawers unto them of the seed or doctrine
Apostolic: So as our natural progenitors have derived, or passed unto us the
natural seed of Adam. Confingant tale aliquid Haeretici: Let the Heretics
feign any such thing, if they can says he: But no doubt they cannot, and
therefore be they not Apostolic: and ours most certainly, which manifestly so
does, is Apostolic.

God grant them therefore once in heart also to believe with us, that which
with us in mouth they profess: to believe, I say, One, Holy, Catholic, and
Apostolic Church. Neither it is the Motive only of Tertullian: Saint Augustine
also in the greatest matter that can be, touching the very Canon of the
Scriptures, sends us to those Churches specially above all others, Quae
Apostolicas Seeds, De doct. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 8.
and Epistolas accipere meru^runt, which to have Sees Apostolic, and to
receive Epistles Apostolic, found the favor.

Finally, many others of the holy Fathers teach us the same way unto the
Truth, and no one of them all did ever disprove it. In whom this is yet
further to be considered, that whereas there were in their time standing yet
many other Churches Apostolic besides the Roman, they for all that did ever
principally and singulaly direct men always to the Roman: so also calling it
by prerogative the Church Apostolic, or See Apostolic, that by that name it
was no less known from all others (as all can bear me witness that read
antiquity) then (I say) when there were also many other Churches or Sees
Apostolic, than now at this time it is, when we have none other Apostolic
See remaining. After which manner also we know Virgil from all Poets by the
name of Poeta, and Aristotle from all other Philosophers by the name of
Philosophus, and S. Paul from all the other Apostles by the name of Apostolus.
Which thing well considered of any indifferent man, may give him easily to
understand, that the holy Fathers of the Constantinopolitan Council in their
Creed, bidding us to believe the Church Apostolic did not only mean the
Roman Church, but also none other but the Roman: well, that I leave to the
consideration of such as be indifferent.

But that, which before I said, is certain, as it is also most worthy to be
considered, that the Fathers in their times having many Sees Apostolic, yet
chiefly looked themselves, and directed others to the Apostolic See of Rome.
And now at this time, when as there is none other of that sort remaining in
the world, but only the Roman, and yet never none of them all more impugned
then this, no none of them all ever the thousandth part so much impugned, so
much barked at, so much sifted, as this: and yet they gone, and this remaining:
(by which very event of things Christ has plainly declared unto us, what he
meant, when he said to Peter first, concerning all his Apos^les: Simon, Zuke.
22.
ecce Satanas expetiuit vos, vt crib^ar^t s cut triticum: Simon, behold S^tan
has desired that he might si^t you l^ke wheaten meal: all the flower of truth
out of the sieue, and nothing to remain within but bran of Heresy and error:
then concerning Peter himself: Ego autem rogaui pro te, vt non deficiat fides
iua: and tu aliquando conuersus, confirma fratre tuos: But I have made petition
for thee, that thy faith may not fail: and thou once turning, confirm thy
brethren:) all this (I say) notwithstanding, the Heretics of this time, will
have us now to be so blockeheaded, and so mad, not to take our light of the
Apostolic Church of Rome: that Church (I say) whose Bishops from Peter unto
Eleutherius of his time, twelve in number, Ireneus reckneth up and says, that
it is plenissima ostensio, Lib. 3. ca. 3.
a most ample declaration of the Apostolic truth to be of his side, and a
confou^ding of all false masters. That church again, whose Bishops from Peter
unto Siricius of his time, seven and thirty in number, Optatus reckeneth up,
and says, that he is Schismaticus and peccator, Lib. 2.
a Schismatike and a sinner, that against this one singular chair, sets up
another. That Church also, whose Bishops from Peter unto Anastasius of his
time, eight and thirty in number, Epist. 165
Saint Augustine reckons up, and says, that this is. Certo and vere
salubriter numerare. Surely to number, and to our souls health in very deed.

Who now that have care of their salvation, will not follow the example and the
rule of these Holy Fathers and Saints in heaven, reckning up likewise the
Bishops of the same Church from Peter to Gregory of our time, the thirteenth
of that name, being two hundred thirty and three in number, and there seek,
find, and believe the Doctrine which the Apostles taught, Mat. 16.
rather then with the Donatists, Protestants, Puritans, and other gates of
He^l* fight against the rock all in vain, so foolish to think that he can
with the^ leap at one iumpe from Luther to the Apostles, having not one place
to rest his feet in all that long space of fifteen hundred years which is
between. Catholic men (you see) were never wont so to leap, to prove their
Church to be Apostolic: Heretics have none other but that impossible way.
Wherefore the Protestants and Puritans be not Catholics and Apostolikes: they
be Schismatikes and Heretics: and with such guides or companions they walk,
that walk with them: whither who sees not? whither else, but to perdition?
God give my dear friends and Countrymen better eyes, and take from them their
vvilfull blindness.

The Romans never changed their Religion.
Quod Romana esset Catholica and Apostolica Ecclesia, that the Roman was the
Catholic, and Apostolic Church, Hist. Angli. Lib. 3. Cap. 29.
Saint Bede our Countrie-man much commends in his time King Oswy. But to make
it yet more plain, I add this other consideration: that whereas the Romans
faith was once the true faith, of S. Paul himself commended, where he says:
Gratias ago Deo meo per Iesum Christum pro omnibus vobis, Romans 1.
quiae fides vest^a annunciatur in vniuerso mun^^, I give thanks to my God
through Jesus Christ for you all, because your faith is reported in the
universal vvor^d: And whereas their Church was once Catholic and
Apostolic, which the Heretics themselves neither c^n, nor wi^ deny: it cannot
possibly be showed, that they ever changed their faith, or any part thereof.
Wherefore their Church does still remain, as it was Apostolic, and their
faith Catholic. Or let them show, if they can, what Pope changed it, in what
Articles or points of Faith it was changed, at what time, with what tumultes
in the world rising thereupon, what Doctors withstood it, what Councels
accursed it, or such other circumstances, which we can show in all
innouations, both great and small, that ever by Heretics were attempted: as
namely by the Arrians, Sabellians, Donatistes, Pelagians, with other of old,
and now presently of the Protestants and Puritans. We see in what Princes
days they began, what Captains they had, what points they changed, what
Catholic men have set against them, what places or countries have changed
Religion with the^, what countries again keep still the old Religion. These
things, and others the like can never be showed in the Romans, because they
never were: and therefore most certainly never was there by the Romans any
change made.

Or if any man will say, that the Romans made their change not al at once, but
secretly by little and little: he can not so escape, but he must show us those
several little changes in form also aforesaid. As we do show not only the
total change made now by the Protestants, but also how in the former ages at
sundry times their mystery of iniquity did work by little and little, or by
one and one. For example, Aerius preparing to their hands their doctrine
against Purgatory: Nouatus, their doctrine against forgiveness of sins by a
Priest: Iouinian, their doctrine of Priests and Nuns marriage: Vigilantius,
their Doctrine against praying to Saints: Manicheus, their Doctrine against
free will: Pelagius, their Doctrine against the necessity of childrens
Baptism: Simon Magus, their Doctrine against salvation for good works:
Eunomius also, their Doctrine of only faith to be sufficient: with many
others, that here I could recite. They must show the like of the several
points in their imagined Roman change. Which most sure it is they can not
do. For name they what point of faith they will, at such, or such a time to
have been changed, and we will plainly show the contrary, that the same
point, which they will say to have been brought in by the change, was ever
before by the Romans and other Christians believed, up to the Apostles time.
What points will they name, but such as even now I touched, of Purgatory,
Confession, Saints, vowed Nuns, with the rest? But those you see, were so
not brought in by any Roman change, that we have by the FATHERS noted unto
us, what Heretics would have brought in their contraries by some change.

Whereby it is inuincibly proved, that in those very points also the Roman
Church remained unchanged. And so do the Holy Fathers witness as much, that
even then, when (as we can show) the Romans prayed for the dead, etc. they
did yet keep still unchanged the Faith which of the Apostles they had
received: as a little before I showed by the witness of Ireneus in his time,
Optatus and Saint Augustine in their time: at which time (I say) it is yet most
evident, that they prayed for the dead, because they then accounted Aerius an
Heretic for denying the same. And so have I most plainly showed, that the
Roman faith, which once was right, is still right, because it is not
changed: that promise of God by Esaias his Prophet never failing: Esaias. 62.
Super muros tuos, Jerusalem, co^stitui custodes, tota die and tota nocte in
perpetuum non tacebunt. Upon thy walls, O Jerusalem (he speaks to the Church
of the Christians) have I placed watchmen: all day and all night for ever they
shall not be dumb: but straight give warning, and without ceasing, if any
enemy at any time go about to break in with any profane innovation, 1.
Tim. 6.
whatsoever it be. As S. Augustine also says: Epi. 119. cap. 19.
Ecclesia Dei inter multam paleam, multaque zizania constituta, multa tolerat:
and tamen quae sunt contra fidem, vel bonam vitam, non approbat, nec tacet, nec
facit. The Church of God being set amongst much chafe and much cockle,
tollerateth many things: but such things as be against faith or good life, it
neither approves, nor is dumb at them, nor practices them.

Conversion of Heathen Nations.
converted by the Protestants. As it was always the practice of Heretics to
draw away Christian men from the true faith of Christ: so we see, that the
Protestants have done the like in many Countries corrupting christian men:
but that they ever turned men that were not christians, to be christians, who
can say? That Calvin to get this glory sent certain of his Ministers into the
new found Countries of the Indians and others, we understand: Villagag. con.
Calu. and Epistolae Indic.
but who ever heard any Protestant boast of any one there converted by them?
The truth is, that they there agreed so well together in their preaching, one
destroying still another building, that they were laughed to scorn by the
Infidels, and feign all to be put to silence. Contrariwise, the preaching there
of our religious men of the orders of Saint Francis, and S. Dominicke, and of
the Society of JESUS, what fruit it had, and daily has, their filling of
many and ample Kingdoms both in the East and Weast India, with the knowledge
and faith of Christ, does openly speak to all such as read the
Ecclesiastical Histories of this time. Whereby the Church has in those parts
vvonne more incomparably, then it has lost by Heretics in these our parts.
Besides these, many other N^tions have been within these thousand years
converted unto Christ: as our English Nation, Germany also, the Bohemians,
Hungarians, Flemminges, Brabantines, with many others.

Consider me now, whether any one of them all were not converted by our
Catholic Roman Church: whether they were converted without the mighty
operation of infinite and wonderful miracles by their Apostles: whether they
received not at their conversion as Articles and joints of the very body of
Christ's Gospel, all points of our doctrine that the Heretics now call
Papistrie: whether they were not for the said receiving of our doctrine, and
religion, and at that very time, when they first received the same, and never
before, truly called Christians, and noted by all Histories, at that time to
have bin converted to the Faith of Christ: whether the Nations converted before
these latter thousand years by the Popes of Rome that then were, or other Holy
men sent by them: as Italy, France, Britany, Scotland, Ireland, etc. were
otherwise converted, then by such Miracles, or were named Christians of another
Christ, or had any other religion planted amongst them: finally whether those
holy Popes sent abroad into the world any other faith, then S. Peter and S.
Paul brought to Rome, and preached, they with the other Apostles of Christ, in
the Greek and other Nations that they had bin in.

Is it not evident by all this, that the Church as well of these last thousand
years (which by our adversaries is confessed to be ours) as of the six hundred
years before, is the Church of Christ, the one and self same Church, to which
he said at the beginning of it: A^
Eritis mihi testes in Jerusalem, and in omni Iudaea, and Samaria, and vsque ad
vltimum terrae. You shall be witnesses unto me in Jerusalem, and in all Iewrie,
and Samaria, and even to the farthest end of the earth. And again, is it not
evident hereby, that the Gospel which the Church for these thousand years
has preached (which they confess to be ours) is all one with the Gospel of
truth, whereof S. Paul in the beginning of it, said to the Colossians: Quod
peruenit ad vos, Col. 1.
sicut and in vniuerso mundo est, and fructificat, and crescit: which Gospel
is now come also to you by the preaching of Epaphras, as it is also in the
universal world, and bears fruit, and grows on? And therefore our Savior
likened the Doctrine, Mat. 23.
which he would send by his Apostles into the world, to seed sown in a field,
that is to say, in the world, and not to be plucked up again by the root soon
after the spring, but growing still, as well as the cockle, even until
harvest, that is, until the very end of the world. Likewise to a small grain
of mustard seed, growing still on till it be a great tree spreading his bows
over al. To a fishers net likewise cast into the wide Sea of this troublesome
world, which they never draw nor cease filling of it, until they come to the
shore, that is, to the end of the world.

Seeing therefore, that the Protestants seed was not in the field, nor their
net in the sea, for these thousand years from S. Gregory's time unto Friar
Luthers Apostasy, and seeing that our seed has all the same while, been
growing and spreding, and none other but ours: our Peter's net also all the same
space been fishing the sea, and taken into the faith of Christ so many Nations,
which before were swimming and drowned in Paganism: it is (I say) hereby
inuincibly proved not that the Protestants, by no means, but ours most
certainly is Christ's Seed and Christ's Net.

By what Religion has Idolatry been destroyed.
Altar, to his Saints in heaven, to their Relikes, to the Images of himself,
of his Cross, and of his Saints: for that all this, as the rest also of our
Religion, is the seed and Doctrine of Christ himself, every man may easily by
that, which has been said, conceive.

But to make it yet more sensible, eue^ to the blind eyes of our Adversaries
themselves, such as it shall please God mercifully to lighten, forgiving both
their ignorance, and their malice: I propose this to their said, earnest and
quiet consideration: whether that all these foresaid Nations of Christendom
were not before their Christening, worshippers of Idols, as of Jupiter, Mars,
Saturn, Venus, Priapus, and ten thousand more: Whether that upon their
Christening they have not been so fully turned from those Idols, that the
multitude has forgotten their very names also: such only knowing somewhat of
them (but that very little) as are conversant in the old writings of Greeks and
Romans, that were Heathens: whether again that this so general destruction
an oblivion of those Idols be not that which God by his prophet Zachary Zac.
18.
did foretell in these words: In die illa erit sons patens Domui David, and
habitantibus Jerusalem: in ablutionem peccatoris and menstruatae, and erit in
die illa, dicit Dominus exercituum, disperdam nomina Idolorum de terra, and no^
memorabuntur vltra. In that day there shall be a font standing, open for the
house of David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem: for to wash or baptize him
that is a sinner, and her that is in flowers: And be it shall in that day,
says the Lord of ostes: I will destroy the names of Idols from of the earth,
and they shall no longer be remembered.

Being then of God this such conversion of these Nations, their Idols with
their names and memories, destroyed by God: and the Font of Baptism opened
unto them by God: and they in it washed by God from their sin and filth, and
so brought into the house of Christ our David, and made free Citizens of his
new Jerusalem: all this foretold by the Prophet, all this even so fulfilled by
God: are the Heretics yet so blind, not to see upon whom they cast their
blasphemy? He that turned them from their Idols, did not the same God turn
them at once to our Religion? Did he turn them from serving of Idols, to
serve Idols again? Was that so worthy a promise to be made so long before by
his prophet.? Yea, or can his Prophets word, and his own promise be possibly
justified, if the Heretics saying may be justified.

Let them therefore blaspheme (if they list) and blaspheme again even until
they fall into the pit of everlasting blasphemy: other men, whom the Devil
and sin has not so blinded, do see by this, that the conversion of al
Chhristian Nations has been none other, 1. These. 1.
then as S. Paul says to the Thessalonians of their conversion: Conuersi
estis ad Deum a simulachris, seruire Deo viuo and vero: Your conversion was to
God from Idols, to serve God the living and the true.

But yet farther, utterly to confound them, or the Devil rather that speaks
those blasphemies out of them, and to set open a full window to the blasing
light of God and truth: you shall consider, that even the very same points of
our Religion which they call Idolatry, are so far from Idolatry, yea so
contrary and so directy opposite to Idolatrye, that they have been the means,
whereby God has destroyed all Idolatry, and so fulfilled the foresayed
Prophecy. The Blessed Sacrament, I say, Saints, Relikes, Cross and other
Images, with such like, never could the Devils better abide them, when they
were within those Idols, then they can do now within these Heretics: as
Saint Hierome straight upon the rising of their Fathers the Vigilantians,
witnessed: Lib. 28. in Isaiae. c. 65. Vide eundem con. Vigil.
Haeretici nuper in Gallia sub magistro cerebroso pullularunt: qui Basilicas
Martyrum declina^tes, nos qui ibi orationes ex more celebramus, quasi immundos
fugiunt. Hoc autem non tam illi faciunt, quam habitantes in eis Daemones,
fortitudinem and flagella Sancti Cineris non ferentes. Heretics of late in
France are buded out under a braynsicke Master: who shunning the Martyrs
Churches, do flee from us, as from unclean persons, that there do celebrate
prayers after the manner. But this do not they so much, as the Diuelles that
dwell in them, not being able to abide the might and whips of the holy Ashes.

Let our men therefore look well to themselves and consider depely, of what
spirit they are inhabited, and suggested, Neither because Saint Hierome is so
plain, let them therefore think him a liar: or his admon^tion, because it is
so sharp, therefore to be unwholesome. For he is not singular in this point,
nor for it of any Father controlled, yea the same thing of them all likewise
most plainly testified: so many examples of Devils by such things put to
silence, and tormented, and expelled out of Idols, and out of men's bodies,
being in ancient Histories and other writers, as would fill whole books. My
purpose and study is here and in all this Treatise, rather how to make short,
then how to make long: and not to heap together so much as may be said, but
to take out so much as is sufficient. To descend there-fore from Zacharies
general Prophecy of the whole earth, unto one special Country, they that read
either the divine Scriptures, or also profane Authors, do know, that of al
Countries Egypt passed for Idolatry. And yet of it did Ezechiel leave this
prophecy: Ezech. 10.
Haec dicit Dominus Deus: and disperdam simulachra, and cessare faciam Idola de
Memphis, etc. Thus says our Lord God: I will both destroy abominations, and
make an end of Idols out of Memphis, and other places of Egypt.

And as much had learned one Hermes Trismegistus, a false Egyptian Prophet of
those Idols there, himself also after his death an Idol and a false God of
theirs: and the means also had he learned, by which it should be so
accomplished, which he uttered in a book of his written to Aesculapius, quasi
futura praenunciando deplorans, August de Ciu. Dei. li. 8. ca. 26.
as it were bewayling things to come in foretelling them, as S. Augustine
says. Hermes words are these: Tunc terra ista sanctissima seeds delubrorum
atque templorum, sepulchrorum erit mortuorumque plenissima. Than shall this most
holy land (of Egypt) the seat of the Godds and of their temples, be filled al
with sepulchers and dead men. His meaning therein does. S. Augustine thus
interpret: Dolor daemonum per eum loquebatur, qui suas futuras poenas apud
sanctorum Martyrum Memorias imminere moerebant. In multis enim talibus locis
torquentur and confitentur, and de possessis corporibus hominum eijciuntur. The
sorrow of Devils, by whose instinct he said this, did speak by him who
lamented for the drawing nigh of their pains that they should suffer at the
Memories (or Relikes) of the Holy Martyrs. For in many such places they are
tormented, and made to confess, and thrown out of men's Bodies by them
possessed.

Another Paynims like complaint for the same, because people upon their
Christning did forsake their former heathen Gods with their temples, and
worshipped the holy Martyrs, frequenting or going a Pilgrimage to their
Sepulchers, Ep. 43. Maximi Medaure^sis.
you may see in S. Augustine his Epistles. But in this kind, of all most worthy
to be known and remembered is the story of Babylas the Martyr and Bishop of
Antioche, which is to be seen in the works of S. Chrysostom himself, and in
the Ecclesiastical H^stories of Socrates, Theodoret, Sozomenus, Ruffinus,
Euagrius, and Simeon Metaphrastes. Thus it was according to the words of
Socrates: Chry. de vita Ba^ylae ^ongen. Thom. 5. Socr. li. 3. cap. 16. Theo.
li. 3 cap. 9. S^z lib. 3. cap. 18. Ruf. li. 1. cap. 15. Euag. lib. 1. cap. 16.
M^t. in vita Babylae.
Iulianus the Emperor and Apostata, when as he had commanded the temples of
the Heathens, which were at Antioche to be opened (for they were shutt up
before by other christian Emperors, and namely by Gallus the brother of
Iulianus, who purged that place of Idolatry by bringing thither the Relikes of
this Babylas, as Sozomenus writes) he made have to receive the oracle of
Apollo, who was served in Daphne, a Suburb of Antioche. But when as the Devil
that dwelled in that temple, gave to the Emperor no answer for fear of his
neighbor Babylas the Martyr (whose shrine, wherein his body lay, was hard by)
the Emperor after that he understood the cause, commanded the Martyrs shrine
with all speed to be translated from thence. Of which thing the Christians of
Antioche being certified, came thither men, women, and children, and leaping
for joy, with singing of Psalms translated the shryne out of Daphne into the
Cyty, and the Burden of their songs was this: Sozomen.
Confundantur omnes qui adorant sculptilia, and qui gloriantur in simulachris
suis: Psalm. 96.
Confounded be all that adore graven Gods, and that boast them in their Idols.

I wish every man to read the whole History, and consider it well: I may
stand no longer upon it. And so plain a matter this is, so well known,
believed, and confessed in the very first and best times of Christ's Church, our
worshipping of Martyrs and their Relikes not only to be no Idolatry, but also
to be the very baine of all kind of Idolatry: that the holy Fathers even in
their Sermons to Christian people to draw them quite from all society with the
Idols and Idolatrers, sent them to the Relikes: as S. Chrysostom, In Genesis hom.
15.
where he says: Occupemus pedes, non in theatris, and spectaculis damnosis
equestribusque ludis, sed in Ecclesiis, and domibus precationem, Martyrumque
loculis, vt abillis benedictionem percipiamus, and nos a diabolicis laqueis
irretiri no^ sinamus. Let us ocupie our feet not in the stages, and lossefull
shows, and horsegames (made by the Painims in honor of their Idols) but in
the Churches, and howses of prayer, and Shrines of Martirs, that of them we may
receive blessing, and not suffer our selus to be entangled with snares of the
devil.

So certain and evident a thing likewise, Our religion an invincible motive to
forsake Idols and believe in Christ.
that the same holy Fathers have used commonly to allege it to Idolatrers also
themselves and Heathens, as a motive most undoubted, most strong and mighty,
why they should convert themselves from their Idols unto Christ our Lord and
the faith of him. Whereupon S. Augustine, amongst many other Motives says to
the Madaurian Heathens, as here it follows: Ep. 42. ad. Madaure^ses.
Videtis certe Simulachrorum templa partum sine reparatione collapsa, partim
diruta, partim clausa, partim in vsus alios commutata, ipsaque simulachra vel
ce^fringi vel incendi, vel includi, vel destrui: Atque ipsas huius saeculi
potestates, quae aliquando pro simulachris populum Christianum persequebantur,
uictas et domitas, non a repugna^tibus, sed a morientibus Christianis, and
contra eadem simulachra, proquibus Christianos occidebant, impe^us suos
legesque vertisse, and imperij nobilissimi eminentissimum Culmen ad Sepulchrum
Piscatoris P^t^i submisso diademate supplicare. Haec omnia S^rip^urae diuinae,
quae in manus omnium iam venerunt, ante longissima tempora futura esse,
testatae sunt. Haec omnia tanto robustiore fide laet^^ur fieri, quanto maiori
authoritate praedica^a ^sse in sanctis literis inuenimus. Verily you see the
Temples of Idols partly fallen without repairing, partly cast down, partly
shut up, partly changed into other uses, and the Idols themselves either to be
broken, or to be burned, or to be shut in, or to be destroyed: and the very
Potentates of this world, who once for the Idols persecuted the Christian
people, being overcome and tamed, not by the resisting, but by the dying of
Christians, both to have turned their maine and laws against the same Idols,
for which they killed the Christians: and the top most Sovereign of the Empire
most Noble, laying down his Crown Imperial, to make supplication at the
Sepulcher of Peter the fisher. All these things the Divine Scriptures (of the
Old Testament) which are now comen into all men's hands, did witness a
marvelous long time before, that they should come to pass. All these things
to be done, we rejoice with faith so much the stronger, how greater that the
authority is, wherewith we find them in the holy books to have bin preached.

And in another place he says: In Ps. 44.
Ostendatur mihi Romae in h^nore tanto Templum Romuli, in quanto ibi ostendo
memoriam P^tri: show me at Rome the temple of Romulus in so great honor, in
how great I show there the memory of Peter, or Church where his Relikes do
lie. In Petro quis honoratur, nisi ille defunctus pro nobis? In Peter who is
honored, but (Christ) he that died for us? L b. ^2. cap. 8.
Likewise in his work De Ciuitate Dei, alleging to the Paynims many great
Miracles wrought by the Relikes of S. Steven, and namely one of a young woman
in his own presence, which as she was gone from the pulpit to the holy Martyr
to pray, straight was she cured of a trembling horrible palsy: upon the long
showting with wondering and weeping for joy of the people, that imm^diatlie
ensued thereof, thus says S. Augustine. Quid erat in cordibus exultantium,
nisi fides Christi, pro qua Stephani sanguis effiosus est? What was in the
hearts of them so rejoicing, but the faith of Christ for which the blood of
Steven was shed: And in the Chapter following he says again to them: Cap. 9.
Cui nisi huic fidei attestantur ista Miracula, in qua praedicatur Christus
resurrexisse in carne, and in coelum ascendisse cu^ carne? Nam and ipsi
Martyrs, huius fidei Martyrs, id est, huiu^ fidei testes fuerunt, etc. pro
ista fide mortui sunt, qui haec a Domino impetrare possunt propter cuius nomen
occisi sunt, etc. Nam si carnis in aeternu^ resurrectio non est, etc. quare
Martyrs tanta possunt, qui pro ea side, qua haec resurrectio predicatur,
occisi sunt? etc. To what, but to this faith do these Miracles bear witness,
in which faith Christ is preached to be risen in flesh, and to be ascended into
heaven with flesh? For also the Martyrs themselves, were Martyrs of this faith,
that is to say, witnesses of this faith, etc. For this faith died they who can
obtain these things of our Lord for whose name they were killed, etc. For if
Rising again of the flesh for ever be false, etc. why are the Martyrs of so
great power, who were killed for that faith, wherein this Resurrection is
preached?

Theodoret also by the same Motive of our Pilgrimage and seeking to Martyrs,
and their helping of us, and again our honoring of them for it with hanging
up in their Churches, of golden or silver hands, feet, or eyes, every one
according to the benefit that by their intercession he has received of God,
labors to bring the Heathens to the faith of Christ, in his work written by
him of purpose, De cur. Graec. affect. li. 8.
Of curing the Paynims diseases, Haec itaque omnium spectaculo exporrecta,
testantur morborum depulsionem, cuius ipsa certissima signa sunt, a sanitatem
consequutis allata: haec, inquam, sepultorum ibi Martyru^ quae sit virtus,
ostendunt: Martyrum autem virtus, quem ipsi coluerunt Deum, verum esse Deum
declarat. All these vowed Donaries of Christyan people, hanged up by them that
have been cured in the Martyrs Memories, and there set out to be seen of all
men, be witnesses of those cures, whereof they are signs most certain: and
do show, what is the power of the Martyrs that there are buried: And the
Martyrs power does declare that God, whom they served, to be the true God.

And in the same place does he show, that God has thus glorified his Martyrs
above al their heathen Philosophers, Orators, Dukes, and Emperors, yea above
their very Gods themselves. But what do I speak (says he) of their
Philosophers, Emperors and Dukes, cum eorum quoque, qui passim Dij ferebantur,
m^moriam^ mente hominum Martyrs ab^leuerint? Seeing that the memory also of
them, which every where were counted gods, our Martyrs have out of the minds
of men abolished? For their temples together with their Idolatrous Arbres, are
now so destroyed, that neither so much as any steps of them remain: muchlesse
can men perceive of what fashon were their Aultars. And the matter of those
things is cleansed by building with it the Temples and Aultars of our Martyrs.
For in steed of your Gods, our LORD God has brought into the Temples his dead
ones. And them, perdie, has he made vain and without all glory: and to his
Martyrs has he given their honor. For in steed of Pandia, Diasia, and
Dionysia, that is to say, the solemnities of Jupiter, and Father Bacchus:
Solemnities are kept after the Christian manner to Peter, Paul, Thomas,
Sergius, Marcellus, Leontius, Antoninus, Maurice, and other holy Martyrs, etc.

It is infinite, that I might after this sort allege out of all old
Catholic Writers, to show, that this part of our religion is the very
destruction of Idolatry, and a Motive most singular to believe in Christ. The
only sign of the Cross also, to be of the same might and virtue, innumerable
examples and Writers most ancient do bear plain witness. Lactantius saying
in his work against the Heathens, thereupon: Lib. 4. Ca. 27.
Nam cum Dijs suis immolant, si assistat aliquis signatam frontem gerens, sacra
nullo modo litant: nec responsa potest consultus red^ere vates, etc. vide Ath.
de incarnat. verbi. Nazianz. ^rat. 2. in. Iul.
For when they make sacrifice to their Gods, if one stand by that has his
forehead signed, in no case will the sacrings frame: neither can the false
Prophet answer the Idolaters consultations, etc. Nec tamen ex hoc ipso caeci
homines intelligere possunt, aut hanc esse veram Religionem, cui ad vincendum
tanta vis inest: aut illam falsam, quae subsistere aut congredi non potest.
Neither yet by this self same thing can the blind bussards (the Idolatrers)
understand, either that this is the true Religion, in which there is so great
might to overcome: or that to be false, which can not wrestle with it, or
stand in the arms of it.

And be not our Heretics in the very same blindness? Be they not against the
same religion which this mighty working of the sign of the Cross commends?
Do they not count it false? Yea, they blaspheme it, and wickedlie call it most
gross Idolatry: even the religion I say, which has utterly destroyed
Idolatry, at which the very Devils of Hell do quake and tremble, which
stands upon the very same grounds with the faith of Christ himself, which
the Heathen abhorred as the only Religion of Christ, which the christians made
for a certain Motive to believe in Christ, by which finally God the Father
delivered al Nations out of the power of darkness, and transsated them into the
Kingdom of his beloved Son. Col. 1.
God for his mercy give my Countrymen, both the deceived, and the deceauers,
the eyes to see their own wilful blindness, and that in such their talk they
serve and please none but the Devil himself, whom (as I have showed) nothing
more displeases, more tormenteth, more tameth, and breaks, the^ this
Religion so of them blasphemed. They think themselves very ingenious and
sharp witted, because of their promptnes to invent scoffs, and other light
follies: but if indeed they had so much as one grain of salt among them all,
any piece of either heart, or brain, how could they be so gross, so dull, yea
so dead, not to perceive, that white is not black, that light is not
darkness, that the bane of Idols is not Idolatry?

What shall I here speak of the Blessed Sacrament, my Lord and my God: but
only to wish with all my heart, with weeping eyes, that he either would, or
might say again: Pater, dimitte illis: Lucae. 21.
non enim sciunt quid faciunt. Father, forgive them: for they know not, what
they do whether they know or no, I for my part beseech you most humbly to
forgive them: but and if he also would speak the word, the thing were done.
Neither I, nor themselves, nor no man else can excuse them of malice most
Satanicall, as I fear: but at least of damnable gross ignorance: they in the
mean time thinking al men but themselves to be blocks and stocks. But and if
it will please God to open their eyes, they both may, and shall then see, this
most Divine Sacrament to be that simple loaf of Barley Bread, which in the
time of Gedeon went rolling about, Iud. 7.
and descended to the camps of the Madianites: and when it came to any
tabernacle of theirs, did strike it, and ouerturne it, and made it even with
the ground: to be likewise the Ark of God, which in Samuels time being
brought into the temple of Dago^ the God of the Philistians, 1. Reg. 5.
laid him flat on his face, again and again, groueling on the ground, cut
off his head and both his hands, and left him so but as a block without form
and fashion in his place: this Sacrament, (I say) to be the suppression and
subversion of all Idols, and Devils in all persons, places, things, and
Countries.

In witness whereof, Motive 5.
I alleged before out of S. Augustine the fact of a Priest of his own
Monastery, who offered in a certain fa^me the Sacrifice of Christ's body, and
thereby immediately delivered it of wicked spirits that did trouble, and molest
it. In witness of the same, many of our own Countrymen have on this side the
Sea been present at the mighty casting out of many devils by virtue of the
same Sacrament: which who that lists, may read in M. Pointz book of the
Real Presence.

The like unto them you may read in the life of S. Bernard, Lib. 2. Cap. 3.
written by Bernard the Abbot of Boneuallis, who lived at the same time: how
he to expel the devil out of a woman at Milan that had bin very long
possessed, to the leesing of her sight, speech, and hearing, and she now more
like a monster than a woman: at his Mass so often with the Sign of the
Cross he signed the woman, as he did the sacred Host. And after the Pater
noster was done, the blessed man sets upon the enemy, with more force: upon
the Patin of the Chalice, he puts the Sacred Body of our Lord, and holding
it over the woman's head, thus he says: Adest, inique spiritus, Iudex tuus:
adest summa potestas, iam resist, si potes, etc. Here present is, thou wicked
Spirit, thy Judge. Here present is the most Sovereign power: resist now if
thou can, here present is he, who being ready to suffer his Passion for our
salvation, said: By and by shall be cast forth the Prince of this world. Joan.
12.
This is that body, which was stretched on the tree of the Cross, which did
lie in the grave, which did rise from death, which in the sight of his
Disciples ascended into heaven. Therefore in the terrible power of his
Majesty, I command thee, O wicked spirit, that thou go out of this his
handmaide, and that thou presume not again to touch her. Which straight after,
at the giving of the Paxe was done: the Devil departed: the woman restored to
her senses, and reason: both of her and of all the City God blessed, and S.
Bernard highly honored: ringing of the Belles, showting, rejoicing upon all
sides, and weeping for joy over all the City.

A little before you may there see, how that at another time, in the same
City, he powered water upon his fingers over the Patin of the Chalice
wherewith he was ready to say Mass, Cap. 2.
and with a drop of the same water, which he put into the mouth, and so into
the stomach of a little wench that was possessed, he made therewith the Devil
immediately to break out of her for fear, together with most filthy vomit.

So that, such water being of such power, it is less marvel, that Saint
Cyprian writes of another little wench an Infant, to whom had bin given a sop
of Idolles sacrifices, and she afterward by ignorance brought into the place
where Saint Cyprian was sacrificing. Ser. 5. de laps^s.
Sacrificantibus nobis, eam secum matter intulit. And there was she very much
tormented by the holy prayers, but specially when the Deacon came to give her
amongst the rest somewhat of the Chalice: then turned she away her face
through the instinct of Gods Majesty (says he) and held her lips very fast
together. But the Deacon for all that powered some in. Tunc sequitur singultus
and vomitus. In corpore atque ore violato Eucharistia permanere non potuit.
Sanctificatus in Domini sanguine potus, de pollutis visceribus erupit. Tanta
est potestas Domini, tanta maiestas, etc. Then followed yokes and vomit. In the
body and mouth defiled with Idolatry, the Eucharist might not abide. The
drink Consecrated in our Lords blood, break out of the poluted bowels. So
great is the power of our Lord, so great is his Majesty, etc. Which S. Paul
himself also does witness, in saying: Quae immolant Gentes, Daemonijs immolant,
2. Cor. 10.
and non Deo. Nolo autem vos socios fieri daemoniorum, Non potestis Calicem
Domini bibere, and Calic^m daemoniorum: non potestis mensae Domini participes
esse, and mensae daemoniorum. The things which Heathens do sacrifice, they
sacrifice them to Devils, and not to God. I will not have you to be made
partakers of devils. You cannot drink our Lords Chalice, and the Chalice of
devils: you cannor be partakers of our Lords table, and the table of devils.

And of this who can doubt, the Sacrifice (I say) of our Lords Table and
Chalice to have abolished all the Sacrifices of the devils table and chalice:
according to S. Augustines saying: De Ciuit. Lib. 10. Cap. 20.
Huic summo veroque Sacrificio, cuncta Sacrificia falsa cess^ru^t: To this most
high and true Sacrifice, all false Sacrifices have given place: seeing it has
taken away the very Sacrifices also of the old Testament, by God himself
ordained? which both S. Paul does witness saying: Habemus Altar, Heb. 13.
de quo edere non habent potestatem, qui Tabernaculo deseruiunt, etc. We
(Christians) have an Altar (or Sacrifice) whereof they have not power to eat,
which serve the Tabernacle of the Jews etc. And the Prophet also did long
before pronounce in it saying: Sacrificium and oblationem n^luisti: Psalm. 39.
Heb. 10.
corpus autem perfecisti mihi. Sacrifice and oblation (of the Jews) thou haste
refused: but unto me thou haste prepared a body. Quia pro omnibus illis
sacrifi^ijs and oblationibus corpus eius offertur, and participantibus
ministratur. De Ciuit. Dei. li. 17 Cap. 20.
Because (says S. Augustine) for all those (old) sacrifices and oblations, his
body is offered, and to the receauers ministered. Id enim Sacrificium successit
omnibus illis Sacrificijs veteris Testamenti. For that sacrifice (and table
according to the order of Melchisedech, which our Priest the Mediator of the
new Testament does exhibit of his own Body and Blood) has succeeded to all
those sacrifices of the old Testament.

To conclude therefore, all such as would rather please God then the Devil,
may by this Motive see, that as without controversy our Religion it is, to
which belongs these Relikes, Crossing, Images, and Massing: so the same is
the only true Religion of God, the displacer of all other Religions, both
Heathenish and Judicial, the ouerthrower of Idols, the quailer, the tamer, the
caster out of Devils: and that so certainly, so plainly, that (no doubt) the
Devil it is, that has possessed the blasphemous tongues of Heretics.

Unity.
and that with the utter extirpation of their several Religions by them so
many hundreds, yea and thousands of years, used aforetime: you shall have
next of all to consider this, that our Church ever sithence, so many hundred
years again, through so many Nations, in such variety of vvitts, such
diversity of manners and fashions, such multitude of tongues and languages,
such distance of places, such difference of opinions amongst learned men, such
number of matters to be believed: yet all this while has, and still does
remain and continue in most peaceable unity.

Which thing most evidently declares, that as the Apostles were they, for whom
our Savior prayed to his Father, and was heard of him, where he thus said:
Pater sancte, serua eos in nomine tuo, Joan. 17.
quos dedisti mihi, vt sint vnum sicut and nos. Father that art holy, keep
them in thy name, who^ thou have given unto me, that they may be one* as we
also be one: so that we and our Church be they, for whom in the words
following he prayed, and was heard likewise, when he said: Non pro eis autem
rogo tantum, sed and pro eis qui credituri sunt per verbum eorum in me: vt
omnes vnum sint, sicut tu Pater in me, and ego in te, vt and ipsi in nobis vnum
sint: vt credat mundus quia tu me misisti. Et ego claritatem, quam dedisti
mihi, dedi eis: vt sint vnum, sicut and nos vnum sumus. Ego in eis, and tu in
me: vt sint consummati in vnum and cognoscat mundus quia tu me misisti, and
dilexisti eos, sicut and me dilexisti. Not for them do I ask only, but also
for them that shall believe by their preaching, in me: that all may be one, as
thou Father in me, and I in thee, that also they in us may be one: that the
world may believe, that thou haste sent me. Unity of the church a Motive to
believe in Christ.
And the glory that thou have given me, have I given them: to be one, as also
we be one. I in thee, and thou in me, that they may be perfect in unity: and
that the world may know, that thou have sent me, and haste loved them, as also
thou haste loved me.

Our marvelous divine Unity declares (I say) that we are these which here
are meant. For on the contrary side if you look to Heretics: what Schisms,
Dissensions, Sects, Divisions were always amongst them? For example the
Arrians, Donatistes, Eutychians, Nestorians, Simonians, Valentinians, were all
into many contrary parts divided, as in the Ecclesiastical Histories may be
seen, And is there any better Unity amongst the Heretics of our time? Yea,
is there not far more discord in sentences, bloodshed in fighting, multiplying
of Sects, without hope of uniting? Luther had scarce begun his part in the
year 1517. or rather 1519. but by and by in the year 1522. his Disciple
Zuinglius made pieces of him: and him again soon after did Calvin hew.
Finally of Anabaptists, Suenkfeldians, Trinitaries, Libertines, Maioristes,
rough Lutherans, soft Lutherans, Protestants, Puritans, and an hundred more,
all with them is full: in so much that the very names of their Sects do make
great tables, which are common to be seen. In our own small country, and
that ruled by one, all things diligently looked unto, the Catholics
dispersed every where amongst them to mark, to see, to reprehend their
doings: yet all this notwithstanding (that I say nothing, how they were under
King Harry scarce Lutherans, then under King Edward both Lutherans first, and
after Caluinistes) in this time, within very few years, all men see their
manifest Division, the mutual hatred of Protestants and Puritans, their
standing one against another, even to death if it should be offered. Into how
many parts would they have bin run, think you, if they had stood so many
hundreds of years, as we have done by their own confession?

Of them therefore, no less then of the foresaid Heretics, the Psalm
speaks: Psalm. 54.
Contaminauerunt Testamentum eius, diuisi sunt ab ira vultus eius. Because they
have once defiled Gods testament, perverted his Gospel, forsaken his Truth,
he has in his anger for to punish their sin with another sin, suffered
them to cut themselves into Divisions. Sicut Donatus Christum diuidere conatus
est, sic ipse a suis quotidiana concisione diuiditur: As Donatus (Luther, or
Calvin) went about to divide Christ and his Church, Aug. de Ago. Chr. ca. 29.
so is he himself of his own followers divided by daily cutting of him and
mangling: says Saint Augustine. Mat. 5.
In qua mensura mensi fueritis, remetietur vobis. In what measure you meat,
you shall again be meated unto.

And consequently they are not those, for whom Christ our Savior asked,
obtained, and gave unto them that perfect unity before mentioned. Whereupon it
is further necessarily inferred, that they must forsake themselves, return to
the unity of the Catholic Church, and so must all their followers, if they
will be comprehended in our Saviors words that in the same place do follow:
Pater, quos dedisti mihi, Joan. 17.
volo vt vbi sum ego, and illi sint mecum, vt videant claritatem meam quam
dedisti mihi. Father such as thou haste given me, my will is, that where I am,
also they may be with me: that they may see my glory, which thou haste given
me. Which I pray him, who full dearly bought them, to grant unto them both
this unity, and that Glory.

Judges infallible in cases of Controversy.
God of peace, and not of dissension, 1. Cor. 14.
has given always unto our Church, and still maintains in the same, this
precious grace of inseparable unity: the causes also, wherefore all Heretics,
both old and new, do lack it: and the only way for them with us to have it:
you shall have in the next place to consider, what company of Christians in
the earth there is, which has most certain ways and remedies to compose
their Controversies, discretion of Spirits, sensible and living Judges of truth
most infallible, marvelous orders quietly to rule every singular persons
sense and understanding: and vvithall, in them that be of the said company,
the will and humility to submit themselves to their ordinary powers by God
ordained to decide their doubts, and straight ways without all
tergiuersation to captiuate their understanding into the obedience of faith.

Is it not plain by the Scriptures, that the Church of GOD should be so
obeyed? Or is there any so blessed a Church and fellowship, save only ours? Any
other Church, so credited, so believed, so reverenced, so obeyed of her
children, that whatsoever she teaches, is received and followed? whom none of
her children, be his wit never so great, or his learning so excellent, ever
controlleth or ever mistrusteth? and that most agreably (I say) to the holy
Scriptures in ten thousand places. as where they say, Ephesians. 5.
that Ecclesia subiecta est Christo in omnibus, the Church is obedient to
Christ in all things. Who therefore says unto it: Qui vos audit, me audit:
qui vos spernit, Luc. 10.
me spernit, he that hears you, hears me: and he that despises you,
despises me. Mat. 18.
Si Ecclesiam non audierit, sit tibisicut Ethnicus, and Publicanus. If he will
not here the Church, avoid him as thou would an Ethnic and a Publican.

Thus is the Church of God to be obeyed, and thus do we obey our Church, and
none of their Church, but we. For our Church it is, and our Church only, which
has by the spirit of wisdom and discretion so sorted and severed from the
corpse of truth, al blemishes, corruptions, uncertain or singular opinions, or
several errors, in her childrens and Masters works whatsoever, that both the
truth may be had with ease and security, and the untruth escaped without
doubt or danger. Ours therefore and ours only it is, that has in it the path
that the Prophet Esaie forespeaketh, and promises should be in the Church of
Christ: Isai. 35.
Et erit ibi semita and vita, and via sancta vocabitur. Non transibit per eam
pollutus, and haec erit vobis directa via, ita vt stulti non errent per eam.
And there shall be in it a path and a way, and an holy way it shall be called: the
defiled shall not pass by it, but this to you shall be a direct way, so that
fools cannot miss, if they follow it.

But now on the contrary side, in any company of these several sects, and
scatered congregations, are they so humble as to submit themselves for dicision
of their questions to any power placed in earth: or have they any possible
means to try and end their controversies, any sort or number of men amongst
them, whom they may trust in all things, which whom and in whose steps they
dare venture to walk the way of faith and Religion toward salvation? None
there is amongst all the Sects in the world so happy, none so secure, and
therefore no Church amongst them. For in the plat form of the Church drawn
by the Apostles, we see, that when a question arose about Circumcision of us
that be Gentiles, straight was there found a remedy: Statuerunt, Act. 15.
vt ascenderent Paulus and Barnabas, and quidam alij ex aliis ad Apostolos and
Presbyteros in Jerusalem super hac quaestione. They determined, that there
should go up Paul and Barnabas, and some others of the other side, to the
Apostles and Priests in Jerusalem upon this question.

Upon this matter has S. Augustine written an excellent Book, which he
entitled De vtilitate credendi, Tom. 6.
of tht utility of believing the Catholic Church in all things, and whith
all humility: which book I vvish and desire all that can, to read it. Very
fit it is for this time, and alone sufficient to persuade any reasonable man
to be a Catholic. For were it not for believing the Catholic Church, and
taking of it our light and knowledge, a small number (God wotteth) of truths
should we in our whole life be able to find out, although we lived the years
of Mathusalem, and in most things should we foully err and be deceived, and of
nothing almost be fully resolved. And therefore being so many, so obscure, so
controuersed the things whereof upon pain of damnation we may not doubt, but
must hold them certaynely, even to the loss of frinds, Country, liberty,
goods, lands, and life: what hope were leafte for us poor wretches, of any
salvation? So desperate is the state of Heretykes and their followers: that no
doubt for lack of being grounded upon the sure Rock of the Churches Faith,
they would as sone be carried away from the faith of the B. Trinity, if the
wind should chance to blow that way (as were in old time the Arrians and
others, and now in Polonia the Protestant Trinitaries) as they have been from
the other Articles unto the which we labor and pray to see them once revoked.

Protestants themselves take things upon our Churches credit.
principium, origin, or beginning, etc. also many artificial terms, as
Person Trinity, Consubsta^tiality, Sacraments, etc. into the very heart of
Religion, which neither they did would, or could have invented, nor we never
have used, but only upon infallible credit of this Church.

Con. Epis. Man. ca. 5.
For whereas S. Augustine said: Ego vero Euangelio non crederem, nisi me
Catholicae Ecclesiae co^moueret authoritas, I for my part should not have
believed the Gospel but the Catholic churches authority moved me: Catholicis
obtemperaui dicentibus, Credit Euangelio, to the Catholics it was that I
obeyed saying, believe ye the gospel: Eua^gelio Catholicis praedicantibus
credidi, I believed the Gospel upon the Catholics preaching: Catholicis
praecipientibus Euangelio credidi, at the Catholics commaundment I believed the
Gospel: was it the Protestants Church (think you) that in all these words he
meant? Or can you hold your laughter, when you hear the question asked? No no,
the Church, at whose commandment he believed the Gospel, at the same Churches
co^maundment he believed (as he declares in his book De Doct. Christ.) Li. 2.
ca. 8.
the books of Tobie, of Judith, of Canticles, of Wisdom, of Jesus Sirach
called Ecclesiasticus of the Machabees, in the old Testament: and in the new
Testament, S. Paul's Epistle to the Hebrews, the Epistle of Saint James, the
second of S. Peter, the second and third of Saint John, the Epistle of S. Jude,
the Apocalips of S. John. Al which holy books of Canonical Scripture the
Protestants either in their whole multitude, or in some of their Captains who^
they defend, follow, and commend as men of God, do either flatly deny, or
call in question and leave in doubt as a thing indifferent for any man to
affirm it, or to deny it: which the learned know to be so, and I will by Godds
grace show to be so, when it shall be required.

And therefore it is not the Protestants Church whereof Saint Augustine there
speaks, but a Church it is that the protestants do impugn: a Church, that no
less bids us not to believe the protestants, and to believe those
Scriptures: than it did bid S. Augustine not to believe the Manichees (as he
there does say) and to believe those Scriptures.

Storehouse of the Scriptures.


Will any man doubt therefore, whether this be the true Church, which is the
old and only Treasure-house of so precious a Monument, which has kept the
just possession of it these fiftene hundred years, and has lost neither
leaf, nor line thereof? Or will any man be so mad, to think that to be the
true Church, which occupied no Bible, nor had not to do with holy Scripture
(as they confess themselves) for a thousand years together: and which now
forcibly and violently plucking it out of the just possessours hands, has in
little more then forty years of their restless spoiling reign, robbed us of
so many whole Books thereof, and of many a particular portion more? Tantae
igitur ostensiones cum sint haec, Iren. li. 3. cap. 4.
non oportet adhuc quaerere apud alios veritatem, quam facile est ab Ecclesia
sumere, cum Apostoli quasi in depositorium dives, plenissime in ea co^tulerint
omnia, quae sint veritatis, vti omnis, quicunque velit, sumat ex ea potum
vitae. Haec est enim introitus vitae: omnes aute^ reliqui fures sunt and
latrones. Propter quod oportet deuitare quidem illos: quae aute^ sunt
Ecclesiae, cum magna diligentia diligere, and apprehendere veritatis
traditionem. Being therefore these so great, and so many demonstrations, a man
must not yet (says S. Ireneus) seek the truth amongst any other, which it is
easy of the Church to take, because the Apostles have in her as in a rich
storehouse laid up most plentifully all that true is: so that every one that
lists, may out of her take drink of life. For she it is, that is the door
of life: all other are thieves and robbers. Wherefore a man must avoid them, I
say: but the Churches things he must most earnestly love, and take hold of her
Tradition of truth.

Studying and teaching of all divine truth.
the Incarnation of Godds Son, joining two most different natures of God and
Man, both intiere, both complete, no commixion, no confusion, into the unity
of one Person: about all the same one persons in his human nature
perfections, and defects, doings and sufferings for our sakes, about the
creation of the world in the beginning, of things visible and invisible, of men
and Angels, what they were both made by God, and what they made themselves by
sin: about the Resurrection and Judgment that shall be in the ending, and
state of things both in earth, and hell, and heaven for ever afterward, finally
about all parts of faith and Religion, no less then about the Questions of
this time.

And again, who they be on the other side, that know very little even of their
own Questions, that they have moved unto our Church in these their days, as
they can not possibly know much, being occupied rather about wyning, then in
studying, and taking upon them to be teachers, before they have bin lerners,
husbands and Ministers both, so sone as they can get them wives and benefices:
so young fathers, so young Doctors, that the common Wealth is (forsooth) greatly
strengthened by their multiplying, and the Church substantially edified by their
preaching. But in other questions of our belief, such as before I rehearsed,
so ignorant they be, that they are scarce ever heard, and very few of them, to
preach or teach upon them, the people thereby remaining utterly unskillful
of Mysteries that they are bound to know upon pain of damnation. Yea, Calvin
himself, the learned of them al, and their master of masters, compelled also
to study the Mystery of the Trinity for to answer his Polonion Trinitaries,
yet is he found so ignorant therein, that his errors are intolerable, as that
Gods Son is autotheos, God of himself (and not GOD of his Father, Just li.
1. cap. 13. nu. 23. 24. Vide Geneb. de. Trin. li. 1. page 43.
as the great Nicene Council has professed, Deum de Deo, Deum verum de Deo
vero, God of God very God of very god) whereof it ineuitably follows, that
they are two Gods and not one God, unlike in substance, and not
consubstantiall, beside many other his ignorant errors: Such was Iuels
ignorance also that Christ is a priest according to his Godhead.
being yet (I say) studied in the matter. What then must be the blindes of our
Country Heretics, that never trouble their brains about those Mysteries?
Look to their Universities, and see whether there be any appointed public
Readers, or Teachers of such matters, any that privately make them their study,
whether they do not all in manner study nothing at all but the art of
speaking, or else but certain new books of common places for a few points of
their new Doctrine, and them so lightly, that the common sort of Catholics
are able to answer all there arguments, and to say also more for them, then
they can say for themselves: and yet it serves them to be Doctors there of
Divinity, a Gods name: how be it both in law and truth they are no Degrees,
that men seem there to take.

Is such a Church (trow you) that Rich Storehouse, Li. 3. c^. 4.
in the which the Apostles laid up for ever most plentifully al truth and
knowledge for every one, when he lifts to take what he will, as Saint
Ireneus has said? Or is that the Company, where is discarged the charge that
Saint Paul gave to Timothee: 2. Tim. 2.
Qu^e audisti a me per multos testes, haec c^mmenda fidelibus hominibus, qui
idon^i erunt and alios docere. The things which thou have heard of me by many
witnesses, the^ commend thou again to trusty persons, such as again shall be
able to teach others also: and so from hand to hand, from mouth to mouth,
continually till the worlds end.

Are men amongst them prepared, instucted, and made able to defend the Faith of
Christ in all points, against Jews, against Turks against Arrians,
Manichees, Nestorians, and all other Heretics what soever have been, or may
be? The very Foundation of our Faith, and in deed al in all, is, that Jesus is
Christ (who knows not and grants?) the very point that is between us
specially and the Jews, and which Saint Paul full often and full mightily
proved to and against those traiterous infidels, as in many places of the Acts
S. Luke has noted. Act. 9. and 17. and 18. and. 26. and. 28.
Now if in England any of our new Masters should meet with such a Jew,
would he be very ready (think you) to oppose him, to reply upon him, to
make answer unto him? Or if he should light upon any there, that thinks
there is no God, or that believes not the immortality of the soul, and should
reason so with him in the hearing of others: were he not like to betray the
truth for lack of learning, rather then to root out the error? The multitude
of that threefolde cockle in our Country, against Jesus, against God, against
the soul, declares well what husbands they are.

And will there yet be any man so folish to think theirs to be the Church, that
S. Paul does call Columnam and f^mamentum veritatis, 1. Tim. 3.
the Pillar and vpholder of truth? Or is there any man of experience that
knows not, that our Catholic Church it is, wherein most learnedly, most
substantially, most lightsomely, most orderly, most vniuesally, all truth
Christian is studied, taught, and learned? Look the Sums of Divinity written
by our Masters, as Saint Thomas, and others. Consider our Pulpits,
Catecheteries, Monasteries, and Universities? such Readers, such Lectures, such
Orders, that in a short space a man may learn the grounds of all and every
truth that unto Faith belongs.

In the Universities on this side the sea that I have been in (and the like I
hear of others) shall he hear in four or five years the whole Course of
Diuinitye, and all in Dictates, under two or three Readers, twice or thrice
over: in the same time also the Controversies of these days by another Reader
severally by themselves examined: by another all the new Testament very
learnedly, and very profitably expounded: all this besides above a hundred
public disputations every year, every disputation being of some whole matter,
as of all Baptism, all the Eucharist, the Trinity, the Incarnation, the
Supremacy, the Angels, the Creation of man, Original sin, etc. every one
continuing for three hours: at every one, four or five Opponentes, besides
many Doctors sitting by, and replying where and when they list: all this
again besides private Disputations (little inferior to the other) in sundry
places, every week: finally besides all this, the whole Bible red over at
Table every year, and always after dinner and supper two Chapters of it, one
of the old Testament, another of the new, diligently examined, as it were by
familiar conference between the better learned and the younger sort, as
Doctors, Licentiates, Bachelors, and Scholars of Divinity.

In this Church, (I say) are the Treasures of the wisdom of Christ, and
knowledge of God. This is the Church, of whose learning and wisdom S.
Augustine often writes himself to have bin in vvonderfull admiration: De
vtil. cred. ca. 4.
and calls it, Syncerissimam Sapientiam, De mor. Ecc. Cat. cap. 30. con.
Epist. fun. ca. 4.
most sincere wisdom: alleging it to the Manichees, for the first Motive
holding him in the lap of the Catholic Church. And therefore of this Church, I
say to every one of my dear friends and Countryemen, as he did to his friend
Honoratus: Diu te affectum vides: and si iam satis tibi iactatus videris, De
vtil. cred. ca. 8.
finemque huiusmodi laboribus vis imponere, sequere viam Catholicae
disciplinae, quae ab ipso Christo per Apostolos ad nos vsque maenauit, and
abhinc ad posteros manatura est. You see, that you have been long troubled
with these broils of parties in the world. And if now you think your self to
have been tossed, and turmoiled enough, and would have at length an end of
these vexations: follow the way of the Catholic Discipline, which from Christ
him self, by the Apostles, to us is come, and from hence shall not fail to
come to our posterity. This Catholic continual Discipline, and everlasting
teaching sufficient to settle all that labor for the truth, and to show them
all that they seek, is evident to be ours, and that it can be none but ours.

Annual celebrating of all Christ's Mysteries.
consider you consequently, what Church it is, that for the due worship of GOD,
for the thankful and lively rememberance of our Redemption has driven the
Christian Service to such a Majesty, order, and decency, in all Countries of
Christendom most uniformly, that it has beautified, and sanctified all
Christian common wealths with the observation of Feasts, and of Fastes, with
Rogations, and other solemn Supplications, with variety of sundry seasons,
with Histories to be remembered most apt and fit for every season: so exactly
applying out of the Old Testament all shadows, figures, promises, Prophecies,
to the manifold and several Truths of Jesus Christ our God and Lord, that the
Jew may be confounded, the christian confirmed, al Heretics of themselves
ashamed, to see that done by Christ's Church every year continually without
ceasing, which Christ before did himself to his Disciples: Luke. 24.
Incipiens a Moyse, and omnibus prophet is, interpretabatur illis in omnibus
scripturis quae de ipso era^t. Beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he did
unto them interpret and declare throughout all the Scriptures the matters, that
to him belonged: as, his Passion, his resurrection, etc. his Catholic Church
to begin at Jerusalem, and to go thence over all Nations by preaching penance
and forgiving of sins.

Was it the Protestants Church that has so done? Or is it not even so done in
the service of our Church? Who then are they of whom it is written: Tunc
aperuit illis sensum, Luke. 24.
vt intelligere^t Scripturas, then did he open their understandings to
understand the Scriptures? Can these be the Protestants? who even in their
very Commentaries upon the old Testament, take their understanding out of the
blind commentaries of the obstinate Jews, professed enemies to our Savior
Jesus Christ: and therefore make they very few Prophets, very few Scriptures,
and in very few places, to speak of him, even so much in manner, as has
pleased the Jews their masters, and not all the Prophets (as S. Peter says)
nor all the Scriptures, Act. 10.
almost in all places to belong to him, so as he himself declared, and so as
both his Apostles, and his Church, to whom he gave the gift to understand the
Scriptures, have ever taught, and still do teach us.

It is our Church (I say) whose very Service does this very well declare. It is
our Church, that by her very Service does every year Praedicare annum Domini
acceptabilem, Luke. 4.
preach the gracious year of our Lord, by yearly recording at most convenient
times all that he did and suffered for us any year, and all his years that he
was with us upon earth: his Precursour and Baptists Nativity, his own
Conception, his Aduent, his Nativity, his Circumcision, his Manifestation too
and adoration of the Gentiles, his Presentation, his Baptism, his Fasting, his
temptation, his Preaching, his Miracles, his Passion, his Death, his Burial his
Resurrection, his Ascension, his sending of the Holy Ghost to be with us for
ever, and again his Aduent: besides the birth days (not into this world, but
into Heaven) of his Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, and other most
Holy witnesses.

By all which things the Church makes her Spouse and Redeemer with all his
Mysteries, even to be seen felt, and palpate of all his people. Was this the
Protestants work? Or is not that Christ's Church, which has done this for
Christ? Look to the very names of these Feasts, and see whether they speak
not our Church? Candlemas day, Corpus Christi day, Al-soules day, Al-hallowes
day, Ash-wensday, Tenebre-wensday-Maunday-thursdaie, Passion-sondaie,
Passion-weeke, Goodfriday, Holyroode day, Shroue or Shrief-tide, fastinges
Eaue, This is Ember, that your blind Apostls do boldly say to have bin the
Popes Lemman.
Lent, Ember-dayes, or (according to the Dutch, the root of our English)
Temper-dayes, Quatuor Temporum, Palmesondy, D^minica in Albis Sondaie in
whites, with many more: speak they Protestancie, or speak they (as you call
it) Papistrie? Or were not these Feasts by the same Church ordained, that
appointed us to keep Christmas, Easter, Whitsonday, Trinity sunday, the
Tra^sfiguration of our Lord, and the rest?

All these to have bin by our Church instituted, it will be easily proved, if
need shall be, and the Protestants do manifestly declare, while that in many of
their places infected, and specially where their Puritans do reign, they
keep no better Christmas day it self, nor any Sunday, then they do
Ash-wensdaie. Which they declare again most plainly, in laying away not only
all the days of Saints which were not Holy days, but many also that were
Holy days, as still in the Catholic Church they are. For was not Saint
Laurence day brought in and ever observed by the same Chruch that commanded
Saint Steuens day? Was it not the same Church that honored our B. Lady Gods
Mother with holydaies, which made holy the Apostles days?

Of that same one Church therefore are not the Protestants, who have put down
S. Laurence day, and all the days of our B. Lady, with very many more: all
the days (I say) of our Lady, every one none excepted. For the Annunciation
of our Lady, is the Conception of our Lord: the Purification of our Lady, is
the Presentation of our Lord: neither of them more properly our Ladies day,
then Christmas day is our Ladies day, Christ being that day borne, and she
delivered. But the proper days of our Lady are, her Conception, her Nativity,
her Visitation, and specially her Assumption, which the Protestants have laid
all away, as though Christ were worshipped by keeping his Precursors or
Baptists Nativity, and dishonored by keeping his Mothers Nativity: honored
by keeping his other Saints Assumpting out of this life to heaven, and
dishonored by keeping his mothers Assumption: a fault most absurdly by them
committed, that whereas in all Saints we keep specially their Natalitiae, or
taking hence unto Christ: his own mothers day that she was by death assumpted
(in soul only, as other Saints, or in body also although it be certain, I
do not here say) that this day of Gods Mother, the Lady of Saints and Angels,
they keep not, it is (I say) for them an intolerable foul absurdity. So do
they many ways (as I have said) manifestly declare that which also in it self
is evident, that they be not the Church, which with such days and
observations has commended all christendom for to be Regnum Sacerdotale, a
Kingdom Priestlike, 1. Pet. ^.
and heaven upon earth, Christ with his Saints and Angels being by such means
continually seen here by representation and remembrance, as there in face and
fruition: but that they be the Rebels of that Church, the defacers of
christendom, the coolers of devotion in christian hearts, enuiers of the honor
and remembrance of Saints, and of Christ himself. That and if they might or
would be but present once at the Reverend solemn doing of the foresaid
Catholic Service, specially at Christmas, Easter, and such other more
festival times, I doubt not but that most of their stony hearts would melt for
joy with the love of Christ: so as Saul also himself did Prophecy, 1. Reg. 10
and 19.
coming in place where the Prophets were: if (I say) they would come in and
leave their standing without with him in the Parable, Qui audiuit symphoniam
and choru^, Luke. 15.
etc. and nolebat introire, who heard the singing and melody, etc. and would
not come in. And much more would the cold hearts of many Catholics be
enflamed therewith, which now for fear of the world, and for lack of the
fear of God, do to their own damnation appear at this new paltrie.

Wherewith how well God is pleased, they may learn of Saint Jerome, saying
thus: In Amos. 5.
Haeretici quotiescunque sub nomine Domini fuerint congregati, detestatur
faetorem eorum, and claudit nares suas, etc. Whenever Heretics be gathered
together under the Lords name, he abhoreth their stinking, and stops his
nose, etc. Iudaeorum quoque oration and Psalmi, quos in Synagogis canunt, and
Haereticorum composita laudatio, tumultus est Domino, and (vt ita dicam)
grunnitus suis, and clamor Asinoru^, etc. Also the Jews praying, and Psalms
which they sing in their Synagogues, and the Heretics fine composed praising,
is a great disquieting to our Lord, and (that I may so say) a grunting of
Swine, and a braying of Asses, etc. The cause thereof is, for that he has
appointed only the Catholic Unity to be served in. Ephesians. 4. Phil. 2.
And therefore he counts them Traitors, not only which serve under his
professed enemies, as under the Turks, Jews, and Heathens: but also under
them that pretend to be his friends, and yet know themselves, and are so
known of others, to be in deed his enemies (as all sorts of Heretics:)
because that although they say themselves to be his soldiers, yet do they
wilfully and manifestly fight against the^, whom he has appointed for the
Governors of his people. As presently the Hollanders, and Zealanders that
serve the Prince of Aurenge, who knows not that they be Traitors to the
king, because they stand against his known Governor of these Low countries,
howsoever the said Prince in his Proclamations and style ridiculously
pretends, that he is for the king.

God for a figure of this serving him in unity, Deuteronomy. 12.
ordained only one Altar at the Tabernacle in the Old Testament, for all to
offer there, and no where else, their Sacrifices, under pain of his great
indignation: in so much, that when as the Tribes of Ruben, Gad, Ios. 2^.
and half Manasses, had in another place builded another Altar, all the other
ten Tribes only upon suspicio^ that they meant thereon to offer sacrifice, were
by and by assembled to make war against them. Our men therefore, of whom I
speak, who are not only suspected, but openly seen to commit this heinous
sacrilege, and that so many years together, or that will seem to do it: will
they not think how grievously and how damnably they displease God their Father,
and his Holy Church their Mother? The Arrians, and other old Heretics,
changed not the Service nor Sacraments of the Church: but yet because they
were Heretics, Catholic men would not in any case come to their Churches, nor
receive the Sacraments, the true Sacraments, I say, at their hands: As S.
Gregory writes of Ermigildus a Kings Son and Heir apparent of the mighty
Goths in his time, Dial. li. 3. cap. 31.
who rather then he would receive the B. Sacrament of an Arrian Bishop,
suffered himself to be of the Arrian king his Father, disenherited, imprisoned,
laid in irons and his brains finally hewed out of his head with an axe: God
straight after by sundry Miracles at his body, confirming well his doing.

Innumerable other like ensa^ples there are in all Histories* of Catholics
that have chosen (as they were taught) rather to abide most cruel Martyrdomes,
then to come once to the right service (I say) and Sacraments, only because
Heretics were the Ministers. In our country the^, where not only the
ministers be Heretics, or set a work by Heretics, but also the whole service
is of it self schismatic, and the sacraments Heretical, there for
Catholics not to abstain, is a crime intolerable, a sacrilege unspeakable,
and a manifold wicked shameful and shameless denying of Christ our Savior.
And therefore fie upon livings, goods, lands, friends, life, and all other
worldly trash, and transitory earthly things, to the which carnal senceles
men do stick, and cleave so fast, that they stick not to sever themselves
quite from God, both now and for ever, to hear him say therefore unto the^
within less then one minute of an hour: Get ye hence from me, Mat. 25.
ye accursed souls, into fire everlasting prepared for the devil and his
black Angels. The only remedy is, first to do Penance (according to the
judgment of some Catholic Priest, if possibly he may be had) for all that is
past, whether it came of ignorance, or of frailty. Secondly, if we will be
saved, no more to worship those Idols of Babylon, Barut. 6.
according to the Epistle of S. Jeremy the Prophet. For so must we every where
understand Idols in the old Testament, that they were figures of Heresies in
this time of the new Testament, no other Idols being now, but heresies. Ponitur
Idolum, quando nouum Dogma constituitur, etc. An Idol is set up, when a new
Position (or Heresy) is erected, says Saint Hierome, In Ier. 32
the most learned and expert interpreter of the Scriptures: Saint PAVLE also
himself giving his voice thereunto, where by BAALL the Idol that GOD did
speak of to Elias, Romans 11. 3. Reg. 19
he teaches us to understand the erroneous wicked Doctrine against Christ of
his incredulous Countriemen the Jews of his time. And thirdly, during this
time that God of his justice for our great innumerable, frequented, universal
sins will have us to sit in Babylon, we must bitterly weep, sob, and sigh,
to remember Sion and the Temple of our Mother Jerusalem, Psalm. 136
day and night (with the affection of King David being cast out of Gods
inheritance, 1. Reg. 22 and 20. and Psalm. 62.
and feign to hide himself in the dry Wilderness without the water of Gods
service) praying God most humbly, and most ferue^tly for his mercies sake, once
to make an end of our miserable captivity, and to bring us all home again to
the sweet Angelical songs and heavenly Service of the same, with liberty:
there to make Principium laetitiae nostrae. The first beginning of our gladness.

In which prayer (specially now against this most acceptable year of grace
beginning at Christmas next, A. 1575.) for the love of Christ, let us join
together (notwithstanding Ieroboams commandment of going no more unto
Jerusalem) all that be Catholics, 3. Reg. 12
both such as are already by Gods goodness delivered out of Babylon both in
soul, and body: and such also as are only in soul out of it, and not in
body: finally, such also as are in it still both in soul and body, who
doubtless have of al most need so to pray, if they can or will see the dreadful
peril of their own captivity.

And here does Charity compel me, to admonish certain Priests of their duty
who will of us be counted Catholics, and yet do for the penny give them selves
to the ministry of this new Service, and flatter themselves therein, as
though it were no sin. But that in so doing they damnably deceive themselves,
they may consider by this little which I have said of such as come only to
hear that service. For the hearers sin being so grievous, who can think how
detestable is the sin of the ministers? If they lived under Turks or Jews,
and should there either for worldly fear, or filthy lucre, do as they now
do living under Heretics, would they think that they did not sin? And most
certainly no reason nor color there is to excuse the^ more in this, then in
the other.

Howsoever therefore they flatter themselves, or also be flattered of others,
one, or two, or three, that seem learned, who having a singular opinion in
this matter, contrary to all truth and reason and learned Catholics of all
Nations, and to themselves also (we doubt not) if they lived in the free and
open air of the catholic Churches practice, do speak placentia unto them,
Isa. 30.
doing themselves as they may do, and yet telling these that they should do
otherwise, to the heavy judgment of both the coun^el giuers and the
counseltakers: yet no doubt for all this, as the lay ministers were figured in
the pristes of Jeroboam, of whom it is written: Fecit phana in Excelsis, 3.
Reg. 18.
and Sacerdotes de extremis populi, qui non erant de filijs Leui, He made
Lofthouses, and priests of the rascal people, who were not of the sons of
Leui: so were these ministering priests plainly figured in that covetous
wordly Leuite, Iud. 17.18.
that first for a little money served newfound Idols in the house of Michas,
and afterward for more lucre and honor did the same in the Tribe of Dan. Plain
it is that our Savior in the Gospel makes but three kinds of Ministers: two,
that minister after the right manner, one for Gods glory, the other for his
own commodity, Joan 10. Vide Aug. de ver. Do. Ser. 49.
which are there called Pastor, and Mercenarius, the Shepeard, and the
Hierling: the third, whose ministration is wrong, and to the shepes
destruction, which is, there termed Lupus, fur, and Latro, the wolf, the
stealer and the robber.

Whereby these flatterers of themselves, of whom I speak, who seeing the
wolf come, did neither stand constantly in the right ministration, until
they should have been thrust out of all by the wolf, or clean forsaken of
the sheep, as the Shepeheard: nor did not forsake the Sheep and run away as
the Hireling: but did, and do abide still, and join with the wolf, and
minister after his tradition: may see most evidently, in what part of our
Saviors just division they have placed themselves. And therefore if they
list, vnsensibly, desperately, and damnably to hold on with the wolf, as they
do, and to take no charitable wholesome warning: the Sheep must
notwithstanding mark well this forsaid division made by the good Shepherd,
and Prince of Shepeheardes: and consider, Joan. 10. 1. Pet. 5.
that what he has said of wolus the same he has said of these also: telling
the sheep their duty in these words: Oues pastorem sequu^tur, quiasciunt voce^
eius. Alienum autem non sequutur, sed sugiunt ab eo: quia nou nouerunt vocem
alienorum. The sheep follow the Sheepeheard, because they know (or like well)
his voice. But the alien they follow not, but they flee from him: because they
know not the voice of aliens.

By which admonition of our Saviors, the doubt also of certain sheep is
answered, who think it lavvfull for them to hear the wolves Sermon, though
not his Service. But our Savior tells them, that the true sheep know not
neither the voice of the wolf, but that they will flee from him. So as by
virtue only of Tradition without Scripture, did those Christian peoples of the
Barbarous languages, of whom S. Irenee says thus: Li. 3. ca. 4
Quibus si aliquis annunciauerit ea, quae ab Haereticis adinuenta sunt proprio
sermon little colloquens, statim co^cludentes aures, longo longius fugiunt, ne
audire quide^ sustinentes blasphemum colloquium. Sic per illam veterem
Apostolorum Traditione^, ne in conceptionem quid m mentis admittunt, quodcunque
eorum portentiloquium est. If any man would preach unto them the things that by
Heretics have been invented, talking with them in their own language: they
will flee away farther and farther, not abiding so much as to hear the
blasphemous talk. So through that old Tradition of the Apostles, they admit
not so much as into the cogitatio^ of their minds, any monstrous, speech of
theirs whatsoever it be.

And besides that admonition, and this ensample, also very good reason so to
do: because those Sermons are (as no Catholic will deny) most blasphemous
against al persons and things most holy and most honorable, both in earth and
in heaven, Psalm. 82.
according to the psalm: Posuerunt in coelum os suum, and lingua eorum
tra^siuit in terra, They have put into heaven their mouth, and their tongue
has passed over all the earth. And therefore solemnly to hear such Sermons,
must needs be horrible sin, seeing that the only private patient hearing of
one detraction against some one neighbor of ours, deserves damnation, as
Saint Bernard, Li. 2. de Con^ad Eugen.
according to many holy Scriptures, has noted: Detrahere, and detrahentem
audire, quid herum damnabiliu^ sit, non facile dixerim. To detract and to give
ear to a detractor, which of these is more damnable, I may not easily say.
Whereupon the Prophet David says: Psa. 100.
Detrahe^tem secreto poximu^ suu^, hunc persequebar. Him that speaks
detractio^ secretly against his neighbor, him did I persecute.

S. Augustine writes of Innocentiareligiosissima foemina de primarijs ipsius
ciuitatis, De Ciuit. Dei li. 22. cap. 13.
a most religious woman of Carthage, one of the chief of that City, who (as
she told him herself) upon a vision that she had, caused a woman newly
baptized to make the sign of the Cross upon her breast infected with an
incurable canker, and thereby immediately was healed: that, when her Physician
being an Heathen, did afterward see it, and ask her earnestly by what medicine
she was helped (which his master Hyppocrates knew not of) she telling him how
it was done: he with the voice and countenance of one as it were contemning,
so that she feared least that he would utter some contumelious word against
Christ, answered with devout civility, I thought quod he, that you would have
told me some great matter. Atque illa iam exhorrescente, mox addidit: Quid
grande fecit Christus sanare cancrum, Joan. 11.
qui quatriduanum mortuum suscitauit? And she now shyuering for fear, he by
and by did add: what great matter did Christ to heal a canker, who raised one
that had been four days dead?

Whereby we see, that good folk which love Christ, when they se so much as
one word about to be spoken against him, will be ready to swound and to dye for
fear. What then are they, which will go to the place, where they know that he
is blasphemed, there to stand so quietly, so long, so often, to hear such
blasphemies? Certainly they are more senseless and more dead, then was that
foresaid Lazarus. I pray Christ to call them likewise forth of their stinking
graves: Lazare veniforas: Lazarus, come forth: and so to give them to his
ministers to be loosed: Soluite cum, and sinite abire. Loose ye him, and let
him go.

And again, let them tell me, whether a Sermon be not part of the Service?
Which is so evident, that they see the Puritans would have no other Service but
a Sermon. And therefore look for what causes it is unlawful to hear their
Service, for the same unlawful it is also, to hear their Sermons. Do they
not know, what many our Holy Fathers the Popes and Councels, and namely the
Council of Trent has enacted touching the very books of Heretics? In indice
librorum prohibitorum, regula vlt.
Quod si quis libros Haereticorum (vel cuiusuis authoris scripta, ob haeresim,
vel ob falsi dogmatis suspicionem, damnata atque prohibita) legerit, sieve
habuerit: statim in excommunicationis sententia^ incurrat. Qui vero libros alio
nomine interdictos legerit aut habuerit: praeter peccati mortalis reatum, quo
afficitur, iudicio Episcoporum severe puniatur. The books of Heretics, (or
writings of any Author, for Heresy or for suspicion of false doctrine,
condemned and prohibited) if any man read them, or have them in his keeping:
we ordain, that by and by he incur the sentence of excommunication. As for
books that are for any other cause forbidden, he that reads or has them,
besides the guilt of mortal sin, whereof he is attainted, let him, according
to the discretion of the Bishops, be severely punished.

Now, whether is worse (I ask them) and more dangerous, to read their
books, or to hear their Sermons? No doubt, to hear their Sermons: both
because the greatest and foulest blasphemers of them al do preach, who yet for
lack of learning, or for other causes do not, nor are not always suffered to
write, abstaining also in their Sermons from no blasphemy, be it never so
devilish and false, because they fear to that no answer, as to their books
they do. And also because that viua vox word of mouth has incomparably more
force, then the dead pen, whether it be to edify, or to destroy. 1. Tim. 2.
Sermo eorum, vt cancer serpet, says Saint Paul: Their preaching will creep
upon you like a canker.

No man is so madd, as to let poison into his body, be it never so little.
These then that go to the places where most souls are poisoned, and al in
danger to be poisoned (unless they think themselves more safe and sure, than
was our mother Eve in paradise it self) do plainly show, that they care less
for their souls, then for their bodies, and therefore less for the world to
come, then for this world, less finally for God, then for themselves. Yea, as
I said before of such heretics as had the true Service: so although it should
chance to be nothing else but truth that Heretics preach, yet should we not
come at them. For else why did our Savior, for the same confession, for which
he said to Peter, Beatus es Simon Bar-Iona, etc. Mat. 16.
Blessed art thou Simon the son of John: say to a Devil, Obmutesce, Luc. 4.
Be thou dumme and hold thy peace? Peter's confession was: Tues Christus Filius
Dei viui, Thou art Christ the Son of God the living: And the Devils was: Scio
te qui sis, Sanctus Dei, I know thee, who thou art, the HALOVV of God.

Moses likewise in figure of this that I say, Deuteronomy. 18.
rekoned up many dark Scholemaisters, as Southsaiers, Inchaunters, Witches,
Wisemen, Familiars, Coniurers, etc. and charged the people, not to seek even
Truth it self of such. And therefore whereas a wench possessed of a
Pithon-sprite cried after Saint Paul and his company: isti homines, serui Dei
Excelsi sunt, Act. 16
qui annuntiant vobis viam salutis, These men are servants of God the Highest,
who show to you the way of salvation; what says the Scripture thereupon?
Dolens autem Paulus, and conuersus, spiritui dixit: praecipio tibi in nomine
Jesus Christi exire ab ea. Et exijt eadem hora. But Paul being grieved thereat,
and turning himself, said to the sprite: I command thee in the name of Jesus
Christ to go out of her. And he went out the same hour.

Much more might be here said to this purpose, in commendation of Catholic and
detestation of Heretical both Service and Sermons. But for my brevity thus
much shall suffice. Proced we therefore to other Motives.

Ecclesiastical Monumentes, and livings.
Esaiae. 49.
Et erunt Reges nutricij tui, and Reginae nutrices tuae Kings says he, shall be
thy fosterers, and Queen's shall be thy nurces.

Were then these magnificent Churches, Colleges, and Universities, builded
either by Protestants, or for Protestants: by any one or for any one ever
that was of their Religion? Were the Bishopriks, Archedeconries, Deanries,
Prebendes, Personages, and Vicariges instituted for their women and children,
to make them gentlewomen and gentlemen: or to the honor and service of any
Church, but ours? Were the tithes and other liuelyhoodes, so religiously lotted
and limited of every man's goods for any Church, but ours? Such maintenance of
study in Universities and Schools, of Solemn Service in Chapel, Church,
College, Cloister, and Close, did it proceed from their Church? Or was any of
these commodities made or meant toward any Church, but ours? Does not the very
condition of these fore-sayed things point ours to be the true and only Church
of Christ and Christendom, and give terror and horror to the consciences of
our Adversaries, against the fearful day of Christ's general Judgment,
either for plucking down and destroying, or for usurping the foresayed douries
of his Catholic Church, clean against the meaning of all the first Founders?
Look at the very form and fashion of every Church, of every Chapel, of
every Chauncell, of every Chalice, of every Altar of every Sepulcher, of every
Stone, of every window: give they not evidence for our only Church and
Religion? Bear they not our cognizance and badges? Cry they not out alowd,
that they be and have been always, some of them these twelve hundred years
and upward, our goods and possessions, and that the Heretics be usurpers,
thieves, sacriligious men, and robbers?

Apes:
in it no good Learning or knowledge, no just Law, no necessary order, because
it has in it all things delivered by Christ coming unto it by the Apostles
hands and their most certain Successors, ever having with it the Holy Ghost
to assist it in all things, to lead it into all truth, to direct it into all
good order, and there to keep it: so is it of al Schisms and separated
Religions imitated and apishly followed, as without whose ground, foundation,
and example none of them all could in any thing tell where to be. And therefore
her they imitate in their Service and Sacraments, in their Discipline and
Jurisdiction, in their Laws and ordinances: out of her books and doings
taking all their light, never otherwise having been able to tell, that they
should use Baptising of men, Joan. 13.
more then washing of feet, or this less then that, or one to be a Sacrament,
and not the other.

Of her they learned to keep their spiritual Courts, Visitations,
Conuocations, and Councels. Of her they learned to excommunicate and suspend:
of her they learn to have for several functions several officers and
peculiar orders. Of her they learned their wisdom in dead men's wills, their
providence in bidding and forbidding of banes their discretion to discern and
disseuer lawful and unlawful Marriages: she parted their people into Parishes
and Provinces: finally nothing for man's spiritual commodity that they have
amongst them, but of our Church by usurpation or imitation they took it. Their
very Communion-booke to be made altogether out of our Masse-booke, their own
Puritans will bear me witness, and so much (as I hear) have they already
plainly opened to the world. Which may likewise be easily showed in their other
Church-bokes also, that out of ours they be taken, as is well known to all
that know both.

Which now, think you (I appeal to all reasonable men) to be Christ's Church
the reasonable soul, or the brutish ape? It is the observation of the Holy
Fathers, that the Devil always and his members were feign to be the apes of
God and his people, that there the Philosophers learned their Theology, the
Idolatrers their Priests and Sacrifices, the Heretics their Rites and
Ceremonies: in figure whereof we have in the holy Scripture the example of
Jeroboam in his Dan and Bethell playing the ape of Godds Temple in Jerusalem,
3. Reg. 12.
with many others more.

States of Perfection.
this comely variety? Have not we in the Acts of the Apostles (where is
described unto us, as I have often said: the plat-forme of Christ's Church
than beginning, and afterward to grow up still in the same orders (as a child
does in the same members) the perfect example of the whole multitude of
christian Jews selling all and living in common without property? Act. 4.
The terrible sudden death also of Ananias and his wife Saphira, Act. 5.
for playing a false part in that behalf? of the multitudes profession, and
manners of such ever afterward, until and in S. Augustines time: you may see
more that list, Li. 1. ca. 33.
in his book De Moribus Ecclesiae Catholicae: as also in all the old writers
whose works are extant.

How then can that be the Church of God, which provides by waste, desolation,
destruction, and (as it were) by law that no such Orders of men and women
specially and totally deputed to Gods service, be suffered amongst them, where
be no maids, but such as can get no matches, where no man is poor, but with
grudge or much against his will, where no vow is made to God, nor to him must
none be kept: where fasters be counted Pharisees, Monks and mourners esteemed
mad men, the best sort of Christian men reputed the fowlest Hypocrites:
finally, where in apparel, gesture, or countenance, no sign of Religion,
devotion, or virtue, thought to be commendable, or almost tolerable.

The state of our Predecessors.
of their Books they can patch or pike any apparent sentence to amend their
own credits, they highly vaunt thereof. What Church that is, whose security of
salvation is so certain, breeding such awe in the Adversaries hearts and
tongues, be they never so wanton, that they dare not condemn neither the
followers of such things, as they would have seem to be superstitious and
detestable, nor the very principal Authors, doers, or teachers thereof.

Was Protestant ever heard so bold to pluck S. Gregory out of heaven for
saying Mass: or Saint Bernard for his Monks Coule: or Saint Augustine for
praying and offering Sacrifice for his Mothers soul: or the very first Authors
of Monks and Friars Orders, as Saint Basile, S. Benedict, S. Frauncis, S.
Dominicke, S. Anthony, and such others, or the Founders of our Colleges in
Universities for their respecting in their work, and commanding in their
Statutes, prayer, Dirige, and Mass for their souls for ever? Yea, do they
not, the best of the^ all, in the most solemn pulpits of the realm, commended
them by name, bless their memory, and praise God for them? Would they so do
by souls damned with the Devil in Hell?

Finally, which of them all has been heard so peremptory in his sentence, to
condemn to hell for daily, hearing of Mass, praying for the dead, calling
upon Saints, going a Pilgrimage, etc. the very multitude of our Predecessors,
all since the first christening of our Nation, nine hundred or a thousand
years ago, even until King Edwardes time, all his own and others fathers,
and mothers, grandfathers, and grandmothers, and other Ancestors, kinsfolk,
and countriemen that ever lived since that time? But those that lived before
that time in Paganism, and Idolatry, who sticks to condemn, more then the
Old Romans, Grecians, and other Infidels of other countries, not serving
GOD, nor having heard of, nor believing in Christ? If any will say, that
ignorance before this time of their new Gospels preaching excused the one
sort: why did not ignorance excuse likewise the other sort? What cause can be
given, why the one sort are in heaven, and the other in hell, but only that as
they before our Christening were without God and without Christ: so these
since that time believed the right faith of Christ, and used the true worship
of God?

As for inuicible ignorance to have saved then the simple sort of very sottes
in manner (as now by the opinion of some learned Catholic men it does in
Germany and in England, etc.) it can not here of them be said: because they
must and do confess, that Saint Bede in our Country, Saint Bernard in
another, and such like, are of all most surely saved, who yet had not this
ignorance, but knew right well this new doctrine, and condemned it for most
wicked heresy And will men of this time be then so folish, so wilfully cast
away themselves, to forsake that sure faith, that sure manner of serving God,
which by the very confession of those that would have it forsaken, served well
the turn so many hundred years together, to save men from hell, to bring men
to heaven?

Who is so sure, that this new Faith, and new Service, has all this while
brought any one to heaven? Yea, how certain that is, which the Holy Ghost by
the mouth of Saint Paul has spoken: Ephesians. 4.
Vna fides, vnum Baptisma, one faith, one Bapisme: so certain it is by that
aforesaid, that whosoever in this new faith and service has ended this life,
is in Hell most certainly: the very first fathers and open teachers of it
condemned by God and all good men when they were alive, and ever since their
death remaining in so cursed memory, that their own followers dare not for
shame and fear once name them to their honor, nor any true Christian man
think otherwise of them, then as of most damnable creatures.

The only known, and undoubted Mother of Christ's children for a thousand
years together.


Or can that be the true Church, which so many worlds together either was
not at all (as we say and as it is certain) or was so obscure and hidd, that
it could not be seen nor known, and that, in the gloriouse time of the new
everlasting Testament, which is the time of Christ's Churches Reign, in
height, above the topp not only of al Iereboam and other Idolatrers Excelsies
and Hillockes, 3. Reg. 3.
Excelsa and colles, but also above the mountes and Hills themselves of both
Temples, Joan. 4.
false Samaritan, and true Judicial. Is 4. Mic.
For so say the Prophets: Erit in nouijsimis diebus praeparatus Mons Domus
Domini in vertice montiu^, and eleuabitur super colles, In the last days
shall be cunningly set the Mountain of our Lords house on the top of the
hills, and it shall be exalted above the hillockes: whereas contrariwise by the
Protestants saying, Christ's Church should be more obscure then the Synagogue
of the Jews not only before, but also in this very time of their utter
desolation. In which time the Church of Christ is set in such clear light
and bright shining, that both the Prophet says: Scietur in gentibus semen
eorum, and germen eorum in medio populorum: omnes qui viderent eos, cognoscent
illos, quia isti sunt semen cui benedixit Dominus. In Nations shall be known
their seed, Is. 61.
and their issue in the midst of peoples: all that see them, shall know them,
that these are the seed which our Lord has blessed. Mat. 5.
And also our Savior calls it a City that cannot be hid, being set upon a
mountain: that cannot be hid, he says.

And yet shall you have some youths, which please themselves so much in their
own inventions, that they fear not to say: Yes, but it may be hid, because
the highest hills have sometimes mistes about them. In deed, with their mistes
they hide for a time this City, how high as it stands and how plain in
sight, from some weake-sighted persons, that be without it, to their own
damnation. But from such as are within it, and there will keep themselves, no
mist can hide it. For which cause our Savior says in the same place: Mat. 5.
Vt luceat omnibus qui in domo sunt, to give light to all that be in the house.
God open the eyes of people, even of the mist-casters also, to see where they
are, and where they should be, and where they shall be, if they go blindly
forward as they have begun: to see, that those wits and tongues of theirs,
which now they count lucra, Phil. 3.
for bringing unto them so many Church-liuinges, and so much vain glory, are
in very truth nothing but stercora and detrimenta, for beraying them all with
sin, and leesing unto them the glorious City of Christ, both here, and
hereafter. A long time it were for a mist to have lasted above a thousand
years together: and much for it all that while not only to have hidden, but
also to have quite choken up such a City, set up by Christ to be seen and to
last for ever.

In this time of Christ's glory and his new Testament, so long together, was
not at all the Protestants Church, say we, and otherwise also must they
themselves confess, that all that time it had no use of her own Sacraments,
nor any help to salvation, but by another company, which was contrary unto
it, and in which only was then all the practice of all christianity: and
which therefore was the Church of Christ, so high, so bright, so fruitful, as
promise was made before it should be.

Celebration and operation of Christ's death.
Christus in vobis non infirmatur, sed potens est in vobis: 2. Cor. 13.
and she in Christ Jesus being by God created in good works, who loved her,
Ephesians. 2. and 5.
and gave himself for her, that he might sanctify her and purify her with
the lauer of water in his word, to present her unto himself at the last day a
glorious Church without spot or wrincke, or any blemish.

Contrariewise, can that ungrateful company be the true Church, which offers
not to God, but abhors the high Sovereign office and honor due unto him by
Sacrifice: which has not in sacrifice the co^memoration of Christ's death: that
infirm and beggarly company, which grants she has no sacraments to give
grace: which of her own accord gives over the right and order of Priesthood:
which confesses, she has no rite of Ceremony, no power of word to
sanctify any creature in Christ's name, no virtue to bring under, and conjure
away Devils from her Childrens bodies, cattle, houses, and other things: no
blessing, no spiritual gift, no grace: yea which cannot bear more the^ the
Devil himself, any external monument of devotion nor benediction, but fears
superstition in obeisance at the name of Jesus, misdoubteth Idolatry in the
figure of Christ's Cross: and finds in good works, nothing of Gods spirit,
nothing of Christ's Passion, no grace, no merit, nothing finally but finne and
hypocrisy.

Teaching the narrow way, and living after it.
takers up of matters and quarrels that fall out between their neighbors
worthiest members of common wealths, best beloved both of God and man.

On the other side, what Church is that whose preachers preach pleasauntnes,
and be meal mouthed, make open profession to ytching ears, and hold a common
Schole of sin and flattery, hold sacrilege to be Gods service,
unfaithfulness and breach of promise to God to give it to a strumpet, to be a
virtue: abandon fasting, abhor confession, mislike with penance, like well
of usury, charge none with restitution, find no good before God in single
life, nor in no well working, but have in all things smothed and planed with
sweet words of false peace and deceitful security the rough way of Heaven
and salvation. Whose followers, for those causes, are easily to be noted by
their naughty conditions: the unbridled youth, that seek for license and
liberty: the carnal swine that wallow in sin, the unruly ruffians that count
order a prison, discipline a torment, the pirates, robbers, oppressors (both
Masters, and Ministers) that like best of that Church, which is furthest from
grace, vnpriuiest of consciences, nearest to Atheism: unjust Bankrupts; cruel
Usurers, that would have it lawful to enrich themselves with other men's
goods: delicate Merchantes, wanton women, that in this world serve their
lusts, both at board, and in bed, lading themselves with all kinds of sin,
and yet presuming of heaven to find it wide open: finally all persons as they
fall from order and godliness, more nere they be to this profession or religion:
a common rule and general observation, that all men as they return to our
Church, bettered and amended: as they fall to their Sinagogue, much worsed and
more then before corrupted.

For proouing whereof I need not bring in the common known testimonies of
Erasmus and Luther himself. Eras. Epi. in pseudo. Euang. and ad frat. inf.
Ger. Luth. in post dom. 1. Adue^t.
It is in our Country most evident to all men, both in particular persons, and
in the multitude, and in the State: never in people less fidelity, less
friendship, less charity, less humility, less simplicity, less goodness:
never more pride (as in apparel, etc.) more double dealing, more swearing,
more forswearing, more whoredom, more theeuing, secret and open, personal and
general, more sin, more vice, more naughtines, that by all examples of former
times nothing is to be looked for, but universal destruction and utter
desolation. And of all most ill, most wicked, and therefore every where most
despised, most contemned, most irrided, most scorned the Superintendents and
Ministers themselves: that if a book should be made of their several
behauiours, as it would presently be confessed, so would it of posterity be
scarcely believed. That and if they had such enormities to lay to our Clergy,
as we can lay to them innumerable, and intolerable, O how should all pulpits
and places ring thereof? Give me tears (O Lord) yea a flood, yea a Sea of
tears (O Lord) I pray thee, to bewail my sins, and the sins of my Nation:
give them (O Lord) thy grace to repent their sin, the very cause of all their
wicked Heresy: that our poor Country may with Niniue find thy mercy, escape
thy wrath and by prevention turn away her misery.

Obedient Subjects.
Augustine says, Ipsae quodam modo etiam humanae leges Christianae sunt: De
vtil. cred. ca. 7.
the very human laws also be Christian, as is evident in the learned Civil
law (as they call it) of the Romans, and also in the sage Temporal Law of
our own Country, both being Christian according to the Christianity of the
Catholic Church only, which the Students and Readers of them do well know,
that they are both made to serve our Savior Christ, as he is served in our
Church, giving in most things plain witness against these destructions and
innouations of the Protestants.

And wherein again her own Ecclesiastical laws be the life and continuance
of all good commonwealthes: by which the Princes and Powers have good and
obedient Subjects, the people again have just and loving Governors: whose
children be folowers of peace and tranquillity, be taught order and obedience
to their ordinary powers: of whom temporal Princes for God and conscience sake,
be they never so evil are in all lauful cases duly served: and if at any time
it happen, after long toleration, humble beseeching, and often admonition, of
very wicked and notorius Apostates or heretics, no other hope of amendment
appearing, but the filthy more and more daily defiling himself and others to
the huge great heap of their own damnation that after all this the sovereign
authority of our common pastor in religion, for the saving of souls, do duly
discharge us from subjection, and the Prince offe^der from his dominion: with
such grie^^ o^ heart is it both done of the Pastor, and taken of the people,
as if a man should have cut of from his body, for to s^ue the whole, so most
principal, but rotten part thereof: who therefore with his Natural affection
that said: Quos iterum parturio, donec formetur Christus in vobit: Gal. 4.
with you again I go in travail, until Christ be fashoned in you: do al
their endeavor, make suit to man, beseech the party in himself, or by his
more interiours, and above al things at Gods feet cast themselves down,
praying him every hour, day and night, with sighing and weeping, when one is
weary, another succeding in his place, 2. Man. 13. v. 10. Act. 12. v. ^.
al hours (I say) of the night no less then of the day, so to make a
continual clamor in the ears of God our most merciful Father, that we may see
by reconciliation, our so principal a member healed and set again in his
place: being then most ready to do him again al honor and service, in heart
also and mind that may be due unto him: neither in the Mean time denying him
such love and worship as we may.

Contrariwise to consider on the other side, what Church is that, which rises
by disobedience to both the Swords: which counts all Regiment of women to be
monstrous: which stands by traitorous murdering of great Persons, by wast
and destruction of cities, countries, and Kingdoms: which violently
displaceth, unfaithfully rebelleth against and openly with-standeth all Power,
though it be confessed to be most lawful of the Sect it self. Yea, of the
catholics, though discharged of their fealty, yet for common humanity, for
their accustomed use, for their continual and (as it were) natural
institution, the Prince better obeyed, more faithfully served, by his own
approbation and all men's sight, then of the Puritans themselves and
Protestants (which in manner all in heart be Puritans) who yet would seem to
believe in conscience, that he is not only Head of their Realm, but also
supreme Governor of their Church: but in very deed they believe, as their man
of God Martin Luther and other Goodmen have taught them, that he is neither the
one, nor the other: meaning in heart and truth with their Anabaptists no better
to the State civil, then to the Ecclesiastical

Whereby both honorable Princes with their grave Counsels, and all other men
may see, who they be that both teach and follow S. Paul's doctrine of obedience
to Superiors, and who they be again, Romans 13.
that S. Jude in his lively description of Heretics calls, ^^d.
Contemners of Lordship, Blasphemers of Majesty.

The Church to which Princ^s do Homage.
Catholic, another defender of the faith, and so forth: in what Church the
Prophecy of Esaias is fulfilled: Et erunt Reges nutri^^ tui, Esai. 49.
and Reginae nutrices tuae: vultu in terram demisso adorabunt te* and puluerem
pedum tuorum lingent. And Kings shall be thy fosterers, and Queens thy
nurces: looking demurely with their eyes on the ground, shall they worshipp
thee: and the dull of thy feet shall they lick. And again: Esai. 60.
Et aedificabunt silij peregrinorum muros tuos, and Reges eorum ministrabunt
tibi. And the sons of strangers (that is, of the Gentiles) shall build thy
walls, and their Kings shall do service unto thee. Et aperientur portae tuae
iugiter: die ac nocte non daudentur, vt asseratur ad^e fortitudo gentium, and
Reges earum addu^antur. Gens enim and regnum quod non seruierit tibi, peribit.
And thy gates shall stand open continually, day and night shall not they be
shut, that unto thee they may be brought the very strength of the Gentyls, and
that unto thee their Kings may comme. For the Nation and Kingdom that will not
serve thee, shall surely perish.

Consider therefore, what Church it is which conformably to these Prophecies
has brought the mighty Princes of the world, Kingdoms of the earth, and
States of Commonwealths to submit their Septers under Christ our Lord and
Government of his Church: to what Church the very Roman Emperors, before
most cruel tyrants, and for three hundred years together Persecutours of the
Church, straight upon their conversion, eue^ then when they were Lords of all
this world yealded up their very Imperial City of Rome with the whole most
large and mighty Country of Italy, and translated their own State into an
other part of the world, giving place to his Vicar, by whom in him they had
been Christened: the only work of our Savior Christ, Lord of all and GOD
omnipotent, so to bring into his Church and submit unto it the very Strength
of the Gentiles, and so mightily to bring Satan himself under the Feet of the
Roman Christians.

This Church, you may see, has (as it should do) ruled with Law and
discipline all states of people: it has faithful Princes no less subject unto
it, then the people, as obedient children, as the people: even so as God
foretold, promised, and ordained that they should be. Never therefore exempted
it Emperor, Prince or Potentate of the earth from his due obedience to Gods
Church and lawful Ptstours.

Consider on the other side, what Church is that, where all is contrary, the
Prince not only not taught obedyence to the Church, humility, and service,
under pain of himself and his Realm to perish: but fondly seduced,
miserablye deceived and flattered above measure with the very Title of head and
Supreme Governor of the Church.

The Parliament Church.
received of Christ, and take another of the King or Queen: to ch^rge both him
and all his fellows the other Apostles of God our Savior, to change that true
service of God which they had received, and to minister of another sort, which
the King, or Queen, or Parlame^t, or law of the country should prescribe unto
them: to put S. Augustine to fine to the Queen one hundred Marks for saying
Mass for his Mothers soul: to leese his Bishopric, to live and dye in
prison for the same, and for calling and counting Aerius an Heretic for
holding against it: and for many other points of their faith, both he and all
the other Holy Fathers, feign to leese all, and to give place to certain new
Masters that had been from hence at the Apostles, going so long a journey
without any footing in the way, and as the Philosophers spoke, transeuntes de
termino in terminum sine medio, and from thence fetched us a new Religion that
they never knevv. Yea a Religion, that should compel their Master and ours,
Christ himself, God above all to be blessed for ever, if he had chosen this
time and our Country for to teach, and work in it man's salvation, to have
held his peace and leaft his meddling like a Foreiner as he was, and in no wise
to have behaved himself like the Head of his own Church, unless he would
have also said, that he had been the natural king of England, and displaced
the lawful heirs of the Kings afore-time, and changed his talk to Pilate,
when he said: Regnum meum non est ae hoc mundo, Joan. 28.
my kingdom is not of this world: to have said: My Kingdom is of this world,
and thy Master Caesar does me wrong. This must he needs have done (I say) by
our new men's doctrine, or not have bin Head of his Church, because by their
saying that Headship cannot be separated from the Kingship, being (as they say)
a real natural, and an essential part thereof.

Which their own saying, themselves yet again destroy by another saying of
their own contrary to the former: whiles that they profess (as truth is) our
Prince to be King of France as well as of England and of Ireland: and yet say
not, that he is Head of the Church of France, but only of the Church of England
and Ireland, as every man does see in the King or Queens usual Style.
Wherefore if any man think, that Company, which breeds and nourishes such
monsters, such absurdities, to have any resemblance of Christ's Church,
horribly blinded in his sight, and his understanding foully darkened.

Communion of Saints.
epistles directed from beyond the sea by Saint Paul himself, such as his
Epistles to the Romans, Corinthians* Galathians etc. could bear no sway: that
in it all the Apostles together writing from their Synod of Jerusalem, as
they did to the Antiochians, might bear no stroke: that in it Christ himself
without the King and the Parlaments consent, might not dispose of his own
Churches. Into such wonderful narrow straightes have these men laced and
pinched up themselves, besides their precise dealing also about communion with
the souls in Purgatory, and the Saints in Heaven.

Consider then, whether this be the Catholic and Universal Church of Christ,
spread over all Nations, descending unto us throughout al ages, one and the
same both in earth, and under earth, and above earth: and not that Church much
rather, yea most certainly, by which every faithful man communicates in all
offices of Relygion with all others, be they never so far asunder, be it in
time, or be it in place: in which there is a perfitte participation and
society of all spiritual commodities and commandementes: where serving and
obeying, praying and working, desiring and deserving lacking and abounding,
trouble and comfort goes in common.

The Church that all Christ's enemies fight against.
Princes of it toward such wars? Yea, does not all the world see, that these
go together: them that fight against Heretics, the same to fight against
Turks: and they again that maintain Heretykes, the same to favor Turks, to
be sorry for their overthrows, to be glad of their prevailing, for Christian
Princes good success to feign false bonefires for TVRKES good success to show
forth merry hearts?

Of our Church, I showed before, that those Emperors afterward received their
Baptism: therefore ours it was that they before did persecute For so
witnesses the Prophet Esaias, that it is one Church, Esa. 60.
and the same, which they did first afflict, and after adore. Et venient ad te
curui filij eorum qui humili^ue^^t te* and adorabunt vestigia pedum tuorum
omnes qui detrahebant tibi, and vocabunt te Ciuitatem Domini, Sion sancti
Israel. And there shall com unto thee creeping and crouching the sons of them
that afflicted thee: and there shall adore thy footestepes all that blasphemed
thee: and they shall call thee the City of our Lord, the Syon of the holy one of
Israel.

Seeing it is evident (I say) that those Potentates never to no Church did this
honor and Service, but only to ours: euydent also it is, that our Church it
was, which before they persecuted: that Church, Christ's Church, by the
confession of al men: therefore our Church, Christ's Church, to the eye of such
as are content to see. Which yet again may be more plainly seen by this Motive
of S. Augustins, by him proponed, amongst many others, to the Heathens, to move
them to be Christians: Vid^tis, Epist. 42
ipsas huius saeculi potestates, quae aliquando pro simulachris populum
Christianum persequebantur, victas and domitas, non a repugnantibus, sed a
morientibus Christianis, and ^^ntra eadem simulachra, pro quibus Christianos
occidebant, impetus suos legesque vertisse, and Imperij nobilissimi
emine^tissimu^ culme^ ad sepulchru^ piscatoris Petri submisso diademate
supplicare. You see, the very Potestates of this world, which once for Idolles
did persecute the Christian people, overcome and tamed, not by the resisting,
but by the dying of Christians: both against the same Idols for which they
killed the christians, to have turned their forces and their laws: and also
the high^st top of the most noble Empire, at the Sepulcher of Peter the fisher
submitting his Croune to make supplication.

By this it is evident, I say, that our Religion it is, to which from their
former Paganism those Emperors were converted, and to which S. Augustine
would have those other Heathens to convert And farther yet in the same kind of
motive you may consider, what church it was, which all HERETICS likewise ever
impugned, but never prevailed. Which very note of his Church our Savior
gives: Mat. 16.
Portae inseri non praeualebunt adue^sus eam, The gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it.

Was it then against the Protestants, that Iouinian let out of Hell Priests
and Nuns Marriage? Or were it they, and ^gaine stopped up that gap and gate of
Hell? Was it against them, that Aerius let out of Hell his Heresy of No good to
be done to the dead by prayer? Or, were it they, that again stopped up that
gate? Was it one Church, against which these Heretics and many other such like
ran out: and another, against which issued out the Arrians, Sabellians,
Nestorians, Pelagians, and finally all the rabble? Or, was it not one Church
and the same, which stopped up both sorts of gates? Not the Protestants, but
our Church, the one sort: therefore not the Protestants, but our Church, the
other sort: and therefore again, not the Protestants, but our Church, the
true Church.

Ever Visible and Catholic.
also that the Adversaries now impugn: which is known still to have in all
places, even amongst the Kingdoms of Heretics, Turks, and Heathens, her
open Confessors, Professors, and Maintayners unto death.

Consider on the other side, what Church is that, which lacking proof of
law^ull and lineall Descent, cares not for the midst, but leapeth from one
end immediately to the other, from Luther to Christ, not having record of her
religion in all the mean time: no monument of such a Church, neither in leaf
or line of Seruice-booke, neither in creation of Priest or Bishop of their
Sect: no like practi^e for her ^n government, either civil, or Ecclesiastical.

The truth is, that some there have bin in many ages in some points of their
opinion: but such as may not bear the naming, and as may be easily proved not
to have been of their Church, because of certain other points of their
opinions. As Aerius* who denied praying and offering for the dead, ordinary
days of fasting, diffe^ence of Priest and Bishop: dare they (trow you) for
all this, name him as a Protestant? No, Au^. ^^r. 5^.
I warr^nt you: they know that he was withal ^n A^rian. Or any other of the
old Heretics likewise in some rail tied to them, do you hear them for all
that make their vaunt of them?

Let us come then to very Hu^ and Wicklef themselves, of whom they are wont to
be somewhat less ashamed: were they at least Protestants? Or (which is all one)
be Protestants as they were, Hussites and Wicklefistes? No, there be many
points named, wherein they agree not. One for example: Hus and Wick^ef did
hold, (...) 35.
that for every mortal sin which any Magistrate should commit, by and by he
lost his office, were he Priest or Bishop, King or Queen, or what else so
ever, and no longer therefore men bound to obey him. Will the Protestants allow
well of such confusion as in things both divine and humane thereupon must
follow?

To be brief, let them hear their Father Martin Luther speak: Non r^cte
faciunt, qui me H^^ssit^m vocant. Ap^d Rof. a^. 30.
Non enim m^cu^ ille sentit. They do not well (says he) that call me an
Hussite: for with me he agrees not. Let them hear also their brother Phillip
Melanchton speak. Inspexi Wiclefum: Ad Frider. Micon.
sed deprehendi in eo multa alia errata, ex quibus iudicium de spiritu eius
fieri potest. Prorsus non intellexit, nec tenuit fidei iustitiam, etc. I have
viewed Wicklef: but in him have I found many other errors, by which, judgment
may be made of what spirit he was. Certainly he understood not, nor held not
the justice of faith: foolishly confounded he the Gospel and things political:
wi^h many other his errors that he there confesses and obiecteth. Li. de vit.
Jew.
Which L. Humphrey either ignorantly knew not, or maliciously dissembled, in
extolling so highly this wrong-sprited Wiclef, making him his Jewels peer,
them two the two Moons or Suns of Oxford, and yet Melancthon withal, that
thus has judged him, a man of right judgment. So that by this it is manifest,
that the Church of the Protestants never was, never at al (I say) in the world
before this time.

Now consider than, to which of these Churches the Holy Scriptures bear
witness, to this new vpstart, or to that old permanent. As where our Savior
says to them, whom he sent to preach and to minister his Sacraments to all
Nations: Mat. 28.
Et ecce ego vobiscum sum omnibus diebus, vsque ad consummatione^ saeculi. And
behold, I am with you all days, even to the ending of the world. As also
where God says of Christ by his Prophet Jeremy: Si irritum potest fieri
pactum cum die, Iere. 33.
and pactum cum nocte, vt non sit dies and nox in tempore suo, and pactum meum
irritum esse poterit cum David seruo meo: vt non sit ex eo filius, qui regnet
in Throno eius, and Leuitae, and sacerdotes ministri mei. Genesis 8.^* 22.
If broken may be my promise with the day, and my promise with the night, so
that there be not day and night in their time: my promise also broken may be
with David my servant: so that there be not a Son of him to reign in his
throne, and Levites (or Deacons) and Priests my ministers. As again where
he says by his Prophet Esaias: Hoc foedus meum cum eis, dicit Dominus: Spiritus
meus qui est in te, Esaias. 59.
and verba mea quae posui in ore tuo, non recedent de ore tuo, and de ore
seminis tui, and de ore seminis seminis tui, dicit D^minus, am^d^ and vsque in
sempiternu^. This is my promise, or bargain with them, says our Lord: My
spirit which is in thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not
again go out of thy mouth, and out of the mouth of thy seed, and out of the
mouth of the seed of thy seed, says our Lord, from henceforth and even so for
evermore: with innumerable more such like places, that most evidently contain
in them visible preachers and ministers, preaching and ministering, raygning and
shining in Christ's Church for ever: and therefore the said Church to be
everlasting visible, and visible everlasting.

Where grew the Protestants seed before our time.
time at the soonest, but yet that many points of Protestancy were long
before, and that, at sundry times. Whereupon I would have it considered, what
ground it was always, where at those sundry times did grow the sundry points
of the Protestants doctrine which at any time before our time chanced to
appear: what manner of me^ they were either for lyse, or for doctrine, to whom
happened to be showen some glimce of this great light, which now the
Protestants Gospel has brought unto us.

For a few examples, because my purposed breuity permits not many, as in
deed very many there are, which the learned may here remember: One kind of the
Protestants seed is, that we must not pray for the dead: another that we must
not keep the Lent and other accustomed times of fasting: another, that we
must not pray to Saints: another, that a Bishop and a Priest be equal. But
where grew those seeds afore-time? Some in one Aerius that lived in the time
of Saint Epiphanius: some in certain that named themselves Apostolici in S.
Bernardes time, and at other times in others.

Now if you will know, what manner of ground that was: Aerius was an Arrian,
Apostolici were Anabaptists. Of Aerius thus vvriteth Saint Epiphanius: Lib. 3
co^. Haer. her. 75.
Hic Aerius in hunc vsque diem viuit in carne, and superest in vita: Arianus
quidem in totum, aliter enim non sentit, quam velut Arius, and adhuc vltra
amplius quae Arij sunt perscrutatur, acutus lingua, and armatus labijs in hac
part. This Aerius lives to this day, being an Arian altogether. For otherwise
thinks he not, then even as Arius: and yet furthermore, does he search than
the things that belong to Arius, having his tongue whetted sharp, and his lips
armed in this behalf And in another place, he was a Priest of Bishop
Eustathius, who for an Arian was accounted, and deprived. And because Aerius
himself was not made Bishop in his place, multa contra Ecclesiam docuit, In
Anace phaleosi.
fide quidem existens Arianus perfectissimus, many things he taught against the
Church, being in belief a most perfect Arian. Verum amplius docet, non
oportere offerre pro his qui obdormierunt. But further he teaches, that we
must not offer for them that are departed. Si quis vero ex discipulis
ciusieiunare vult: Ne in diebus ordinarijs hoc facito, inquit, sed quando
volueris. He forbids to fast on Wensday, and Friday, and in Lent, and the
holy week before Easter. The Church has released wensdaies fast long since.
But and if any of his folowers will fast, do it not (says he) on the days
appointed, but some other day when thou will. Ass^rit idem, Episcopu^
Presbytero non esse excellentiorem. He says also, that a Bishopp is no better
then a Priest.

All the same does S. Augustine likewise witness of him, Haer. 53.
that these were his own Heretical assertions, and that he was besides an
Arian, and the occasion of his fall to have been the very same, because he
might not be made a Bishop. Of the Heretykes named Apostolici S. Bernard
vvriteth, In. Cant. ser. 66.
that they likewise would have no praying to Saints, nor for the dead, and
that withal they laughed at the Catholics for Baptising of Infantes,
Anabaptists as they were. I would have it therefore considered, why these
seeds of the Protestants were so sown upon the ground of Arians, and upon
the grond of Anabaptists. Let them tell us, why unto such wicked men they were
so dear? Why were these ca^dels of theirs (as they account them) lighted to
Aerius a perfitte Arian, and a proud Ambitious fellow, rather then to S.
Athanasius, S. Epiphanius, Saint Augustine and other holy men of God that stood
with the Church against the Arryans? Why to those false Apostolykes, who were
wicked Anabaptists, Bern. ep. 240. de. Henrico.
and to others that were dicers and hoorehunters rather then to Saint Bernard,
and other holy and Catholic men of the same time?

Is it not plain by this, who is the sower of such seed, the lighter of such
candels? Even he that sowed us the Seed of Arianisme, that lighted us the
candell of Anabaptisme: not GOD our Lord, but the Devil himself the Lord of
Heretics. Such seed it is as we see, that any ground will bear it, if it be
not the Catholic, be it Aria^, be it Anabaptist. And not those only, but also
at this time whereas there are in the world very many Sects, which also the
Protestants themselves condemn as well as we do, yet what one is there of
them all, which with the same agrees notright well? Yea each one of them, in
his falling from the Catholic Church, what soever were the sink to the which
he fell: yet in his way took he not with him the doctrine of the Protestants,
and the light of their Gospel to be his direction? The very worst sort of
Heretykes of this time as the Anabaptists, the Trinitaries, or who soever else
they be: yea, and all the sorts that be, one and other: yea the very Epicures
also, and Atheistes, who knows not, that first they were Protestants, yea
and that such they be, and will seem to be still? The opinions of their own,
and of the Protestants standing all in manner so well together (unless
peradventure I should except the Atheistes, whereof yet I doubt very much) that
they need not to lay away scarce any one point of the protestants common
doctrine, as being contrary to their own: no not the Atheists themselves, I
think: (but of all the rest it is certain) of those general negative points, I
say, that properly are the Protestants, and for the which they so call
themselves, and wherein they be from us departed: troubling therefore the
Catholics in our Country for them, and tolerating and mainteining all Sects,
how many soever and diverse they be.

That Seed therefore, which ever is found amongst such cockle, and that light
which shows the way and leads unto such headlong downe-falles, and which
light also they no less se that be in such Egyptiacal darkness, then our
Protestants themselves: who soever is content to take it for the right seed,
and the true light, little cares he (as he plainly declares) what seed grow
in his soul, or into what darkness he be lead* and therefore shall he be sure
at the later day, to be gathered by the reapers together with the Arians, the
Anabaptists, the Atheistes, and all other darnell that the parable speaks
of, in these words: Mat. 13.
In tempore messis dicam Messoribus: colligite primum zizania, and alligate ea
in fasciculos ad comburendum: At Harvest time I will say to the reapers: gather
ye first the Darnelles, and bind them in bundelles to be burned: where there
shall be weepyng and gnashing of teeth. For being here found with Arians and
other cockell aforesaid, how can he be but there bound up with them in the same
bu^del? Sure therefore shall he be likewise from this wilful darkness to be
thrown yet into further darkness (into the which he would not) with him that
another Parable speaks of, where it says: Mat. 22.
Tunc dixit Rex ministris: ligatis manibus and pedibus eius, mittite eum in
tenebras exteriores: ibi erit fletus and stridor dentium. Then said the King to
his servants: Bind him hand and foot, and cast him into more outward darkness:
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Sure To Continue.
what Church that is, which as it has so manifestly and gloryously lasted ever
unto this time; so is it most sure and certain, from this time to last again
even continually till the world shall end. And what Church that is on the other
side, which as it is lately start up, so is it most sure and certain quickly
again to fall to nothing. Of the first was Saint Augustine bold to say to his
frind Honoratus a Manichee: De vtili. cred. ca. 8.
Si finem laboribus vis imponere, sequere viam Catholicae disciplinae, quae ab
ipso Christo per Apostolos ad nos vsque manauit, and ab hinc ad posteros mana
tura est. If thou desire to make an end of al thy troubles, follow the way of
the Catholic doctrine, which from Christ himself by the Apostles even to us
is descended: and from hence to Posterity shall descend. And again to his
cou^treymen the simple people of the Donatists, Psalm. con. Par. Don.
showing them the sure way to be again grafted in Christ: Numerate Sacerdotes
vel ab ipsa Petri Sede: Et in ordine illo Patrum quis cui successit, videte.
Ipsa est Petra, quam non vincunt superbae inferorum portae. Count the Priests
hardly from the very See of Peter: And in that order of fathers, consider who
to whom succeeded. That same is the Rock, which the proud gates of Hell do not
overcome.

If any man at that time, or at any time had been bold, so to have said of
any other Apostles See: had he not by this time been proved a liar? And were
those other Sees more impugned (I pray you) by Tyrants and Heretics, the^ was
the Sea of Peter? Yea, has not Peter's See with all kinds of engyns, by all
sorts of enimyes, ten thousand fold been more impugned? But all in vain: De.
vtili. cred.. 19.
Frustra circumlatrantibus Haereticis says Saint Augustine: In vain is the
barking of Heretykes all about it. All is in vain, And for what other cause
(Let them, if with all their wits and wysdomes they can, give us any other) but
only because Christ our Savior God Almighty has said the word: Tu es Petrus,
Mat. 16.
and super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam: and portae inferi non
praeualebunt aduersus eam. Thou art Peter, or a Rock, upon which Rock I will
build up my Church: and that, spite of Hell gates: they shall not prevail
against it, be they never so many, never so mighty, never so politic, never
so eloquent, never so hardy, and what soever else can be thought or named.

Upon this most plain and most sure word of him that is truth and might it
self, have our Fathers bin always bold to say, that the Sea of Peter should
never fail, neither in succession, neither in faith: And upon the same word be
we much more bold (if more may be) because we see, that it has held on almost
two hundred and forty Bishops, whereas they say not forty. And we again
besides the fighting against it that they saw, have seen an infinite deal of
more: Therefore be we bold to say with them, that never shall hell gates over
come this Rock, but that both the Succession shall endure, and also the very
same faith of it endure. Who can say so of the B. of Canterbury, of London, or
any other, or either of these: either (I say) that always there shall be a
Bishop, or that for the time he is, he shall not change his faith?

These Heretics, all the world sees how soon they fade and fail, one
always eating up another: as a great morsel of Luther eaten up by Zuinglius,
of Zuinglius, by Calvin, of the Protestants, by the Puritans, etc. And so in
themselves every one wonderfully diminishing: and in the mean time the
Catholic unity meruailouslie increasing. For example whereof, we need not to
go to India, where the multiplication is miraculous, nor to other Countries of
Europe, very many persons and parts whereof, do daily repent their
Heresy, and return to unity. Even in our own Country who sees not the
gracious and incredible increase of Catholics: so that now after sixteen
years preaching of the Heretics, and as long silence of the Catholics, all
liberty, maintenance, help and law for the one: all restraint, persecution,
and oppression of the other: yet at this day (thanks be to God) there are
innumerable more Catholics, and they more godly, more learned, more zealous,
more constant, then they were, what time Pharao first arose that knevv not
Joseph.

Whereby any wise man may conjecture, what will be their increase within few
years, yea although the commandment of exponing the men children should
continue: and specially then, when it shall be free for all to depart them out
of the house of bondage, and to hear Moses preach unto them at liberty:
which by the grace of God to be quickly, these wonders that he works both in
heaven and in earth, and specially in the hearts of men (unless I be deceived)
do seem to promise. God grant (if it be, his blessed will) that whenever
it be, it be with the Egyptians own salvation, and that they indurate not their
own hearts, even to the destruction of their Primogeniti.

Well, be that general delivery when God will, ever or never: easily may the
Heretics see by this, that the people of themselves do see their follies, that
much more plainly, and much more generally would they see it, if the Catholics
might be suffered for to show it. Which sufferance although God hitherunto for
the infinite sins of us and our Country would not have to be: yet has he
by other means (we see) and daily does more and more declare, that they be
such as S. Paul speaks of, where he says: Sed vltra non proficient: 2.
Tim. 3.
insipientia enim eorum manifesta erit omnibus. But they shall not still
proceed: for their folly shall be manifest to all men at the length, as was the
folly of Iannes and Mambres, the Magitians of Pharao, who for a while with
their sorcery withstood Moses. For so we see, that partly Catholic men's
writings and Councels of Bishops, partly time it self, all with the help of
God, has and does make known their folly: even there, where by all reason of
man they should have rooted in themselves for ever, and quite rotted out the
contrary. But the rule of Truth cannot be false: Omne regnum diuisum contra se,
Mat. 12.
desolabitur: and omnis ciuitas vel domus diuisa contra se, non stabit. Every
kingdom divided against it self (as they be into Protestants and Puritans,
and as all other great Heresies ever have been, to their own destruction)
shall come to desolation: and every City or house divided against it self,
shall not stand.

And so by this consideration you may perceive the truth of Luthers proud
Prophecy in his Book against King Henry: Luther a fal^e prophet.
Certui sum dogmata mea habere me de coelo: dogmata mea stabunt, and Papa
cadet. Deus viderit, vter primo fessus defecerit, Papa, an Lutherus. Sure I am,
that I have my Doctrines from heaven. My Doctrines shall stand, and the Pope
shall fall. Let God see, whether will first be weary and fail, the Pope or
Luther. Yea, God and the world sees, that thou art comen already almost to
nothing, every where in manner forsaken of thine own Disciples: and by
Zuinglius, Calvin, and others wel-neare consumed, the Sea Apostolic in the
mean while more and more continually increasing in honor and glory. And
therefore may our country men, if they list, of God himself take plain
warning of thee and those others that in our country would be accounted thine
adherents. Thus said God first of all: The Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18.
which corrupted with pride will take upon him to speak in my name, such
things as I have not commanded him to say, or in the name also of other Gods,
he shall be put to death. And then further Moses says: If thou answer within
thy mind and say: But how may I understand the word that our Lord has not
spoken? This sign shall thou have: look what the same false Prophet has
foretold in our lords name, and if it come not to pass, that thing our Lord
has not spoken: But through the swelling pride of his own heart the false
Prophet fained it, and therefore thou shall not fear (or follow) him.

How to make plain demonstration, that the Heretics have no evidence, and
that we have all.


Whereas it is most strongly proved by all this which I have here said, and
also evident in it self to any man of wisdom that is not quite forsaken of
God, that there makes most plainly for us, and against the Heretics, all
that ever was or can be of any christian man required, Holy Scriptures,
Approved Traditions, See Apostolic, General Councelles, Ancient Fathers,
Ecclesiastical Histories, Christian Laws, Divine Miracles, Heavenly Visions,
Gods Church, the very names of Catholics, of Heretics, of Protestants, their
Going out, their Coming of them selves, without sending: Our Unity,
Universality, Antiquity, Succession Everlasting: their reviving of old
condemned Heresies: finally al Monuments, all substance, all accidents of
Christianity: all this being most certain, most plain, most evident: and yet
the Heretics still in all pulpits crying the Gospel, the Word of the Lord,
the touchstone of Gods book: I would have all men here (to know their
impudency) for to consider well with themselves, vwhat should be the true
cause of that their shameless and deceitful cry.

First plain it is, that all these former evidences make for us: and so must
the Heretic that you will deal withal, be made in the beginning to confess:
which they do all confess many ways indirectly, as in that they use not the
same evidences themselves in their declarations: and again in that they admit
no evidence, but only Scripture, etc. In these their sayings and doings, they
confess indirectly and in general terms, that al those evidences make for
us. But you must make your friend confess as much directly and particularly.
Or else let him say eypresly to every one of them, whether he will be content to
be tried by the^: as by the motive of old condemned heresies: himself (I
mean) to be an Heretic, if you prove him an Aerian, for denying prayer for
the souls departed. If he be content, then join with him upon that issue.
Again whether he will be content to be tried by approved traditions, by
Miracles, by Councels, by Fathers, with the rest. And if he consent, then
join with him in like sort upon that point, through all, and each of them,
in manner as this Treatise has shevved you the way. Whereby you shall still
be sure to have the victory: as I will with Gods help more copiously
declare hereafter, if any of them do join with me upon them. And that they
know themselves full well, fleeing therefore evermore from them all to their
vveake and false Castle of only Scripture.

But you must still labor to get them (and if you can) with their consent
out of that Castle into the plain fields aforesaid, to make them grant
expreslie, that there in your hands they can not stand. Very hard it is for
you, I know, to bring any proud obstinate Heretic to that humility to
confess so much, although he think it: yet is it good upon sure confidence
of Gods mighty help, so to assay the worst of them all, if peradventure God
will save him, or any other that by that means shall understand their
cowardlines, and naughtines of their cause. But specially this way shall serve
you to do good upon men more Humble, more tractable, more reasonable, content
to learn the truth, and to save their souls.

Such a one shall you sone, by the grace of God and your own devout prayer,
persuade to come forth unto you upon those Playnes before said, and there to
prove to see, and to confess their falling and our prevailing.

Which when he has so done, he will never (I warant you) return to his former
castle, trusting there to speed any better: so evidently shall he perceive,
those playnes, into the which with his consent you called him out to be the
most certain places, where the truth of christian Religion is to be tried and
to be found.

But yet for the farther confyrmatyon of our Catholyke truth, and of him
therein, you may then afterward will him to retire him to the said castle of
the Scripture. And then to show him, that there he can no better vvith-stande
our assault: bid him consider, whether the holy Scripture be against these
foresaid evidences: yea whether it do not bear them al plain witness, as in
the several places I have partly showed: Again therefore to consider, whether
Holy Scripture be in any thing contrary to it self. And yet once again,
whether that, if Scripture with Protestants were good evidence, we allege not
for us Scriptures most plainly, most mightily, most abundantly.

For example, is not this Scripture manifest enough: Mat. 26.
Hoc est corpus meum, etc. Hic est sanguu meus, etc. This is my body etc. This
is my blood? etc. Is not this Scripture also most manifest: Ex operibus
iustificatur homo, Iac. 2.
and non ex fide tantum, By works a man is justified, and not by faith only?
Is not this again plain enough: Iac. 5.
Infirmatur quis in vobis? Inducat Presbyteros Ecclesiae, and orent super eum
vngentes eum oleo in nomine Domini, and. If any amongst you be daungerously
sick, let him send for the Priests of the Church, and they to pray over him,
aneling him with the oil in the name of our Lord, etc. This Scripture again
is it not most manifest: Salubris est cogitatio, 2. Mac. 12.
pro defunctis exorare, vt a peccatis soluantur: It is a good meaning, to pray
for the souls departed, that they may be delivered from their sins. These
likewise could they be plainer: Multum orat pro populo, and vniuersa sancta
ciuitate, 2. Mac. 15.
Ieremias Propheta Dei: Jeremy Gods Prophet (dead long before) prays much for
the people, and the whole holy City? Genesis 48.
Deus qui pascit me ab adolescentia mea vsque in presente^ diem, Angelus qui
eruit me de cunctis malis, benedicat pueris istis. says Jacob the Patriarch of
Joseph's two children: God who has fead me from my youth eue^ to this day: The
Angel who has delivered me out of all adversities, bless these children: as
if one now would say: God and our Lady bless them.

Finally in the learned books of Catholics of this time, any man may see
infinite manifest Scriptures for us alleged: and all that the Heretykes do
alege, most clearly answered: as most certain it is, that no Scripture from
the beginning of Genesis, to the end of the Apocalipps, makes for them, no
Scripture against us, but all for us: and very many of them so evidently that
the Heretics have no way to answer them but by plucking (if they could) the
pen of the Holy Ghost out of his hand that wrote them. For either are they
proved inuincibly, to be of the Holy Ghostes endighting, or no Scripture at all
is proved to be such: as you may remember the common saying of S. Augustine,
Con. ep. fu^d. ca. 5.
Ego Euangelio no^ crederem, nisi me Ecclesiae Catholicae commoueret
authoritas: I should not believe the very Gospel it self, unless the
Catholic Churches authority did compel me.

Seeing then, that all this is so, I appeal me, and so may any Catholic man
boldly with me, to the judgment of any indifferent man, and to the wisdom of
any that has intelligence, whether it be not certain, that the Protestants
prating so much of scripture proceeds not of this that it bears them at al
any record, but of that thing only which Saint Peter has sufficiently warned
us of, if at least wise we will take any warning, and not wilfully impugn the
truth, and destroy our own souls. His warning is this: In the Epistles of our
brother Paul: 2. Pet. 3.
Sunt quaedam difficilia intellectu, quae indocti and instabiles deprauant,
sicut and caeteras Scripturas, ad suam ipsorum perditionem: There are certain
things hard to be understood, which the unlearned and unstable do deprave and
wrest (as they do also the other Scriptures to their very own perdition.

So then the true cause, why these men be so busy in wreasting and writhing
both of S. Paul's most learned and most Divine Epistles, who be wreasters of the
Scriptures.
and of the other Holy Scriptures, is their own vnlearnednes, who are become
Masters, having never been scholars, joined together with their unstableness,
by which they are so lightly and lewdly run out of the Catholic Churches
Unity and Universality, to the Schism and piece of Luther: and from thence
again, to the piece of his piece broken off by Calvin: and from Calvin
again, to the singularity of English Protestants: and yet again from
Protestants to make another piece of Puritans: neither there undoubtedly, nor
no where else ever to leave their flitting vnconsta^cie, but only by returning
to the settled and immovable rock, whereupon both they before with us, and we
still yet thorough the only grace of God, do stand us steadfast. And once there
standing, they shall sensibly see, this to be most certain that I say, no
Scripture, no truth to be against the Catholykes, neither any at all to be for
Heretics. For that is the place, where God appointed Moses to stand, and there
to see all those Mysteries, which in this life he reuealeth, that he might
afterward in heaven see his Glory: Ecce, inquit, est locus apud me, Exo 33.
and stabis supra Petram etc. Behold, quod he, there is a place with me, and
thou shall stand upon the Rock, etc.

And therefore does S. Peter immedyatly after his words before recyted, thus
infer: Vos igitur, fratres, praescientes, custodite, ne insipienetium errore
traducti excidatis a propria firmitate: You therefore (brethren) knowing this
much before hand by my warning, beware, that ye be not carried away together
with the erring and straying of foolish losels, falling out away from your
own sure steadines. For even as any branch of a tree leesing once the sure
hold that he had in the trunk, and cleaving no more unto it, must needs
wither away and die forth right, and can not possibly grow on any longer: so a
man that falls him off from the deep rooted, and continually standing, and
ever growing Tree of the Catholic Church, he straight ways fades away, and
vanishes, and dies in himself, and howsoever sometimes he seems to grow in
goodness or in knowledge, as the branch cut of his own tree, and planted in
another place: it is al out of the root, all in vain, all but downward like a
cow tail, and as a man that runs very fast out of his way, and therefore
all but backward. Wherefore unto them only that keep their standing, says S.
Peter: Crescite vero in gratia and in cognitione Domini nostri, and Saluatoris
Jesus Christi. But keepyng your hold, grow ye on in the grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And so be his conclusion also
our conclusion: ipsi gloria nunc, and and in die^ aeternitatis, To him be glory
both now, and unto the day of eternity.

AMEN.
Bristow to the Reader.
AL persons of our Nation, that with Gods grace shall chance to be remembered or
confirmed in the Catholic faith, or reduced thereunto by this Treatise:
vouchsafe of their charity, to requite my Goodwill, with their devout prayers
for my sins.

Faults escaped in the printing:
In the first page line 6. for cognossimus read cognoscimus. fol. 16. b. line
12. for protenus read protinus. fol. 56. line vlt. in some books for
dispositions read depositions. fol. 125 b line vlt. for consubstubflantialitie
read consubstantialitie. fol. 128. a. line 23. for vniuesallie read
universally.

A TABLE OF THE MOTIVES contained in this Treatise.
1 NAme of Catholics. fol 5. a. 2. Name of Heretik 9. a 3. Name of
Protestants, Puritans, etc. 10. a 4. O^d Heresies. 13. a. 5. Miracles
dogmaticall. 15. a 6 Miracles personal. 27. a. 7. Vis^^^s. 32. b 8 Scriptures.
39. b 9 Traditions most certain 42. b 10 The Churches judgment. 45. a 11 The
churches practice. 48. b 12 See Apostolic. 55. a 13. Councels. 59. a 14 The
Fathers. 63. b 15. Martyrs. 69. a 16 Their own Doctors. 74. a 17. The Catholic
Faith in England mightily planted, and lightly changed 80. b 18 Going out. 84.
b 19. Rising afterward. 86. a 20 Beginning with wondering and gainsaying of
Christians then in Unity. 88. b. 21. Unsent. 90. b 22 Succession. 93. a 23.
Apostolic Church. 95. b 24 The Romans never changed their religion. 100. a
25 Conversion of Heathen Nations. 102. b 26 By what Religion has Idolatry
been destroyed 105. a 27 Unity. 117. b 28 Judges infallible incases of
Controversy. 120. b 29 Protestants themselves take things upon our Churches
credit 123. a 30 Storehouse of the scriptures. 124. b 31 Studying and teaching
of all Divine truth 125. b 32 Annual celebrating of all Christ's Mysteries. 129
b 33 Ecclesiastical Monuments and Livings. 142. a 34 Apes. 143. 35 States of
perfection. 144. b 36 The state of our Predecessors. 145. b 37 The only known
and undoubted Mother of Christ's children for one thousand years together.
147. b 38 Celebration and Operation of Christ's death. 149. b 39 Teaching the
Narrow way, and living after it. 151. a 40 Obedient subjects. 153. a 41 The
Church to whom Princes do homage. 155. a 42 The Parliament Church 156. b 43
Communion of Saints 158. a 44 The Church that all Christ's enemies fight against
159. a 45 Ever visible and Catholic 161. a 46 Where grew the Protestants seed
before our time 163. b 47 Sure to continue 167. a 48 How to make plain
demonstration, that the Heretics have no evidence, and that we have all 171. a
A TABLE OF THE MORE Principal matters touched in this Treatise.
A
AN Admonition to Catholics that frequent the new Service. Fol. 133. a To
Priests likewise that say it 136. b Aerians alive again in the Protestants
13. b Aultus 34. b 52. a 112. b S. Ambrose Motive, the Fathers 64. a
Anabaptists 165. b 166. a Antichrists side, against the Pope 58. a Apes of
the Catholics, are Heretics 143. a The Apostles were of our religion 44. a. b
60. a 102. a 104. a 156. b Apostolic Church 95. b Apostolic See 55. a 94. b
Assumption of our Lady 132. b Atheistes, why they be so many in England 128. a.
152. a 166. a Motives against the^. See here in the word, Christ, and in the
Preface. S. Augustine of our religion 16. a 34. b. 35. a 44. b 45. b 47. b 49 a
51. b 54. a 55 b 108. a 117. a 160. b. and brought thereunto by God 34 b. How he
should be used in England, by the Parlame^t law, if he were there living. 157.
a His Motives: Name of Catholics 5. b Name as of Protestants, etc. 12 a
Councels 63. a the Fathers 64. b Succession in the Sea Apostolic 95. a 99. b
167. b the Churches authority, p^e. pa. 5. fo. 123. b the Churches continuance
95. a 129. a 167. b the Churches wisdom and learning. pref. page 8. fol. 129.
a Apostolic Churches, as the Roman, etc. 98. a 99. b. The honor and virtue
of Saints and Relikes 110. a. Emperors turned from their Idols, and praying at
Peter's Sepulcher 160 a. Christianity of humane laws 153. a. 160. a S.
Augustine, the Apostle of Englishmen, of what Religion and authority. 80, b.
B
S. BAbilas Relikes 108. b Baptism necessary for salvation of Children 14. a.
49. b. 71. b. 165. b. S. Bid, of our Religion 17. a. 81. a 100. b. His story
to be read diligently of Englishmen 81. a. his Motive, the Roman Church 100.
b S. Bernard of our Religion, and with what Miracles he confirmed it 29. a 115.
a Bishops of England unity and constancy. 86. a A Bishop above a Priest. 165.
a Books of Heretics, not to be read. 140. a
C
Calvin against our Prorestants, about the Head of the Church 78. a His Legates
in India 103. a His errors about the Trinity. 126. b. Caluinists condemned by
Luther 75. a Carolostadius condemned by Luther 75. a Catholics have the truth
3. b. that very name a certain mark of right Catholics 5. a Catholics
Roman 55. b Chalenges turned into Proclamations 1. b Change of religion,
never made by us. 51. a 100. a what an impudent attempt it is. 54. b. 80 b 135.
b the Jews religion changed into ours by Christ 117. a 124. b Christ to be
believed, for these Motives: Authority of his Church pref. page 5. fol. 47 b
Unity of his Church 118. b Miracles 30. b 110. a Visions 33. b virtue of his
Saints and of their Relikes 110. a. virtue of the sign of his Cross 113. a
139. a Converting of Emperors and Powers from their Idols, to serve his
servants 160. a the Scriptures of the old Testament, as they be understood in
the Church 130. b Christ excluded out of England by Parliament 157. a
Christendom shut out of England by Parliament 158. a Christians and
Catholics, all one 12. b Christianity of human laws, in what Church 153. a
S. Chrisost, of our religion 44. a 56. a. 109. a. b the Churches judgment
always infalible 45. a 120. b. 123. a her practice likewise. 84, b the Church
everlasting and visible 47. a 93. a 104. a 129. a 148. a 160. b 161. a 167. a.
Her learning and wisdom 124. b 128. a 130. a 143. b Her service 130. a
Churches, the work of Catholics 142. a confirmed by Miracles 29. a. 54. a
107. a 109. a 111. a by visions 70. b Churches of the Heretics, to be
refrained 133. b. Communion book, an apish imitation of our Mass book 144. a
burned in a vision 38. b. In another vision the Communion received by a black
dog 39. a against Communicating with Heretics in their service, etc. 133. b
Confirmation of Children 72. a Conversion of Heathen Nations by our Church 102.
b Councels 59. a 158. a Cross 30. a 31. b 81. a. 113. a 115. a 139 a Custom
or practice of Gods Church 48. b 72. a S. Cyprian, of our Religion 39. b 44. b
116. a
D
DEgrees taken in universities of Heretics are annullated 127. a Devils
expelled with the Mass, by a Priest of Saint Augustines 16. b. By S. Bernard
115. a with the sign of the Cross by S. Bernard 115. a by Pius Quintus. 31. b
with Relikes 107. a Devils in the Protestants 107. a Donatistes alive again in
Protestants 45. b
E
EBionites 40. a Ember days 131. b Emperors and other powers, of our
Religion, also as their first conversion 55. b 155. a 159. b 160. a. Englandes
first faith and Apostles 80. b England has by Parliament excluded Peter,
Paul, and other Apostles, and Christ 156. b and all Christendom 158. a it
joins with Christ's enemies against Christendom 159* a England beware
Destruction 152. b. 169. b. an English woman miraculouslie cured of late by the
blessed Sacrament 19. a. Excommunication 31. b. 153 b. Exorcisme and
Exulflation in Baptism 49. b. 51. b
F
FAith only 41. b. 101. b Fasting-dayes 44. a. 165. a The Fathers, of what
religion, and authority 63. b. 66. a 157. a. Foxes Martyrs 72. b Fries
preaching in India. 103. a
G
S.GR^egorie of our Religion 35. b.
H
HEad of the Church 76. b. 157. b Heluidians 43. b Henricians 29. a Heresies
revived by the Protestants 13. a 29. a Heretics condemn themselves 4. a. That
very name a certain mark of very Heretics 9 a ^hey are not Christians 12. b.
They are Idolat^^ is 135. b. Apes 143. a. Their Service, not to be frequented
^33. b. Nor their Sermons 138. a. Their books not to be read 240. a. Condemned
by the Sea Apostolic, holden for heretics 55. b S. Jerome of our religion 44.
a 56. b 47. a 53. b 57. a 107. a His Motives: Name as of Protestants, etc 11. a
The Church always lasting, or Succession 47. a 94. a Holy bread 30. a Holy
water 26. a Homousi^m 11. b Hus was not a Protestant 162. a.
I
Idolatry destroyed by our religion 81. a 105. a Idols, heresies 135. a
Jesuits preaching in India 103. a Jewel unawares testifies the Roman
Religion to be Catholic 7. a When by him the Church of God died. 45. b his
challenge 1. b 66. a 67. b his ignorant error about Christ's Priesthood 127. a
Jews how and what religion they impugn as the religion of Christ 21. a 159. a
to their Religion immediately succeeded ours 117. a. 124. b. Images confirmed by
Miracles 29. a 81. a S. Irenees Motives: Rising after 88. a Gainsaid of them in
unity 89 a Succession of the Bishops of Rome 99. a the Churches store 125. a
127. a Iubilei annus 1575. fol. ^36. a.
L
LActantius Motive: virtue of the sign of the Cross 113. a our Lady-dayes
132. a Lay-heads of the Church, against the Magdeburgenses 76. b. against
Calvin. 78. a S. Laurence day 132. a Laurence Humphreyes Troiane horse 7. b his
Pseudocatholici 8. a. his opinion of Jewels challenge 67. b Of the Fathers 68. a
Of the Saints in the Calendare 69 b his Wicklef condemned by Melanchton 162. b
Laws, Civil and Temporal, be Christian by being of our religion 153. a Lent
44. a. Luciferians alive again in Protestants 46. b Luthers conscience, the
Catholic Church to make against him 7. a. and his side to be heretics 10. a.
how he condemns our Protestants 74. b by him true Christianity is under the
Popedom 80. a he was a false Prophet 170. b.
M
MAgdeburgenses against our Protestants 76. b Manichees 40. b the Martyrs were
of our religion 69. a 107. a. 132. a. Mass made by S. Paul 44. b confirmed by
Miracles, in Afrike 16. a in England 17. a 81. b. in Brabant 19. a in Italy
115. a by visions 56. a said every day 35. a 36. b said to drive away devils
16. a for the dead 18. a 35. a 36. a 44. a effectious to redemption both of
soul and body. 18. b. Miracles, a mark of true doctrine 15. a. and of true
Doctors 27. a. Miracles for the Mass 16. a 17. a 29. a 114. a. for Images 29.
a for Churches 29. a for the Real presence 19. a 29. a for Transubstan^iation
29. a for Purgatory 18. a 29 a for praying to Saints 29. a. 71. a for Holy
bread 30. a for the sign of the Cross 30. a 113. a. 115. a 139. a for our
Martyrs 73. a for Relikes 54. a 71. a 107. a. for necessity of Childrens
baptism 71. b for our whole Religion 29. a 80. b 81. b 103. b. S. Monica, the
Mother of S. Augustine, her visions, and religion 34. a. Monks and Monasteries
17. b 29. a 35. b 144. b Monks, the first Apostles of English men 80. b.
N
NAme of Catholics 5. a 12. a of heretics 9 a of Protestants, etc. 10. a of
Franciscans, etc. 11. a of Papists 12. b of Christians 12. b of the Church 46.
b Nicolaites 10. b
O
OBedience of Catholics to their superiors, both Ecclesiastical and
Temporal 120. b. 153. a S. Optatus Motives: Going out 84. b. succession 94. a
the Bishops of Rome 99. b. Orders 90. b.
P
PApists, a name of late put on us by heretics 11. b Parliament religion 60. a
79. a 145. a 156. b 158. a. Saint Paul, of our religion 44. b 49. a 104. a He
might not write: Ad Anglos, for the Parliament 158. b Pelagians (alive again
in Protestants 14. a. 68. a) 49. b 55. b S. Peter excluded out of England by
Parliament 156. b Pilgrimage 25. a 52. b 53. b 70. a 112. a 136. a Pius Quintus
works Miracles 31. b Prayer for the dead, denied by Aerius, and he therefore
by the whole Church holden for an Heretic 13. b 157. a. confirmed by a Miracle
17. a by a vision 36. a by scripture 40. b by the Apostles Tradition 44. a used
always 35. a. 52. b 102. a the ground of building Christian Momuments 146. a
the Priests that say the new service, an admonion 136. b Prophecies for our
religion 37. a 47. b 82. a 106. a 163. a Protestants driven from their bold
challenge to the refuge of proclamations 1. b In their own conscience, they be
both against the Church 46. b and al^o Heretics 9. b 65. a They be Aerians 13.
b 164. a Pelagians 14. a Donatists 45. b Luciferians 46. b and of many other
old Heresies 101. b 161. b They be possessed of Devils 106. b contrary to
themselves 157. b Usurpers of other men's livings 142. b Maligners of higher
power^ 154. b their inconstancy 79. a 119. b 175. a their ignorance 126. a and
that the cause partly of so many Atheists in England 128 a. their discord 74. a
103. a 119. a they be condem. y their own Doctors 78. a by Luther 75. a by
Magdeourgenses 76. b by Calvin 78. a their service, to be refrained 133. b 39.
a they allow better of our orders, then of their own 90. b Saints days by
them laid down 132. a they have shut out of England, by Parli^ment, Peter,
Paul, etc. 156. b Christ 157. a all general Councels, and all Christendom
158. a barred also S. Paul and his fellows for writing: Ad Anglos. 158. b they
were never before this time 161. b their seed before time in what ground it
grew 163. b who now be their followers 151. b they be ashamed of their Fathers
65. a 147. b 161. b why they deny not all the Scriptures 38. a what Scriptures
they deny 40 b. 124. a they do decay, and shall come to nothing 58. b 68. a
89. a 167. b 169. a.
R
Real presence of Christ in the Sacrament 22. a 29. a 34. b 41. b 52. a 75. a
114. a Rechabites 11. b the Religion of the Apostles, of S. Paul, S. Steven,
the Martyrs, the Fathers, S. Augustine, S. Cyprian, S. Hierome, S. Gregory,
saint Chrysostom, saint Augustine our Apostle, saint Bede, saint Bernard,
saint Theodoret, aint Monica, all the saints: of the first Christian Emperors
of laws civil and temporal: Vide in initiali cuiusque litera. Relikes of
saints 52. b 53. b 70. a 107. a 160. a Roman Church, the Catholic Church 55.
b 100. b the Apostolic Church 95. b 100. b. 55. a it lasts for ever 95. a
167. b Romans never changed their religion 100. a. nor never shall 168. b
the communion of the Bishop of Rome, to be kept of all Christians 55. a 94. b
96, a.
S
SAcrament of the Altar sticked by the Jews bleedeth 22. a to be w^ ^ped
with religion 34. b Sacrifice of the Mass 16. a. 18. b. 29. a. 34. b. 35. a.
36. a. 117. a ^^0. a. the Saints were of our religion 132. a. 146. a. See more
in, Martyrs, Invocation and interce^sion of Saints. 29. a. 37. b. 40. b. 52. b.
70. a. 309. b. 110 b. 160. a, 165. b. Scriptures denied by Here^^ks 39. b. 124.
a no Scripture against the Catholics, but al for them 42. 47. a. 124. b. 163.
a. 171. a. the understanding of them, in the Church 130. a. 175. 48. a. See
Apostolic 55. a. 94. b. 96. a. Service of the Catholic Church, to be embraced
130. a. Service of Heretics, to be refrained, in pain of damnation 133. b.
Sermons likewise 138. a. Sign of the Cross works Miracles 30. a. 31. b.
113. a. 139. a. S. Steven of our religion 70. a. Succession* 47. a. 93. a. 96.
a. 100. a. 157. a. 161. b.
T
TErtulianus Motives Rising afterward 87. b. Succession. 95. b. 96. b. 67. a.
Apostolic Churches, as the Roman 96. b. S. Theodoret, of our Religion. 56.
a. his Motive: Honor and virtue of the Saints and of their Relikes 122. a
Traditions 42. b. Transubstantiation 29. a Trent Council 61. a. b. Trinitaries
^23. a. 126. b. 166. a
V
VIgilantiu^ alive again in Protestants 107. a. Visions for our religion 22.
b. 36. a. 38. a. 50. b. 70 a 82. a. 139. a. and they a mark of true doctrine
and Doctors 32. b. Unity 84. b. ^. 117. b. 133. b. Universities of Hereti^es
and Catholics 127 a. 142. a. 146. a. they are no degrees that are taken in
Universities of Heretics 127. a. Water mingled with Wine in the Chalice 44. b
Wicklet was not a Protestant 162. a
Y
Y^^^ of Iubilee. 1575. fol. 136. a
Z
Zwinglians condemned by Luther 75. ^
FINIS

