AN EPISTLE OF AN EBREW WILLINGE TO LEARN CHRISTIANITY: SENT by him to London:
and thence, by the Archb. of Canterburies advise, to Basil: thence returned
vuith some further spech upon it unto the Queen of Englandes most excellent
majesty.

BY HVGH BRVGHTON: (...)

(...).

Romans 9. 4. PRINTED AT BASIL. BY CONRADVS VVALDKIRCH 1598.

TO THE MIGHTY PRINCE ELISABET BY TE GRACE OF GOD Queen of England, France
and Ireland, desendour of the fath, etc.
FROM the seas of ELISA, souerain lady, and from the city built by the son of
the Bretan Helena, there came to your highness King dome, an epistle from a
Learned Ebrew, full of Eloquence, and rabbique skill: judged to conteyne sparks
of matter, which with due nourishment might give occasion to kindle far off the
light of the Gospel, winninge such favor of migthy states that it might turn
to the common good of Christendom. This Jew seems by his epistle to be of
great authority, not only among Jews, which are in Constantina the chiefest of
the world, that he carrying them after him, the rest over the east will sooner
follow: but also with the greatest there: of whose affection nothing may be
spoken, until it please him self to open his mind. He writes in the tongue
that was first used in the world: in which all the holy prophets books are
written: and all divinity graduates must know, or bethought to see with other
men's eyes: and by English universities they are bound to know: ne there may
plead ignorance: but as they are highest in your majesty's praeferment, so the
care to awnswer touches them principally. His epistle penned with exquisite
care shows in his first entrance, skill putting all to the trial, either to
overmatch Christianes by Iudaisme, for all their grou^des, if they grant his,
and pass the^ over as not dashing all faith: or, if by modesty and dexterity
he be taught, how both Talmudes wilfully disturb the Bible, that the Light of
Christ should not shine to them being in Satan's darkness: he cannot by Lerning
longer resist: but by all Turks judgment, upon his own grounds of
Scriptures auctority, he shall be utterly overthrowen. After his begininge, he
continues sundry poinctes in Learned reverence: First commending, matters of
England: next, requesting some petitiones of instruction. Our divinity is in
his spech highly esteemed: as standing upon the clear power of Gods hand: and
removing weeds: such as I think he blames in Greeks. For as the Jews, so
they, have overwhelmed all the Scripture, as with netles: which being
vncutdowne, the thrueth cannoth be seen. Then he thinks that N. has great
occasion to rejoice for a great number that he has brought on to the knowlegde
of God: from which help he also the Jew him self stretched out his hand: and
caught an Omer full: while he stands behind the wall: looking through the
lattice, and knocking at the gates of understanding. After this he slideth unto
commendation of your highness Ligier, at the city of Constantine, for his great
care to settle him in Christianity, And after this praeparation he flows most
plentifully into your majesty's commendation: that by your special tendering
have divines so ready in the Golden candelstick of the Law for the generalles
to bring them unto few heads: and for the particulares, the bowls, Knoppes,
and flowers. Others he commends, as may appear in his Epistle: and after, he
comes to his requests: wherein first he shows a fervent desire, and most
hearty affection to have N. sent to teach all the synagoges in Constantina,
promising that he shall be received as an Angel. But first he would have the sum
of all the Scripture plentifully handled: and ends his Epistle with a Learned
sonnet. This Letter was brought unto my Lords grace, to croyden: where he
should be best at leisure. But his grace seeing an English Endorcement, and
saing that he could read no further, bade the bringers send it to me. Others
also counted ready in the tongue of divinity, could or would say little to it.
Here upon it returned toward the east, not with small hazard: yet* by Gods
goodness, it came safe to me to Basil. I durst not return the Letter: being of
so weighty importance, to abide new danger. But I printed an awnswer to my
Lords grace: showing the principal effect: thinking that his gr. would have
sent for an whole copy or have written: that in this so weighty bysines, to do
good to all the world, no shadow of negligence or delay should appear. But
because that is not done, I have printed the whole Epistle unto your M. whom
the care should chiefly touch: and will show, according to my leisure more then
others had hereyn, my poor opinion of proceeding: if your highness give me
leave. My care is the greater: for his G. dealinges in as great matters about
the Bible, Labored in, ten whole years, upon your M. word: and crossed after
all that labor, and charges of so great time, by his Graces will and authority.
I showed his G. how, upon Dan. 11. 38. unskillfulness, allowed by his skill,
betrayed Gods name, and whole religion, to Satan. Yet there, three Greek
translationes, if they had been known in England, might have given light unto
a sure truth: besides the most steadfast certenty of the Ebrew term: So
Polychronius the Greek, might for all Daniel. Then his G. yielded: with high
Promises. Since a new difference as great fell. That, this Jew may end: whose
Epistle follows.

(...) (...) (...)

THvs your M. sees the Epistle: desired of many sent to England: thence to
Basil: of one made many: that all may see it. The awnswerer should be, my L. G.
for Learned fame and auctority. A Greater cause his G. never dealt in: then to
open all te bible, both Testamentes in Ebrew. And if his G. knows naught in
Ebrew: Greek will do as well, for Byzantium: and better for England: to calm
waves blowe^ of late, to the ruin of all religion, and lerning, which this
Epistle to the Jew will quiet: and bread a windeless Cymatolegen. His G.
knows who stirred a dissension: for the principal article of the Creed: for
Christ his passion, wether his soul went from his body. The Greek tongue, in
spech to this Jew will cut off all co^trouersy: as Learned linguistes and the
sure in Scripture grounds know that all was ever plain to the Simplest. The
Evangelists told that Christ his soul should go presently from his body to
his kingdom, to Paradise, to the hand of God; even through the veil of his
flesh into heaven. This the Evangelists taught: and no one syllable in te
Prophets ever taught otherwise. Now the prophets phrase of all souls
departing this life is: a descendinge to Sheol, or (...) And in spech of full
death among such as held the souls immortality in an other world: with the
bodies death, they mentioned the souls descent to scheol, and (...), Inferos,
Hell So Homer V. 3. for thousands: so Demosthenes for 4000. slain at one fight
by K. Philip. yet they held them to be in happy case: and with their Gods. So
the Creed is penned by a phrase vnwrestable: plain to all Jews and Gentiles:
till the Barbarous would Learn Divinity, as from Dauus in the market, against
religion and all Lerning. This all his G. may cure saffely by writing in Greek,
where none may say that Christ descended to Gehennuo: and where (...), to him and
all good, is Paradise. So his Graces (...), would win him Eternal fame. And I
trust your M. will not appoint a meaner then his G. to this charge But, I must
leave that, to your Majesty's wisdom. yet I hope, all in a case of so weighty
importance, may do well, when occasion forces them to deal, then to speak in
humble care, somewhat touching te weight of Learned business: wherein they have
best occasion to see the right: and what should be done. Thus I wish your M.
all good meditationes, and one that conteyneth all: how God sits on a fiery
throne, and that all men must (...). where (...) that there not Gehenna but
paradise may be your blessed rest.

your Majesty's most humble subject. HVGH BROVGHTON.


