Two Elegies, Consecrated TO THE NEVERdying Memory of the most worthily
admyred; most heartily loved; and generally bewailed PRINCE; HENRY Prince of
Wales.

Hoc font deriuata clades
In Patriam, Populumque fluxit.
LONDON: Printed by T. S. for RICHARD MORE, and are to be sold at his shop
in Saint Dunstones Churchyard. 1613.

TO THE HONORABLE GENTLEMEN, and griefe-afflicted followers of our incomparable
Prince HENRY, deceased.

Interdum Lacrim^e pondera vocis habent


COurteous Reader, I entreat thee patiently to bear with these few faults, in
the first Poem, which through much haste are escaped:

Stanz. for false read true. 1 lump lumps 2 mayme fatal mayme 10 or nor 18
satiate sat 24 Chain Claim 25 Careere in Careere 32 Kingling kindling

A FUNERAL ELEGY ON THE PRINCE.
THose baser minds, unknowing, sensual, rude,
That measure contraries indifferently;
Whose Summumbonum is their sleep and food,
Preferring moments, to Eternity;
That GOOD, in ILL; and Soul, in Sense include;
And bear no part in public Misery:
May well be called that many-headed Beast;
The spawne of Earth, and lump but indigest.
And such, wise NATVRE keeps in desperate care
With hopeless things; that tho oppressed with want,
Yet joy in grief; are hopeful in despair;
And mortal in Affects, as Ignorant;
They feel no motion, nor do bear a share
In that main Cause which all good minds does daunt;
Sad Brittanes loss; DEATHS mayme, whose terror
May mix our Tears, with cares; and grief with horror.
But who, of gentle SPIRIT, and softened HEART,
Or who of Knowledge, and the minds discourse,
One out of NATVRE; the other out of ART,
That do not plunge themselves in Sorrows sowrse?
For these true qualities should bear a part;
NATVRE breeds Tenderness; KNOWLEDGE Remorse,
Remorse breeds sorrow; Sorrow SENSE confounding
With drearie Passion, and Hearts deepest wounding.
And even as from some strange, and joyful Cause
Proceeds often times effects quite contrary,
Which by (confusion of the Organ) draws
The Mirth to Tears: so DEATH (prepostrously)
To snatch a Kingdoms hope, against Natures Laws
So Dear, so Young; begets extremity
Beyond Loves ordinary course of tears,
Such Passion swallows Pity up in Fears.
Then if in Cause so weighty, tears so light,
Express not these effects of gentle kind;
Cold moves in mean; but nums us with much might;
And brightness ouer-great may strike us blind:
So in extremes in NATVRE put to flight,
Which lodged in the Center of the Mind,
Draws in tears moisture Sorrow to supply,
Least heart being burnt to Cinders, Passion dye,
Then in the depth of SENSE, my zeale-fraught breast,
Wounded with grief and straining drops of BLOOD,
Opening a vent to give my Passion rest,
Yield tributary streams to TIMES vast FLOOD.
Work LOVE, swell Seas; may that MUSE never be blessed,
That drownes his WIT in standing Lake of mud:
But Pegase Hoofes strike learned Helicon,
Whose Riuelets now may run through ALBION.
And as a liquid substance whiles one bent
To hold it fast, by thinness apt to run,
Is easier lost, and rather finds vent
By harder handling and compression:
So worthier WITS within the Brain being pent,
Breaking the bounds of such contraction,
Rebound above their EARTH, that holds in vain,
The fluent Numbers of their rauishing Strain.
In TAGVS then some Swannet dip his Pen,
And of this EAGLET-Issue sing the Fame;
Renew his FIGVRE in the hearts of men,
Charm stupid SENSE; your Spell is in his NAME:
And tho this PHOENIX (fled from any ken)
Have sacrificed his LIFE in Funeral Flame,
A POETS Magic yet, preuailes in death;
Adds LIFE to Virtue; and gives Honor Breath.
In moral TRVTH some later Poets feign,
How when we leave this veil of misery,
That Time gives Abstracts, which our names contain,
Which flickering Foul, that about Lethe fly,
Catch in their Beakes, but let them fall again,
Such are rude men that drown all memory;
But if a Swan do get a Heroes name,
He consecrates it straight t'immortall Fame.
Ye Isis Swannes then let not Lethes Fowls
Profane his name; but may this PRINCES glory
(Which Envy, Lethe, Time, or Age controls)
Be sung of you in a Mineruall story:
Let this Fames Sun through this round Transitory
Shine, and never set; and fixed like the Poles,
Whiles some stout Atlas props his heavenly frame,
Let men (like Spheres) move round about the same.
But I, in WIT the weak'st; in ART the least;
Knowing his death would cause the Muses slain,
In will (tho not in skill) strong as the best,
Do give my Tincture to their purer grain:
And tho I bring but groundwork to the rest,
That must erect this Trophe to his name,
I shall be proud yet to have had a hand,
Upon the Bases, where their Columbs stand.
Then fair POSTERITY heavens Arbitresse
(That in Eternal Characters enrolles
Those Worthies, rapt from Earths unworthiness,
Through the divine impulsion of their souls)
Receive his memory which our zeales express,
Deeply remembered in the Thespian bowls:
That Times insatiate Orque (with kingdoms fed)
May on his Ruins have his name be red.
When first in childhood NATVRE swayed his State,
(All diligent Culture used to Virtues Root)
So soon he had disclosed the hidden Gate,
That his high SPIRIT took wing in stead of foot;
His timelinesse did so prevent his date,
That ere the Flower was looked for came the fruit:
Thus Time in him gave spur to Natures speed,
And high-borne thoughts his height of birth exceed.
In him Earths DEITY, with Heavens combined,
To show their utmost cunning in a CREATVRE;
The Humors, and the Elements inclined
To give to him heaven pointed form and stature;
And GOD (by his rich Dowry of the mind)
Rendered his Virtue Angel like in NATVRE;
And then but showed the world their Artfull Prize,
Then shut him up again from mortal eyes.
His LIFE, and LIVES delight, was harmony;
Whose Organs and whose Instruments were found
Upon his PARTS in contrariety,
To make sweet Music upon NATVRES ground:
But TIME too timelesse in this Sympathy,
Hasting his Cloze, this heavenly SPIRIT has wound
Up to the Spheres, and Orbs Celestial,
HE was in NATVRE so Angelical.
His PRACTICE was (with more then manly awe)
To sway the Scepter of his worlds Designs;
Where by an upright hand he sought to draw
Through all his actions, paralells and lines,
Measured by JUSTICE, and by REASONS Law:
No sense perturbs, no passion undermines
His glorious state, but kept his SOVLE a shrine
Burning in zeal of truth, and deeds Divine.
His TIME by equal portions he divided
Between his books and th'exercise of war:
(War, the Tribunal seat where are decided
The rights of KINGS: and studies that from far
Survey the TIMES, how wandering and misguided)
That Mars with wits Minerua seemed at jar,
Which of them both should sway his Princely Heart,
The One with stern Arms; the other with mild Art.
Upon PERNASSVS Mount he took his stand,
A prospect fair of all discovery;
(For nothing secret in Stars, Sea, or Land,
Can be concealed from learnings clearest eye)
Here would HE contemplate, and cast beyond
The TIMES HORISON, to Eternity:
There might he satiate his Thirst, for nothing can
(Excepting GOD) feed full the mind of MAN.
And he that knew the MUSES still t'inherit
The Prime and Privilege of the golden AGE,
(Where heavenly Pleasure, Honor, and faire-Merit,
Inflame Desire with an holy Rage)
HE still embraced them: yet his fiery SPIRIT
To GLORIES aim, so much he did engage,
(Preventing or Presaging things to come)
He used his EARS to Trumpet, Fife and Drum.
And like as when the VIGILL of the night,
(After the Starry RING had moved their course)
Proclaims the Day; and then the GOD of Light
(Roused from his Couch) does mount his fiery Horse:
So our FAMES SON, with no less wished sight
(After his Warlike summons) he would force
Rest from his BED, and at those wished Alar'ms
Mount his hot Steed, shining in glorious Arms.
HE knew that Arms was th'exercise of KINGS;
The spur to Fame, root of NOBILITIES
He knew his BIRTH and SPIRIT had lent him wings
To mount the pitch of all his AVNCESTRIE:
He likewise knew Fames Trumpet never rings
Of delicate Courtship, but with Infamy;
He knew that Soldiers used n'affected words,
Whose Tongues are spears, their Oratory swords.
By Wars fair shadow, his discoursiue Thought
Discernd the substance, and admyr'd the Face;
Bellona was his GODDESS, whom he sought
With Knightly valor, more then courtly grace:
The Impression of whose Figure so much wrought,
That he would front her manly, and enchace
Upon her sternest Brow, his tempered steel;
ARMS had his Heart; when LOVE had scarce his Heel.
Not Canopies, but Tents took his DESIRE,
Not Courts, but Camps; nor could the courtliest dames
(Though they shot Eye-bals wrapped in CVPIDS fire)
Pierce his steeled Breast: but Bullets rolled in Flames,
From thundering Cannons, had more power t'inspire;
Where Towns for marks; and Crowns do stand for games;
Where Foes subdued, for right of Kingdoms wrongs,
HONOR might blaze with shield of golden Tongues.
These were the Subjects of our PRINCES Aim;
A plumed Caske, a Spear, a Sword, a Shield;
Kingdoms his hope; Olympicke wreaths his Chain;
Barriers his practice, and the course of Field;
We looked HE should have impt the wings of FAME;
Charmed Death, ruld FATE, and made proud Fortune yield,
And Lion-like have forrag'do're the EARTH
To hunt his prey, and Crown his NAME and BIRTH.
For who suggested not this ravished mind,
To see him Careere, and weilde his Lance,
What future TIMES such promising hope might find,
How like HE was this Kingdom to advance?
Who would have thought a SPIRIT vnconfin'd,
Should not have triumph't over Death and Chance?
And o'resome vanquished FOE, in crymson Flood,
Be crowned on Horseback sweating dewes of Blood?
And who (in his Praeludium) did not see
(Pent in the CHAOS of his manly Frame)
The spirit of Cyrus in Minority,
In boundless hope, and in a soundlesse Aim;
And in contention for Prioritie;
Not Alexander for th'Olympian Game,
Could show more hearty thirst, and active Fire,
Then he would do in his vnquench't Desire.
In State Designs, how full of State, and slow?
In Thoughts searene; in Carriage grave and wise;
His speech a Current braunch't from NATVRES Flow;
In Countnance, SAGE; Maiesticke in his Eyes:
As if in HIM he would let Statesmen know,
A PRINCES Wisdom not in wrinckles lies:
GOD measures not his GIFTS by Age or years,
His SENSE was hoarie, although green his Hairs.
In him was drawn the Model of a State;
From Reason, Wrath, Desire, or Industry;
Reason, to Government proportionate;
Desire, to Trades; and Wrath, to Souldierie;
To range these powers, three VERTVES destinate;
Wisdom with Fortitude, and Piety:
Those three thus ordered States make Realms complete,
As these three VERTVES, Princes good, and great.
He was the grief of FOES: And even as fire
Being newly kindled, ere it can burn bright
Or'e-comes the smoke, and then it does aspire,
And out of vapor shows his proper light:
So VERTVE ( Enuies object) does acquire
(Mauger malignant Humors of despite)
His native LVSTER^* so our PRINCE (Divine)
From Foe-mens fume, would make his FAME to shine.
He knew himself: no flattering Glass could give
So soothed a humor, or so smooth, a face,
That he would not discern; he strived to live
T'establish TRVTH in Heart; as Power in Place:
From each of these his knowledge did derive
Such equal right, which had so fair a grace,
That TITLES proved but Instruments to praise,
VERTVE was Agent, and still wore the Bays.
His virtuall Impressions could rebate
The venomous BANE of whoorish Flattery;
Which like a SIREN lurkes in surging State,
To sing great PRINCES to their Infamy;
Which living deadness he so seemed to hate,
That in the winde-swolne seas of Majesty,
TRVTH stear'd his course, and kept his BARK from harms;
He had Ulysses power against Circes Charms.
The hope of HIM, made frozen VERTVE burn,
Which took fresh feruor from his Kingling fire;
To him all IRON hearts began to turn;
For he was Lodestone to all Hearts desire:
For HIM all Sexes and Degrees do mourn;
And ever shall we (till our Breathes expire)
Embalme his VERTVES, and upon his vrne
In LOVES sweet Incense, never cease to burn.
What TYPES can WIT devise shall now be wanting?
Yet who his HONORS perfectly can blaze?
What Heart, Tongue, Pen, thinks, speaks, writes, without scanting
His full proportion of immensiue Praise?
But O thy FATE, when now our hopes were planting,
To turn to Funeral Cypress, Joyful Bays,
It reaues my Sense: he was too fair to flourish;
Too soon too ripe, and therefore like to perish.
Why did the Parcoe cut his vnspun thread?
His SPIRIT of Fire to his Element aspired:
Was that the cause? why live we, he being dead?
We are forlorn, and he too much desier'd:
Our full-fed hopes were surfeited, and bred
A new disease; and he we so admired,
First took The Infection, and bequeathed his Breath,
Then we were cause of his untimely Death.
And as a covetous Miser, midst his wealth,
Fats in his JOY, then pines in thirst of more;
So our rich hopes in HIM empair'd loyes health,
And in abundance, we grew starved, and poor:
Then TIME and DEATH that exercise their stealth
Upon the Things wherein we set most store,
As th'Instruments of FATE, hauerob'd us quite,
For Heaven is Jealous of the worlds delight.
No Object dearer; nor no LOVE so crossed:
If ever good cause suffered under might;
If ever JOYS were checked in proudest Boast;
Or ever Claim did non-suite kingdoms Right;
Our Cause, our JOYS, our Right and all are lost,
TIME, DEATH, and NATVRE armed with Fates despite,
By this one fatal blow so deadly given,
Does make us groan under the wrath of heaven.
SORROVV sit down then, and with bended Head,
Bearing thy Chin against thy griefe-charg'd Breast,
Behold the hungry Grave now to be fed,
With worlds delight, and cause of thy unrest:
Be not appeased; forget thy Food, thy Bed
Remembering him; O never more digest
So dear a thought, but let thy Heart, and Brain,
Solicit still thy Passion to complain.
Now Musickes Sirens that were wont to move
His soul harmonious, with your sweet consents,
Howl your lost Joy, your Hope, your Life, your Love,
With your cracked voices and your Instruments:
Disioyne your selves, and like the Turtle Dove
Alone bewail your loss in languishments:
Pine and consume, and like the dying Swanne
Sing Dirges for your selves, and him that is gone.
And ye the Noblest estate of men
(Soldiers) embast in these degenerate times;
Though ye afford most matter to my Pen
Texcite your Tears; yet least my harsher Rimes
On your sad cause, do make you mad again,
Rest to your Passion: Hark the Churches Chime^
Ring to GODS service; serve him then in Peace,
Wex poor in spirit, and let action cease.
But ye dejected Spirits of his TRAIN,
Ruined in fortunes, and distressed in mind;
Of my Complaint receive this horrid strain;
Me thinks your Passion should strike Reason blind
With your immoderate woes; and tho in vain
Ye rage in Tears, like Seas with boystrous wind,
Yet with full sails of grief you should be borne
Till Mast were split, sails rent, and tackling torn.
Now is my Passion with my soul at Wars;
Me thinks the PILLORS of the world should shake;
Alcydes shrincke, and shoures of lucklesse Stars
Drop from their spheres: me thinks the earth should quake
Graves gasp, Raunes croke, and all confused iarres
Fore-runne his FUNERAL: yet what can make
The sight more ruthful? when his HEARSE appears
A little Island compast in with Tears.
O now through ruptures of each wounded Heart,
His living figure prompt our deadest hope,
That Tears (erst choked with horror) may convert
To give our Eyes their deaw, and pity scope:
Now let all sing a tear complaining part,
For weeping Floods do now begin to open
A paslage for their streams, which must extend
In crook't Meanders without ebb or end.
Prepare, prepare thou hollow hearted Tomb,
To take to thy dead Arms, and to embrace
A Tear deaw'd Hearse: never did NATVRES Womb
Produce his like: His Honor, Beauty, Grace
Possess all Hearts; Posterity to come
Record his Name, which may no time deface:
And when Earths glory in Confusion lies,
Let CHAOS murmer Virtues victories.
All stupid sense which Brittane Tears restrain,
Be now dissolved, suggest the smallest Beams
Of his true splendour, and each frozen vein
Will melt in grief, and turn to licquid streams;
On dryest Sorrow cast moist showers of Rain:
Let heat and cold, moist, dry, with all extremes
Fight with Confusion in each troubled breast,
Which Time to quiet, never may digest.
Let tears show Love, tho robbed of comforts cause;
For Canker TIME has eat our hopes with rust;
Let Passion melt, as Icie coldness thawes;
Till windy sighs o'rewhelme us with their gust:
Though tears nor passion wring from deaths foul jaws
Our joys delight now blended with the Dust:
Yet since our Hope and Joy in dust does lie,
Let Hearts strain blood; Eyes weep their fountains dry.
Adore we then that dreadful sacred TRYNE,
That gives us Essence out of Vacuum;
Nor against his Will let Rebbell Hearts repine,
Who is the soul of souls infusion;
And though we seem thus forced to resign
What we thought ours; but his possession:
All fall before his mercies gracious THRONE,
Admire his Justice, and his ends unknown.
Decist vain man be not degenerate
In constitution of thy Soul and Mind,
Presume not in thy Thoughts t'expostulate
With God, who holds the lump of all thy kind;
That bounds the Sea, and sets the world his date;
Confines all things himself being vnconfin'd;
Nor can his Wills vncomprehended might
Be linck't, and tied to thy fond Appetite.
Is not a Malefactor sore afraid
To view th'aspect of MAN'S Austeritie?
Do not Faci^^^^ Facts implore the aid
Of humane MEN, against Laws leueritie?
When cruel Wrath with gentle Piu's staide,
Seems not stern lustice yoak't with Clemency?
Which Sympathiz'd together in one Sphere,
Their Influence engender LOVE, and fear?
How much more shall that Firm DIAMETER,
Essential Sphere of MAN'S Direction;
Heavens Architector; Worlds Artificer;
The Quinessence of all Perfection;
Be loved in Fear, feared in Affection?
Let then no dusty VVormeling ever dare
With his Eternal WILL to hold dispute,
But wrapped in wonder, all be dumb and mute.
The LAW is fixed whose Bounds may none transcend,
Which different Causes in one Chaine-combines;
All things by providence begin, and end,
Which generally orders: next assigns
A special Power to FATE; which does extend
And singularly parts in Place, and Times:
So that GODS general Ord'nanc^ firm must stand:
And FATE still use his vnauoided Hand.
-- Dijs Pietas mea
Et Musa Cordi est.

Defleuit CHRISTOPHERVS BROOK

FINIS.

