A COMMENT UPON COHELETH OR ECCLESIASTES: Framed for the instruction of PRINCE
HENRI Our hope.

BY HVG BROVGHTON. Anno 1605

A COMMENT UPON COHELETH OR ECCLESIASTES: Framed for the instruction of PRINCE
HENRI Our Hope.

By HVGH BROVGHTON.

Anno 1605.

TO THE MOST NOBLE, HENRY PRINCE OF great Britanie.
IN a former little book, (most noble Prince) speaking Ebrew and Latin, I
showed the Persons of David's Family: the Kings race, and the Kinglier then
the Kings, the house of our Lord after the flesh: a matter opened in few
words: yet mistaken in England and almost every where, to the ruin of
infinite millions: who finding Christians unable to settle their own
narration, rejected all Christianity. That small work I dispersed in many
thousand copies by Sea and Land over Europe and Asia: where many have thought
the gift not mean. Next, knowledge of the Persons that sprang from David's
house: the quality of the Kingdom and perpetual Throne promised to David, 2.
Sam. 7. and 1. Chron. 17. and Psalm. 89. should be known. To manifest that
Solomon David's son, and a King that has all Royalties of this world, is
chosen of God. He tells upon his own longue study and experience, that all
things under the Sun be vain: So that the Throne promised to David, must be
for the world to come: which the man Gabriel that appeared to Daniel to tell
our Lords death: and to Marie for his birth, does plainly expound what nature
it has: that it is the Kingdom of Christ by sufferings bringing joy. The
whole book of Solomon herein spent, with helps to clearnes, I join to the
former: which, if God will, shall be accompanied with others, as the argument
calls for explication.

Your graces most humble Hugh Broughton.

THE CHIEF MARK OF ALL The holy Scriptures.
SUNDRY ways does our heavenly father draw us unto the Kingdom of his son:
But Man created of God plain will be searching out many conceits, to his own
over throw: by the sleight of Satan: as the Angels that kept not their place,
fell to ruin. They being created the first day: and hearing the voice of God
which dwells in light that none can come too; saw that the frame of the world
was not for Spirits use: the Sphaeres in their wonderful greatness and
swiftenes: the stars in their most beawtifull order: the vapors, winds, and
clouds in most wise peise, the plants, fowls, fishes, beasts, all these
benefit not the Angels. But after the making of all these, the holy trinity
consulteth for making man, in justice and plain holiness, and makes his body of
the earth: that all things may serve his use: the stars, the Elements, the
plants and all live things. And God does breath into him a soul immortal,
full of life, which might have kept the body always alive: and shows unto
Angels man's wisdom, in that he names all beasts with terms defining their
nature, and makes a woman outo of his side, and gives them dominion over the
Earth: and g tivth his Angels charge over them, to attend upon them, and to
keep them. But one part mislikeh this charge, and by that rebellion extinguish
their own light, and lose their own glory, and find misery vnrecoverable: and
seek leave to try man, whether he can be deceaved, to cast of the obedience of
God, and prevails, and brings them to death of the soul, and loss of that
light which would have kept the body alive for ever: and into sin that draws
eternal woe upon it. And this disobedience being wroght quickly the first day
of man, brought all the world under corruption: and greved still the holy
spirit, and his Angels. But then further counsel is showed: that the ETERNAL
Son of God will take Humanity of Eves Sede: and to him the world is subiectea,
till an incorruptible new world be made. But Satan withdrew belefe from this
poinct; and rules as Prince of the darkness of this world, so as it is hard for
Adams Sons borne in sin and blindness extreme, to hold this world cursed:
which yet all serves man's use: and to hope for a world vnvisible, for the
soul leaving this life: and of a new world for the body and soul. Seeing Adam
cared not for Gods charge, being yet in life and Lordship, and believed not the
word of him who spoke and all things had their being: So the Sons of Adam
will hardly beleve that the King of Glory must die to give life: and to light
Adam by faith to life: and arise to raise Adam: and leave this world, to show
hope of an other world. Experience teaches us how far this is from us.

To this none can come unless the Father draw him. Yet Gods grace in
government condemns all for not layng hand upon this grace, and for not
craving of grace truly so to do. Now to show that by death life should come,
in Paradise a beast is killed: and with the skin, our Parents be clothed:
and fire from Heaven burns the carcass: and the next day is appointed for a
rest to meditate, on this: to whom able to govern, the creature is subjected:
who by resting the Sabath in the grave: which fell out after 39 60. years,
fully ends the Sabath, and rising with the light the first day, brings light
unto the world: as in day, for death, his passion was fitted to Adams day and
time of fall and sentence, against him. Thus redemption was taught: and anger
by a curse pronounced to come by the flood. Now Cains murder of Abel, shows
what poison Satan breathed into Eves soul to bear such a son: and further,
Cains sons appear bad in making Gods of stars Their life and manners and
contempt of God ^ob set h forth: wi^h their destruction*
made to serve man: defying their Lord that made the world for them: and
deifiing the creatures, to lose the creator and creatures: when the flood
vvashed their bodies away: and their souls ascend to Gods Throne to have from
it and before it, eternal flames. Yet then Christ shevved in Noah, how all
beasts and Elements and heavens obeyed him. Again, they are told that Christ
shall arise from Sem to be a King of justice and peace. And, that, when the
heathen receave the promise, Iapheth his sons shall have the chiefest
continuance of grace: And Noes families be named; and the Prophets show their
nationes and stories with Gods people. That matter is expounded by the
Prophets, speaking still of the first families.

But now they make the sad blessing a skoph: and build a proud tower for
worship to stars. Then GOD divided all their tongues, that they should no
more hear his truth: to plead foolishly against it. And two thousand years
all Heathen estranged from GOD perished for ever and ever. And in short speches
to Abraham, he foretells, that of him one shall come that shall bless all
nationess: and shows his death, and recovery from death in Isaak offered near
death, but only by Gods voice, reserved, as by a resurrection: and that Jacobs
sons should not worship stars above, or any thing on earth, they are
stars in Joseph's dream: and precious stones in Aarons Breast lap, or Care of
judgment. And to show what justice God required, they have plain Laws of
perfect Equity: with a curse to all that keep not every one: that men might
know how sin abounds: and to the poor in spirit the redeemer is declared
in mysteries that the profane should not skoff: yet plainly to such as mark
how Adam and Abraham heard of him: and life of the soul is showed by dwelling
with God: as the second death for the soul, by anger from the face of God.
Thus closly the world to come is showed. Also the tabernacle, and appartena^ces
showed Christ his dwelling with man: and by sacrifices and birds escaped, his
death and resurrection: that for justice hence by faith men should not say: who
can go up to heaven to bring Christ down, or who can go to the deep of the
earth to bring Christ from the dead, but might know that Jesus should be the
Eternal, and that the Godhead should raise him from the dead. And the saving of
our souls appeared, in the Brazen serpent, when Moses lifted up the serpent in
the wilderness, and the stonged by serpents wear healed. Many dout less asked
him, what was meant thereby: and he told that so the sun of man should be lifted
up: that they who beleved on him should not perish, but have life everlasting.
Moses mind shined with knowledge of all, as did his face shine with light: and
Levies Sunlike Smaragd: and his Prophecies abridg all the holy stories: and he
makes the twelve dum stones tell much, from Aarons breast: And the Patriarchs
lives, have the like revolutiones in their children: how for cleaving to the
redeamer they should find glory, and again shame in refusing their fathers
God, and following the blindenes of the God of this world. Now in David God
historically expresses Christ his Kingdom. David comes to his Kingdom by
continual afflictiones: and so all that will follow the religion of Christ
shall be persecuted. And by whom the covenant of God and his law shall be kept to
vanquish Satan, David is told: eve^ that Christ shall come of his loins to
reign upon his throne for ever. Of him he shall come to be a man and a King in
this world: but he shall have no Kingdom in this world, and the earth which
God has cursed: but to him is the world to come subdued: being the creator,
and David shows how yet in his suffringes and death he was made inferior to
Angels: but crowned with glory and honor, since he sat on the right hand of
God. And when he came into the world, all the Angels of God worshipped him. And
that Judah should consider how by sufferings this glory comes, David describes
as an Evangelist the suffringes of Christ. This David does. And tells in
Prophecies the overthrow of his nation, and their captivity, and retarne; and
Antiochus persecutiones, and the Jews reiection: even all their times: how God
took a time to plant them, and will pluck them up: to seek them, and will
destroy them: to keep them and will cast them off: to love them, and will hate
them. Now for experience that a Kingdom under the Sun was not promised in
Christ, Solomon had all wisdom, wealth and pleasure, and found all to be
vanity: and by his pleasures fell from God: but returned, and teacheh in
Ecclesiastes in all particular sorts, that all here is but vanity and
vexation of spirit: by man's dealinges, and by the sorrows of their hands: and
closly warns that his son shall not rule all his: foreseying how Joseph's
Jeroboam vold leave only Judah to be an whole tribe till Shiloh his child by
the Virgin the King Eternal came in the flesh. Part of Rachels house, and a
little, of Benjamin, because God built half Jerusalem and the Temple in his
tribe, for that, part of Benjamin cleaved to Judah: as a wolf though not a lion
in Mardochai and Atossa the mother of Great Artaxerxes, that built the temple,
which abode till our Lord came into it. And Solomon warns the ten tribes, how
they will be robbers making one purse, and refuse the love of the truth: and how
God would laugh at their destruction by Assure: and fitted Proverbes to have kept
them from destruction: And the son of Thamar, of Rachab, of Ruth, of
Bathsuagh in the Canticles turns all joy to the Kingdom of Christ: that
Joseph's house should not despise the root of Iessai, though Jesus Son of Nun
conquered the Land and made the Sun to stay. A matter showing that which
follows.

JESUS the Son of GOD, and the Son of David after the flesh, would darken
the Sun, and shake all the earth. And years nere a thousand, GOD still so
governed Judah that they should look for the Kingdom of heaven, always opened
by CHRIST, and still feel their state on earth to be full of sorrow. That did
they sone prove true.

For the Kings of Judah were all either worshippers of Devels with many of
their people, or, in some feeling of great danger and distress: or, in open
hearing of Prophets, and that, many at once, that Babel should end their
state: and Salomons house: because they followed Babel built to make Go^ddes of
creatures. Salomons house utterly perished. And in Babel, the Image, and other
Pictures tells them in expositiones seven times over how heathen shall
withold Iudahs kingdom, even from Salathiel and Zoroba babel our Lords Fathers
after the flesh until he came into the world And they saw how yet under
Heathen they were defended. And when they saw not only the fall of Salomons
race, temple, city, and kingdom, but of mighty Babel in 70. years reign: then
they were in fit case to be taught of David's Throne that should stand for ever.
Aethan, of Phares brother, Zarach, told it before Psalm. 89. But the Angel
Gabriel tells it more properly, even to the very year and day: that all the
world might reckon 490. years to gather how many years, months, and days
they were from the end of Moses, and how nere to the work of redemption, by the
son of God dwelling in our tabernacle. And poor Jews from 120. nationes are
sent to Jerusalem by Cyrus proclamation of the true God, who all could teach
Heathen that the world was made, and also how longue then it had stood: where
still infidels will err. And for receaving of Christ his Prophecy, the poor
nation that returned to Jerusalem in hope of life by it, is recorded by the
holy spirit which beautified the heavens, in high honor; how many their whole
number to every man did make. This honor had the saints: and their poor
state in Ezra and Nehemias is from God set down and their defense, and
affinity with the Persia^ kings also is pe^ned from Gods wisdom, and,
religion is expo^ded by Aggei, Zachary and Malachy, eve^ to John Bap. and to
the meke King, Christ himself. and to the destruction of their nation, which
will not beleve that all kingdoms under the Sun are vanity: but do and will
still hope for a pompous belly blessing in this cursed earth. In due time our
Lord comes, to have his tabernacle in us: for which his tabernacle or temple
the world was made obedient unto man. And though Moses tabernacle, were most
diligently thrice described: and furnished with all dignity of matter and
form: yet God did sone leave it in small regard: and likewise Salomons
temple. Yet against S. Stephens doctrine Act. 7. to this day Israel hops for
a temple of stone, and city to be built on mount Syon, in Chanaan. But our Lord
leaves this world, to sit on David's throne for ever: and Jews perish in their
lies, and blindness, and for our Lords brightness, four Evangelistes tell that:
and one tells how the Apostles taught that to the heathen; and holy Epistles
comment upon all Moses, to teach Israel the golden building, and how their
Thalmudicall is straw: in all hope of Policy good on Earth. And when Jerusalem
is destroyed to force an end of Moses Ceremonies: then more fully the nature of
David's throne is opened by Gracious John, in obscure Patmos. He shows how all
the goodly Jewels used through Moses and the Prophets tend hither, how the
knowledge of Christ practiced openly and rightly by his servantes, makes the
heavenly Jerusalem: the holy Jews a ey-expectation. But this should have two
hindrances: one by the profane Caesares, whom the Lord would pay for their
parts: that all their world should be altered: the other by Christianes
falling away, as Ismael and Ephraim did. So Mackmad of Ismael sone withdrew all
the co^treys of Daniels Image, to their old Arabique infidelity: and Christ
leaves them to eternal blindness, as he did the old builders of Babel. Also
the city, that crucified Christ, sets up an earthly pomp, with corruption
of all holy truth, and carriage in hope of life by the waters of Scripture, out
of which he that is not borne again by the Spirit, can never enter into the
Kingdom of heaven. Yet against this Pomp Christ rules his commonweals in
perpetual expectation of the Eternal Throne to be fully manifested. And this
sum does the holy Bible afforde. Which he that bears in mind shall sooner
see the driefte of every particular Book. And now Ecclesiastes will show, how
this world can have no good Kingdom: where all kind of Sorts flow with
vanities and vexation of Spirit. But to consider his book with more clearness
of light, his kindred, and life, and a popular spech of his royal and most
witty closse spech, and divinity chief poinctes, yet resisted of his nation,
these are to be laid forth somewhat familiarly, for the help of the unacquainted
with such matters.

AN ABRIDGEMENT OF SALOMONS LIFE.
DAVID had sons by many wives. The King and his brother Nathan, and two
more named in 1 Chr. 3. 5. by the daughter of Ammiel: besides the first borne
that sone died. That his wife was called Bath-Suagh (...) a Daughter of
nobility: God closly disposing tongues to that which in story should be most
famous. After Vrias the faithful Hettean died for his people and the cities of
his God, by good David's wicked slight, and David had made that Psalm of
repentance to the comfort of all that should by faith find justice, David
conforted Bath suagh, and swore that Solomon should reign: and called her
Bathshebagh (...) daughter of Oath. And he savv further that Salomons house
would not be upright with God, but would overthrow the temple and nation Lev.
26. and Deuteronomy. 28. and that Nathans prophecy should come of Salomons next
brother: and called him Nathan: that his name should abridge the Prophecy. Bath
shebagh (...) also has her honor from God. Prove. 31. Being an holy teacher of
holy truth, and joying that Christ should come of her, as of Thamar, Rachab,
and Ruth the Moabite: and not also of Roboams mother the Ammonite, nor of any
King afterward. Salomo^ was borne about the time that Adoniah defloured
Thamar: as the story shows: and is cast by the Rabbines and Greeks to be
twelve years old when David dies. His Father and his mother and the Prophet
Nathan instructed him in the vvayes of God: and he craved vvisdome of God, and
had it above all Kings: and the more he increased in vvisdome, he taught the
people knowledge, and fitted many Proverbes. Three books he left; The Song
of Songs shevving the joy of the Church that truly follows Christ: and the
Proverbes, warning much the Tribes that they will fall away from God. In the
same book he joineth the words of Agur Ben Iakeh: a wise Prophet of his
time, who in fevv words taught much, of man's corruption: and spoke of God to
dvvell in Christ, named ^thiel, and Vcal, that is with me God, even the
Mighty. And Koheleth in his third book. The K. had four names Solomon, and
Iedidiah, 1 King. 12., Lemoel, Prove. 31. and Koheleth: Eccl. 1. The notation of
the last should here be opened: (...) Cahal the verb is, Gather, and the novvne
Ecclesia, a company gathered to one assembly: as the 600000. which at once
denied God: Number. 13. called there (...) Ghedah: elsvvhere often (...) Cahal.
(...), Synagogue, or Ecclesia. Of Gathering the best thing, that is, vvisdome,
he is called Koheleth (...). Aben Ezr. Ecclesiast. 1. That is: He is called
Koheleth, by the term of wisdom which was gathered in him: finding by
experience that all things under the sun are vain: and common weals full
of folly and madness: that men should look to the Kingdom of Christ in heaven.
The LXX. made a new term of their own Ecclesiastes: a wise Doctor. And
this book commenteth upon Nathans Prophecy, cited before: and teaches closly,
that many Kings of his posterity by foolishnes would break the hedge, that
Serpents should bite them: and would speak great words, as did Roboam, so
foolish as one that knevv not the way to the city. And he himself, was
entangled by his wives to build Idolea for them: But he proclameth their
wickedness: and how Iedidiah, the beloved of God was delivered from them.
None should doubt but that he is in the Kingdom of heaven; seeing all the
Prophets be there Luc. 13. and he spent all his life to teach the vanities of
this world. His posterity ended in Iechonias: and the Jews miss of all the
Prophets meaning, which say: that Messiah should come of Iechonias: who left
no child naturally: Iere. 22. But sons to his Kingdom many. 1 Chr. 3. and
Salathiel of Nathan Mat. 1. Luc. 3. This poinct should specially be noted of
Christianes. The Jews use all endeavor to overthrow S. Luk for our Lords
Kindred: and mightily labor to prove that Salathiel was natural son to
Iechonias: and not only S. to the Kingdom: as troops of others 1 Chr. 3. but
properly son, as any other to his father, in private spech. And as they look
for a pompous Kingdom: so they continue against Gods oath, the line of Solomon:
in Sanedr. fol. 18. Perec 10. atticle 12. in these words.

(...)

This rule is a foundation: that no King may be accepted for Israel, but of the
house of David and of the sede of Solomon only: and who so is a schismatique
against this family, denies the name of the blessed God, and the words of his
prophets. Thus expressly they teach that Messiah must come of Iechonias: and
know that S. Luke and our Gospel falls vvher that is granted: whom I
ansvvear in mine ebrevv treatise to Prince Henry. And I have shevved of the
grosnes of our table elsvvhere.

A PARAPHRASE Abridging the book: WITH OBSERVATIONES OF speches tovvching the
holy Ttinity, and of Iudaisme, stumbling against Koheleth even unto this day.
ALL this book of Coheleth or Salemon, tends, as was shevved, to open
Nathans spech, 1 Chro. 17. touching the Eternal throne of David: And this
sylogisme arises hence by the Jews grant: in the Chaldy upon this place.

If all things under the sun be subject to extreme vanity: the Eternal
throne promised unto David, must be of an other world.

But all things under the sun be subject to extreme vanity:

Therefore this is all the Man, to look unto the judgment of God for an other
world, and unto the throne of the better stay.

The proposition is omitted, as lapped in the Prophecy of Nathan closly: and
not to be opened directly to the profane: who would contemn all spech of the
world to come. And the humble would sone conceave it. The assumption is proved
by a plentiful induction, going through all man's state. And these be the chief
heads. The shortness of man's life passing as a vapor. The Shortness of life.
Sun, vvind, and water, never resting in one place, picture our state, and
cause our change: our eyes can never be contented nor our ears: and yet
nothing is new: but forgetfulness makes things past to seem new. And wise
policy cannot help common weals so many be imperfectio^s
to mark men's actions, Koheleth, that gathered all vvisdome by experience,
being a King, and in Jerusalem the glory of the world, should pass all that
none coming after him should excede him. He considered the carriage of the
wise, and of the mad world: and savv that the crooked would not be
streightened, and the Chap.
imperfect could not be made up. He tried pleasure in 2.
his great cheer, and his thousand women. That became nothing vvorth. He
joined vvisdome and royal majesty Pleasures, vvisdome, and royalty are but
vanity.
together, in all pomp, and stately works and delites. But all was vanity.
Though vvisdome pass folly as darkness passes light: yet this event have both,
that both sone die, and their memory. And what the wise by care never
resting does bring about, a foolish heir, as Roboam and his house, almost all
the race unto their end in Iechonias, by wicked madness destroy. The best thing
which the vvisest would vvish is contentement, in using their present travel.
But Gods variety in governing man's times and seasons in birth, death; planting,
rooting out: seking, rejecting, love and hatred, this checketh all hope of
resting in contentement Chap.
of wealth gotten. And God used this variety in 3.
his judgments that men should fear him. But the thorny cares and pleasure,
choke the meditation upon Gods work. And thus the vvisdome of the best cannot
bring any sound state. Now folies be infinite. In Oppression common.
courts of judgment, might overcomes right: and men are become beasts: and
for all things under the sun, as the one dies so dies the other. And who
considers the spirit of a man, that it ascends unto God; scant any: But men
live as not beleving, or not regarding the souls immortality. And the vvisest
cannot look for use of their own, for oppressors irresistable *(...) The
heathen sentence was before from God.
are in every place: that the heathen savv how it was best never to have
been, and next, to dye quickly. Envy of life, bretheth in others slouthfulnes.
vvherby the poor in all common weals be infinite. And their misery bredes a
contrary, in some rich: that being without kindred, yet they have none end of
their labor. Yea the rich Kings nether for them selves nor other Sloth
mother of poor folk x.
have any happy case. A wise child in prison, as Joseph, is in better case
then an old foolish King, as Ioas. And Cover senseles.
Kings were borne poor and naked: and may come to the same case: and people
be still vvery of the present, and Cha. 5.
men under Kings had need of continual prayer: and The preset is soon lothed.
in prayer, much babbling and rash vovving increase vanities in the best
business. And for the oppression by the mighty, many are amazed: and know not
how (...) the holy they the high God. as God thy creatoures. chap. 18.
Husbandry full of cares. Riches be vncenten.
Trinity is above all, and has a time for judgment: But the most, think there
is no God. Now tillage would seem a contented life: better then merchandise:
vvher money multiplyeth not: but by care and hazard. Here, as wealth increases,
the servantes that spend it increase: and the master has no more then they,
saving only the sight: and the servantes sleep is svvete: but care suffers not
the master to sleep. And often falls the rich to be vvorth nothing: and only
contentement here is good: but to use the goods gotten, that is a gift of God.
Often the vvelthy are cut off Chapter 6.
from use of their own; long life and many children cannot Many children: in
Arabian poverty are a misery. one in Justin had 600.
in poverty make one better then the untimely birth: yea though a man live in
poverty two thousand years. All must come to one place. And this befalls
all men that the soul is never satisfied. By this the vvelthy wise man or
fool has no sound preeminence, nor the poor of knowledge, infericritie, in
Adam the name ^elle^h man of his frailty.
vvalking before the living. The notation of Adam should teach of his nature:
for the first names expressed the natures of the things named: and it is
evident, that he is but earthly Adam, and is not able to strive with his
stronger: and who knovveth what is good for man in the days of his life that
are but a shadovv, and who can tell him what shall befall him. Therefore Sad
meditation of death is the best thing.
there is no true joy in this life: but a good name before God is better then
any wealth: vvherin precious oinctmentes in the East, were the chiefest, and
better is the day of death, then the day of birth, and the house of mourning
then the house of feasting: for the mourning house is the end of all, and the
living will take it to heart. The practice of wise and foolish show this. For
the wise go to the house of mourning, the fools to the house of banqueting.
So the check from the wise is better then the songs of fools. For as the
voice of thorns is under the pot, such is the laughter of fools. And because
oppression from the stronger drives men to madness: and bribes again destroy
their hearts, the good end is better then the good beginning, and patience
better then anger. A man must be slow to anger: for anger rests in the
bosom of fools. As this proceeds not of vvisdome to ask: why were the
former days better then these. VVisdome is good with wealth, while men live.
Both bring a sheltre. But vvisdome is the better, it saves him that has it.
And here vvisdome shows it self: even in hamblenes not hoping to streighten
that which God has made crooked: rejoice with the rejoicing: and vvepe with
the vveping days. God has so set one by the other, that none can find fault.
The just perishes in too strait justice, and the toylesome holds one long
in his toil. Be not toylsome to much nor too wise: and play not the fool: it
will bring death before the ordinary course. It is good to keep betwixt
both: as they that fear God will. VVisdome will strengthen more then ten
rulers: though in many things all stumble. And this poinct of vvisdome has
great use, not to regard all evel tongues: for all speak evell of others and
the tongue ca^ not be bridled. This Kohe leth tried: and sought still to find
reasons for all cariages. But that was far off. Now the far off and the deep
who can find out. But in trying the madness of folk, Koheleth found by his
thousand wives, that an evell vvoma^ Even women a common mischief (...) worse
the^ death. Solomon (...) Ieremies age. felt ^^at.
was bitterer then death. This he found: examining one thing by an other to
find out devises. But this he could not find out: though in men one of a
thousand, Koheleth would find out the subtilest devises, yet of a subtle
vvomans devises in all that number, he could not. They made him build houses to
strange Gods: whereupon the Kingdom first rented, afterward, perished. And
this, Koheleth found generally true: that God made Adam plain, but they found
out many inve^tiones. Cha. 8.
And so do their children in all folly. And who is as the wise man? who is
like him that knovveth the nature of matters. VVisdome lights the face of a
man: and the hardenes of his face will be changed. As Kings offenses are very
hard to be cured and 2 voided:
vnlernednes bredeth boldness: and judgment, lothnes to be meddling. And it
avoideth the calamities that come from governoures oppression. Herein visdome
would keep the Kings laws, in the Lord: and not resist auctority: for he
earieth not the svvord in vain. But he that does well shall have praise of the
King. But here men bread them selves much sorrow, not knovving what will
befall them. And this vanity is common, that men consider not, rulers nor
subjects, how suddenly Pall death knocks poor cotages, and Kings Pal lates
with an equal foot.
death vnexorable, (against which there is no striving) cease upon men. By
want of vvisdome herein men will be ruling men, to their own harm. In that
case Koheleth savv the wicked buried: when they went away, and passed from
the holy place of judgment, and were forgotten in the city vvher they had so
done. And this vanity might teach, that no throneacceptable unto God, can be
found in this world. But by not knovving Gods dealing herein, men fill this
world with vanity. Because judgeme^t is not shevved quickly upon evel
works, men's hearts be fully carried to do mischief. But the wise Koheleth
would tell, though the wicked do These tovves of the last in this world, a
hevv that all Good is to be hoped in an other world.
wickedly an hundredth fould, and live long: yet it shall be well with the
Godly: and not with the wicked whose days are but a shadovv. An other
secret government of God, teaches the vanity of this life, that the just are
plagued, and the wicked prosper. This teaches that there is an other world of
recompense: as in the Parable of Lazarus and Dives. In this diversity quiet
enioyng of the present wealth is all that a man can have of his travel. And
for man's business restles and slepelesse, not the vvisest can see the reason of
Gods works. By outvvard prosperity, the just and unjust are not discovered
Epienres fill kingdoms b^ blindness herein. and as fish and fowls men are
snared,
often times. Hence Epicures exhort one an other with long orationes to
present pleasures: while not the swift have the gool: nor the valiant the
victory, nor the wise, the bread, nor the cunning, favor, but a time and
occurrant befalls all. And men know no more their time, then fish or foul
that be caught in a net, and snare. Without special vvisdome, this will not
be shunned. VVisdome is soon contemned. This example may be pregnant. A little
city besieged of a great King, by a poor man's vvisdome has been saved. But
vvisdome is in cities in the best desert sone forgotten.
that poor man is soon forgotten, yet vvisdome is better then strength:
though the vvisdome of the poor is contemned, and his words are not heard.
The words of the wise in quietness are heard, more then the cries of Lords
over fools. VVisdome is better then armor of war: and one that misseth of
it, as a Lord over fools, will lose much good. As one dead fly putrifieth
much precious oinctement, so a little folly marreth Folly in one and in one
thing does match harm.
a man precious for vvisdome and glory. VVisdome is rare: and to have the heart
on the right hand. But to have the heart on the left hand, that is common to the
fool: whose heart fails in the plain way, and he tells all that he is a
fool. And in such a world, what study of the Law can bread a blessed throne
on earth. The Spirit of rulers often rises against a dutiful subject: Hatted
from rulers makes many leave the care of their place to their harm.
as did Salomons against Jeroboam: he left his place and fled to Egypt: and
became the ruin of Salomons throne. Here a soft cure might have delayed much
sin. An other evel is great and common: appearing notably in the unlawful
kingdom of Ephraim. The fools of the ten tribes were set on high, and false
Prophets; and the truly rich sat down lovv. Servantes sat on horseback and
Princes vvalked upon the ground. This people might know that great is the
vanity of governements here. Roboam in Judah likewise paid the price of that,
extolling foolish young men, and contemning old sages. And King Ioas most
notably: yelding from his rich counselors, to the foolish Idoleservers. And
his grandfather Ioram greatly vvanted vvisdome that lost all Edoms subjection,
and advaunced fools to kill his own bowels, and to dye by torment of
bowels. And as Saul by folly hoping to defeat David, dug a pit which him
self fell into: So King Ochozias joining with Israel, brake an hedge, that the
Serpent Iehu stange him. And of all Kings vvanting vvisdome, and of all in
high place, and of ill bent, away from God, these Proverbes will be verified,
he that removes stones will be greved by them, and he that cleaves vvood,
shall be endangered by it, if the iron be blunt, and a man vvhett not the edge,
but be vehement in strength: vehemence in a blunt cause, will cause danger.
VVisdome from Gods words of right, will only bring good success: teaching
to bevvare of Satan's deceites, vvher a sting at the first is past cure. All the
Kings of Israel followed Ieroboams worshipping of calves: being so sttong at
the first: without using holy advise: that afterward there could be no use
of enchanters. All the Prophets vvarninges were nothing: all that Jonas
vvhale, and Nineuie taught: all that Osec, Amos, Esai, and Micha told, vvroght
little good. As deaf adders they stopped their ears: and would not hear the
voice of any inchanter. Yet the words of the mouth of the wise do bear
grace: as specially the speches in David for the Kingdom of Christ: but the
lips of the fool Jeroboam svvalovved up all his house, when he bade
worship calves at Dan and Bethel, and forbade to go up to Jerusalem. The
beginning of the words of his mouth was foolishnes, and the end of his mouth
an evell madness. The other Kings foolish before God, multiplied words
against Judah, but savv not their fall. Great toil they took, family after
family, and vvearied them selves in their Idols: being as men that knevv not
the way to the city. And such were Hoseas, Amos, and Esai blame Israel for
this.
all the Kings of Israel, and the wicked of Roboams Kingdom. And vvo be to
the kingdom, where the Princes be given to feasting: as the true noble and
sobre bring happiness. A King dome is like an house: vvher by slougth the timber
work rotteth, and by dissolute hand, the house will be dropped through: when
they make feasts for laughter, and that wine cheer the heart, and money must
affordall. And herein the meddlers with Kings find their own ruin; and
this vanity is common. But they that look to the kingdom of Christ, will not
in thought meddle with Caesar: for listeners will fly to report all that is
once uttered. But men should ambitiously Cha. 11.
seek to meddle with their own matters, and to do good for the hope to come:
as Pilgromes and strangers. This vvil be a casting of seed upon moist ground:
which will fructify: that as one soovveth he shall reap. Therefore while
we have time we should do good to all: lest God alter our ability, or
occasion. The clouds and trees teach that: the clouds fall to moysten the
herbs, and vvher the trees fruct falls, gatherers will be ready. And herein
we should not be casting doubts, either for others success, or lest we in
time want our selves, of our joys. The husbandman plovv eth in hope: not
loking to the clouds for sovving or reaping: as we know not the vvindes
way, nor the Embryones grouth, so we know not how sone God alters times
from life to death: from planting to vnrooting, In this variety we should
serve the time. and omit no occasion, and Israel had experience of all these
vvher the elected fathers had often sons rejected, and fathers lost left
sons to be found o^t: ^ill whole apostasy rooted out the nation.
from building to breaches: from laughter to vveping, from seking, to losing:
from spech to silence, from love to hatred, from peace to war: from youth to
old age, morning and evening we should not be weary doing good: for in due
time we shall reap, if we do not faint. It is a good thing for one to chere
his own life, will man's heart say: but long and merry life will be nothing
saving vanity: when we think upon the time after this life, how it shall
never have end. This thought will make young men little joy in the morning of
age: considering that God will bring them into judgment. And the vvekenes of
our earthly tabernacle should put us in mind hourly. For days void of all
delight will sone come: when our eyes, ribs, arms, stomach, ears, and
tongue, and all helps Chap. 12
of voice and the legs fail: and graynes buddeth, and we are shaken off
like a grasshopper: and the chine and liver all joy falls: and sorrow upon
sorrow befalls.
and brain pan all vvil be rent, and man returns to his endless home, and
mourners go about in the street. This may teach us how all temporal things
be vainesse, and teach from Scriptures to find out Christ his Kingdom: that
when the outvvard man is corrupted, the inward man be fully renewed. For
Christ is our life: and to die in him, that is all our gain. And man's sone
passage hence up to Gods throne, to receive according to the works done by
the body, good or evell should print this in our hearts. And we should give
more abundant head to Koheleth his words: lest they flow aside from our
eyes, as they from Ephraim, Prove. 3. and from the men of Jerusalem: Eb. 2.
whom sin platting about them entangled to destruction. Koheleth, as all the
other Prophets, has words of delight, and Scripture of right: words of
truth: as Goades to direct us, and nails fastened, in the sheep foldes, given
from Christ the only Shepherd, of whom David spoke Psa. 72. his last words:
and therein these. Blessed be the Eternal, God, the God of Israel, and blessed
be his glorious name for ever: and let all the earth be filled with his glory.
Amen, yea amen.

A TREATISE OF THE Holy Trinity
NOW, for the trinity, I will follow those textes at which the very Jews be
amassed, and I will make my style altogether from their words, saving that,
their future, for MESSIAH to come, I will turn into the time passed. In the
Babylonian Thalmud in Sanedrin fol. 38. excellent places be cited for unity and
plurality: touching also MESSIAH from Dan. 7. where Rabbi Sadaias speaks
matter worthy regard: also from Ex. 23. where Ramban writteth well: and I saak
Ben Arama upon Ex. brings the whole Thalmudique consent, that MESSIAH is
greater then the Angels and infers thereupon that he must be God: which
matter Koheleth touches for plura lity of Persons, in Boreeicha Thy
creatours. I have joined an Ebrew style to the English: that the one may help
the other.

OF THE UNITY IN GODHEAD AND PLVRALITY of Persons.
THE ETERNAL, our God, the Eternal is one: and his nature is made known by
himself: for the Persons, the father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, and we
must follow and mark the mystery of the Scriptures for the plural number, and
for the Son of God: and for the holy Spirit. In these there is a great
mystery: Let US make man according to OUR image: This for the persons. And for
the unity of natures this: God created man after his own image. So, Come Let
US go down, and Let US confound there their Lip. And, the Lord Went down
to see the city, and the tower. And, For there, Elohim WERE reucaled unto him:
and, the God which heard me in the day of my distress: And, who is like thy
people Israel, one nation on the earth for whom THEY went, even Elohim, to
redeem them unto him self, for a People, And, Until THRONES were set up: and
the Everlasting Sat: what is to be said of that, One for himself, and one for
the Son of David: as it is written: behold with the clouds of heaven one
like the Son of Man came: This is Messiah our righteousness. And is it not
written of the Messiah? Meek and riding upon an Ass? In deed he came in
humblenes, and came not upon (...) horses with pride. And whereas it was written
with the clouds of heaven: They are the Angels of the host of heaven. This is
the great dignity which the Creator gave Messiah. And to the Everlasting did
they bring him: as it is written: The Eternal said unto my Lord, sit thou on
my right hand; etc. A certain Saducie said, to Rabbi Idith in the Babil. Thal.
San. fol. 38. It is written: and to Moses he said: Come up unto the Eternal:
unto me: he should have said. This is Matatron (the Angel that led the People)
of whom it is written. My name is in him. It is written: rebel not against
him, he will not bear with your sins. Mark also the commentary of Ramban
upon these words; Behold, I send mine Angel before thee, to keep thee in the
way, and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared: regard him, and
obey his voice. Provoke him not, for he will not for bear your Sins: for my
name is in him. Thus there speaks Ramban. In the propriety of the text, this
Angel which is promised here, is the Angel the redemer in whom the great Name
(God) is For in Iah Iehova is the Rock Everlasting. And the same said: I am the
God of Bethel. It is the manner of the King to tarry in his house. And the
Scripture calls him Angel because the world is governed by this Person. And
words of the general Rabines concerning Christ are these: in Isaak Ben Arama
upon the Law fol. 76. Our Doctors say, who art thou great mountain? This is
Christ. Ana wherefore is his name called great? because he shall be greater then
the Fathers, as it is written: Behold my servant that prosper, he shall be high
and exalted; I Will shall be higher then Abraham and exalted above Moses: and he
shall be far above the Angels (...) of ministry: of whom it is written Ezekiel.
^. They had height, and they had terror. And if they mark and understand this,
they do know that the dignity of Messiah is above the Angels of ministry. In
that sense should not he be God him self: as they appropriate unto him this
honorable title. This has Been Arama. And most plainly does the same man's
words say, that God spoke this of Messiah: ps. 89. I will be his father, and he
shall be my son. As Aben Ezra says of, Kiss the Son: This is Messiah. And
of the holy Spirit. Genesis 1. 2. they say: This is the Spirit of Messiah the
King: Zohar upon Gen: and commonly from Jeremy 23: as in Bathra. sect. 5. fol.
75. B. That he is, Jehovah our righteousness. And thus they do in words agree
with our holy Apostles. But they turn aside like a vvarping bovv: vvherof I
vvil now speak by the help of God.

OF IVDAISME DISANNVLLING COHELETH AND ALL the Bible.
One great Rabbin who lived 42 3 years ago, who gathered the Jerusalem
Thalmud and the Babylonian into an easier order, and translated what he
brings into familiar Ebrew: (they be rare Jews that understand the
Ierusalemy, or the Babylonian specially) He ends his volumes in the common
place of Messiah: who shall be translated and cited in his own words: to show
how the whole nation misseth extremely of Christ, the end of the law: though
in tongue, they agreed with the Apostles.

Rambam, or R. Moses Ben Maymony in Misnaioth Tom. 4. tract. Kings Sect. 11.
and 12 thus writes. Messiah the King shall stand up and restore the Kingdom
of the house of David to the old state of the first government: and he shall
build the temple, and gather the dispersed of Israel, and the Laws shall be
restored. They shall offer their offringes, and keep the seventh years rest,
according to every commandment delivered in the Law. And every one that
believes not in him, and he that looks not for his coming, he denies not
only all the other prophets but also the Law, and Moses our Doctor. For
behold the Law testifies of him: as it is said: And the Eternal thy Elohim
shall restore thy captivity and pity thee, and gather thee again, etc. After
thy dispe^^ion shall be into the extremity of the heavens: Yet the Eternal will
bring thee again. And these speech set fourth in the Law, they are
abridgements of all the speches which are spoken by all the prophets. And
specially in the (...) Section of Balaam as is spoken, and there he speaks of
two Messiah: of the first Messiah which is David which saved Israel from the
hand of their enemies: And of the latter Messiah, which shall stand up of his
children: which shall teach Israel in the end. And in the former place he
says: I shall see him: But not now: I shall view him, but not near: This is
King Messiah. A star from Jacob: This is David: and a scepter: That is King
Messiah: And He shall smit the Lords of Moab, He, is David: as it is said: And
he stroke Moab, And measured them by cord: And he shall vnwall all the sons
of Seth: He is Christ the King: as it is said: And he shall rule from sea to
sea. And Edom shall be an inheritance: Even to David as it was said. And Edom
became servants to David. And Seyr shall be an inheritance: etc. This is to
Messiah the King. As it said: And Saviors shall arise on mount Sio^ etc. Also
concerning the cities of refuge he says: thou may add yet three cities etc.
But this has never been done. And the Lord did not command any thing in
vain. But the case stands according to the words of the Prophets: and it
needs no disputing for all books are full of this matter.

And Let it never come to thy mind that Messiah the King needs to work by
signs and wonders: For beho^h Rabbi Akiba was a great Doctor among the
Doctors of the Thalmud: and he was Harnes bearer to Ben Coziba, the King, and
he thought that he was the King Messiah. Both he deemed, and all the Doctors
of his age, that he was King Messiah, until he was killed for Sin. when he
was killed, they knew he was not: And the Doctors asked of him, for no sign
for no wonder. And the ground of the matters thus stands: That the Law, that
the statutes and rightes of it, stand for ever, yea for ever and ever. And
nothing may be added, nothing may be taken away. And if a King stand up from
the house of David studieng the Law, and busiedin the commandments (...) as
David his father, according to the written Law, and the Law of traditions, and
compel Israel to walk in it, and to repair the ruins of it, and to fight the
wars of the Eternal, behold this is sure, that he is the Messiah, if his
doing prosper and he build the temple in place, and gather the dispersed of
Israel, behold that man is Messiah out of all doubt. And he will settle all the
world, to serve the Lord togeither: As it is said: then I will turn unto
nations pure Lips, that all may call upon the name of the Eternal and serve
him with one accord. Perek: or Section 12. and the last of all his Thalmud. Let
it not come into thy heart, that in the days of Messiah, any thing shall be
abrogated from the custom of the world, or that any newnes shall be in the frame
of the world. Nothing so. The world goes on in the same rate and that which is
said in Esaias And the wolf shall dwell with the Lamb: and the Leopard shall
lodge with the Kid, that is a parable and a dark spech. The sense of the spech
is: That Israel shall dwell in safety, among the wicked of the world: which are
Likened to the wolf and Leopard. As it is said: the Evening vvoolf shall spoil
them, and the Leopard shall vvatch at their cities. And they shall turn unto
the Law of truth: and they shall not spoil, nor destroy, but shall eat their
store in quietness: as Israel. as it is said: The Lion as the Ox, shall eat
straw. And so in other matters the like which are written of Messiah, they are
resemblances. And in the days of Christ the King it shall be known to all, what
things were resembled: and to what matters the hid meaning tended. The
Doctors say there is no difference betwixt this world, and the days of Christ,
but only the service under the Kingdoms. It may be seen by the propper sense
of the prophets, that in the beginning of the days of Messiah shall be the war
of Gog and Magog, and before the wars of Gog and Magog, a prophet shall stand
up, to settle Israel, and to praepare their (...) hearts, as it said: Behold I
send unto you Elias etc. And he comes not to Pollute the pure, or to purify
the polluted, nor to disable the fully allowable, nor to allow the manifestly
disallowable, but to settle peace in the world: as it is said, and he shall
turn the hearts of fathers unto the Children. And there be some of the Doctors
who say, that before the coming of Messiah, Elias shall come: But all these
matters and such like does no man know, what they shall be until they be: The
matters are matters closed up with the prophets: also our Doctors have no
Kabala for these matters, But with wresting of the textes. And therefore they
are at schism for these matters: And these matters are in no case, for their
order of being, or particularities, any foundation of Law. Let not a man busy
himself in the Agadoth: (or fables wittilype^ned) nor be long in Midrasoth
commentaries of allusions which are spoken of these matters, and such: and let
him not lay them for a fou^datio^: For they teach neither faith, nor Love. So
let not a man reckon the End. ( Yet the Angel Gabriel and Daniel did to the
very hour Daniel. 9) as our Doctors say Let their soul breath out who reckon
the ends. But let him expect and believe according to the general rule which
we have expounded. In the days of Messiah the King, when his Kingdom shall be
settled, and all Israel shall be gathered unto him, all they shall be genealogized
according to their familyes, by his mouth from the holy Spirit, which shall
rest upon him: as it is written, he shall sit and he shall purify and
cleanse: The sons of Levy first shall he cleanse, and thus say: This man is of
the Priests family: and this man of Levies genealogy: and he shall reject
them which are not of the Genealogy of Israel. Behold a certain One said: And
the Ambassador said unto them etc until there stands Up a Priest with Vrim
and Thummim. Behold thou art taught, that by the holy Spirit the Principal
shall be referred to their Genealogy, and the genealogized (...) shall be made
known. But he will not genealogize Israel, that is, them who are not of Levy,
but generally of what tribe they be: showing that this man and this man, is of
such a tribe. But he will not tell, that such a man is of special virtue, such
an one, of an Heathen mother: such an one, a Slave: But of right, will Let them
sink that will have their Sun to set.

The Doctors and prophets desired not the days of Messiah, neither to rule
over all the world nor to subdue the Heathen, nor to be extolled of nations,
nor to drink and make merry, but to have Leisure for the Law and wisdom, and
have no tax master and Hinderer, that they may be worthy of life Eternal. And
in that time there shall be no hunger, no war, no emulation, nor strife, for
goods shall flow plentifully. And all delicates shall be found as Plentiful as
dust: And the world shall study nothing cls, but only to know the Eternal.
Therefore there shall be great Doctors, and skillful in hid speches, and they
shall apprehend the knowledge of their Creator, according to the force of their
strength; as it is written: For the Earth shtlbe full of the knowledge of the
Eternal, as the waters that cover the Sea.

The Ebreu that follows is the Jews continued spech of their mistaken
Messiah; But excedeth much the English translation in space, because I would
have a fair and great Letter, After shall come a short ce^sure upon the jews
hope for their Messiah: and then: The Chaldy Paraphrastes own argument of
Coheleth, and the holy Text.

A Censure upon the Jew Rambam.
He speakeah truly that Balaam prophecieth of Christ: but he little marketh
what Balaam taught: by that: Messiah shall vnvvall all the sons of Seth.
Yffor destroying all their towns wall this were spoken, that were no
benefit. Nether vvil Solomon suffer to hope for one age to have any thing, the
like vvherof was not before: either for peace or vvarres. Paul expounds the
vnvvalling of Seth sons. 2. Cor. 10. Our armor is not carnal but mighty for
God: to pull down strong holds: This Balaa^ meant By more cities of refuge,
Rambam seeks corners. thus he reasons:

Yfvve had not yet all cities of refuge promised, there is a returning unto our
land of Chanaan to have them. But yet we had not all promised:

Therefore there remains a return to Chanaan.

The assumption is double vveake. The Law gave leave to make more, if they
conquered more: as Ruben Gad and Manasses conquered more. and Permissio^s be in
Laws no less then commandments. Besides we may not say that Ruben Gad and
Manasses made no cities more of refuge: because it is not recorded. The vvitty
Aben Ezra notes upon Gad, Genesis 4. 9. that much is vnrecorded, which Jacob
speaks of him. Thus Rambams hope is the web of a spider. And concerning
building of Jerusalem, what can that profit more then it profited in Salomons
time: when sone all came to nothing: And now the world is 5531. years old:
and their rule is: that six thousand shall end it: which will be at 469. and
what can that time work to change the whole world. Touching Elias: He
tottereth: But we know the case: and he might learn Christ and the heavenly
Jerusalem of our. N. Test. and the Chaldy upon Eccles. 1. v. 2. tells that
their Messiah is but vanity.

(...) KOHELETH.
Ecclesiastes.
1. The words of Koheleth, the Son of David, King in Jerusalem.

2. Vanity of vanities says Coheleth, vanity of vanities, all (is) vanity.

3. what permanent good has man in all his labor which he takes under the
Son;

4. An age passes, and an age comes: though the earth abides still.

5. Both the Son arises, and the Son goes down: and to his place does
he breath: there he arises.

6. He walks unto the South, and compasses unto the North: The wind
whirleth, whirleth, walks, and into his circuits returns the wind.

7. All the rivers go into the sea, yet the sea is not full: unto the place
whither the rivers go, they return to go

8. All things travel, man cannot utter it. The ey is not satisfied with
seeing: nor the ear filled with hearing.

9. That which has been is the same which shall be: and that which has been
done, is the same which shall be done: and there is nothing new under the sun.

10. Is there any thing of which one may say: Behold this, it is new? it has
been already, in the old time that has been before us.

11. There is no remembrance of the former, also of the latter which shall be
there shall be no remembrance of them with those that shall be after.

12. I Koheleth was King over Israel in Jerusalem.

13. And I did apply my mind to search and try the wisdom of all, which is
done under heaven. This is a sore occupation whidh GOD has given to the sons
of man, to be occupied therein.

14. I considered all the works that are done under the sun: and behold, all
is vanity, and vexation of spirit.

15. The crooked cannot be made straight and that which is vva^ti^g cannot be
made up.

16. I thought in my heart, saying: behold, I have amplified and augmented
wisdom above all which have been before me in Jerusalem: Yea my heart saw much
wisdom, and knowledge.

17. And I applied my heart to know wisdom and knowledge, madness and
foolishnes: I knew that this also was a vexation of spirit.

18. For in much wisdom is much grief: and he that increases knowledge,
increases sorrow.

Chapter. 2.
1. I said in mine heart, come now, I will try thee with mirth. Therefore use
good-, cheer. But behold also this was vanity.

2. Of laughter I said, thou art mad: and of mirth, why do thou this?

3. I consulted in my heart to continue my flesh in good cheer: (yet I applied
my mind unto vvisdome) and to lay hold upon folly; until I might see what
were best for the sons of man, to do under the heavens, the number of the
days of their life.

4. I made me great works: I built me houses: I planted me vineyards: I made
me gardens and orchards: and I planted in them trees of all fruit.

5. I made me pooles of water, to water with them the vvood growing with
trees.

7. I bought servants and maids: and I had such borne in my house: also I had
great possession of oxen, and sheep, above all that were before me in
Jerusalem.

8. I gathered me also silver and gold, and the peculiar jewels of Kings, and
countries: I provided me singers, men and women: and the delights of the
sons of men, instruments of all sorts:

9. which as I was great I increased above all that were before me in
Jerusalem. Also my wisdom remained with me.

10. And whatsoever my eyes desired, I witheld it not from them: I withdrew not
my heart from any joy. For mine heart rejoiced in all my labor: and this was my
portion of all my travail.

11. Then I looked upon the works which my hands had made, and unto the
labor which I had labored to do: and behold, all was vanity and a vexing of
spirit: and there is no permanent good under the sun.

12. Then I looked to see wisdom and madness, and folly, And what can a man do
that would try after the King; only that which has been done already.

13. Then I saw that vvisdome excels folly, as light excels darkness.

14. The wise man has his eyes in his head and the fool walks in darkness.
But I saw that the same happ should happen unto them all*

15. Then said I in my heart, as it happens unto the fool shall it happen
unto me also. And to what end then should I more study for wisdom. Then I said
in my heart that this also was vanity.

16. For there shall be no remembrance of the wise, as none of the fool for
ever. Because things past in the days to come are all forgotten.

17* And how dies the wise man as the fool? Therefore I hated life. For I
was grieved at the work which was wrought under the sun. Because all
was vanity and a vexing of spirit.

I hated also all my labor, wherein I had labored under the sunn: which I must
leave to the man that shall be after me.

19. And who knows vvhither he shall be wise or foolish: and shall rule all my
labor, wherein I have labored, and wherein I have showed my self wise under
the sun; This also was a vanity.

20. Therefore I went about to make my heart weary, of all the labor wherein I
had labored under the sun.

21. For there is a man whose labor is in wisdom and in knowledge and in good
dealing: yet to a man which has not labored therein, shall he give his
portion. This also is vanity and great grief.

22. For what has man for all his labor, and for the vexation of his heart,
that he labors under the sun.

23. For all his days are sorrows, and and his occupatio^ disquietnes, and
even in the night his heart takes no rest. This also is a vanity.

24. There is nothing so good for a man as that he eat, and drink, and cheer
his soul by his labor* Though this allo I saw that from the hand of God, it
comes.

25. For who should eat, or who should quickly do that, rather then I: for my
labors?

26. Now, to the man which is acceptable before him God gives wisdom and
gladness: but to the sinner he gives occupation to gather and to store to give
to him that is acceptable before God. This also is a vanity and a vexing of
spirit.

Chapter. 3.
1. All things have a time* and all have a season under the heaven.

2. A time to be borne, and a time to dye: a time to plant, and a time to pluck
up the planted.

3. A time to slay, and a time to heal: a time to break down, and a time to
build.

4. A time to weep and a time to laugh: a time to make lamentation and a time
to dance.

5. A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones: a time to embrace
and a time to be far from embracing.

6. A time to seek and a time to lose: a time to keep, and a time to cast
away.

7. A time to rent, and a time to sow: a time to be silent, and a time to speak.

8. A time to love, and a time to hate: a time of war, and a time of peace.

9. what permanent good has the doer wherein he labors.

10. I have seen the business that God has given to the sons of men to
occupy them therein.

11. He has made every thing goodly in his time. but he has set the world in
there heart, that a man cannot find out the work which God does, from the
beginning to the end.

12. I know that there is nothing good in them, but to rejoice and do good
whiles one lives.

13. Also that any man eats and drinks, and jnioyeth the good of all his
labors, this is the gift of God.

14. I know that all which God does it will be sure for ever: and God does all
that men should live in fear before him.

15. That which has been is now* and that which is to be, now has been: and
God will bring a gain, that which is now passing away.

16. Moreover, I marked under the sunn the place of judgment: there was
injurye. and the place of justice: there was jnjury.

17. I said in my heart: the just and the vnejust God will judge, for there is a
time for every thing and for every deed, there.

18. I said in my heart, after the manner of the sons of man, when God made
them known, that I saw how they are beasts: they to themselves*

19. An hap befalls the sons of man, and an hap befalls the beast:
and they have one hap: as the one dies so dies the other: and man excels
not the beast. For all is vanity.

20. All came from the dust, and all returns unto the dust.

21. For who considers the spirit of man which does ascend upward: and the
spirit of the beast which does descend downe-wards, unto the earth.

22. Then I saw that there is nothing better then that a man joy of his works.
For that is his portion. For who can bring him to see what shall be after him.

Chap. 4
1. But when I considered all the oppressed ones which were greved under the
sunn: and behold the oppressed had the tears, but they had no co^forter, for
the oppressors had the strong hand., and the other had no conforter.

2. Then I commended the dead which already are dead, above the living, which
are alive yet*

3. And above them both him that as yet has not been: because he has not
seen the wrong doing which is under the sun.

4. For I marked all labor, and all industry of works: how it brings envy
to a man from his neighbor.

5. The fool foldeth his hands, and eats up his own flesh. Saying.

6. Better is an ha^dfull with ease, the^ two fistfulls with labor and
fretti^g of spirit.

7. Again I marked a vanity under the sun.

8. There is one and none the second: and he has neither son nor brother: and
there is no end of all his labor; and his eye cannot be satisfied with riches.
And for whom should I labor and defraud my soul of good? This also is a
vanity and a grievous toil.

9. Couples are better then one. For they have a good reward for their labor.

19. For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow: and woe is the one
which falls, and has not a second to lift him up.

11. And if a couple sleep they shall be warm: but how can one alone be warm.

12. And if some one be stronger then one, two will stand against him, and a
threefold thread will not sone be broken.

13. A poor and wise child is better then a King that is old and foolish:
which cannot abide to be advised any more.

14. For out of the prison he comes forth to reign: when as he that is borne
in his kingdom is made poor.

15. 3. I saw all the living which walk under the su^ne, attend upon the child
which shall stand up the others place.

16. There is no end with any people, for any that is over them. Also the later
will not rejoice in the same. So this also is vanity and vexation of spirit.

17. Look to thy feet when thou go into the house of God. For he is nearer
to hear, then to sacrifice. There the gift of fools. For they know not that
they do evil.

Chap. 5
1. Be not rash with thy mouth, nor let thy heart be hasty to utter any thing
before God. For God is in the heavens, and thou art on the earth. Therefore let
they words be few.

2. For as dreams come by much business, so the voice of a fool has much
babbling.

3. when thou vowest a vow to God, differ not to pay it. For he deliteth not in
fools. what thou do vow, pay.

4. Let not thy mouth make thy flesh sin, neither say before the Angel, that
it was an error. wherefore should God be angry for thy voice, and destroy the
works of thy hands?

5. For as in many dreams be vanities: so in many words. But fear thou God.

6. If oppression of the poor, and robbery of judgeme^t and justice, thou
behold in a co^try, marveyle not at the matter. For an higher then the high one
does mark: and there be high above them. HIGH The Tri nity.


7. The commodity of ground is for all. The King is made servant to the field.

8. He that loves money, cannot be fed with money: or he that loves any
wealth which has not fruit.

9. when this good is much, they be many to eat it: and what good comes to
the owners, but the view of there eyes.

10. The sleep of the labourer is sweet, whether he sleep little or much but
the fulness of the rich suffers him not to sleep.

11. There is a sore sickness which I have seen under the sun: riches kept of
the owner, to his own harm.

12. And the riches perish by some evil business: and he begett a son and
nothing comes to his hand.

13. As he came out of his mothers womb naked, he returns to go as he came:
and he cannot carry away any thing of his labor, which he may bear in his hand.

14. This also is a sore sickness. Even as he came so he goes away: and what
permane^t good has he that he labored for the wynd?

15. Also all his days in darkness does he eat and much anger and by his own
sickness and payning.

16. Behold what I have seen: it is a good-thing to eat and to drinck, and to
enjoy the good, in all a man's labor which he takes under the su^ne the number
of the days of his life which God gives him: for this is his portion.

17. Though to every man to whom God has given riches and treasures, and
gives him power to eat thereof, and to take his part, and to enjoy his labor:
this is a gift of God.

18. For, he will not much think upon the days of his life: whom God busieth
in the cheering of his heart.

Chapter. 6.
There is an evil which I saw under the sun, and it is much among men:

2. Some man, to whom God has given riches, and wealth, and honor, and he
wants nothing for his soul of all that he desires: yet God gives him not
power to eat thereof, but a strange man shall eat it up. This is vanity, and
this is an evil sickness.

3. If a man beget an hundred children, and live many years, and though the
days of his years be multiplied and his soul be not satisfied with good
things, and he have not wherewith to be buried. I say that an untimely fruit is
better then he.

4. For he comes into vanity, and goes into darkness: and his name shall be
covered with darkness.

5. He also has not seen, nor felt the sunn: he was in better case then the
other.

6. Yea though he had lived a thousand years, twice told, and see no good. Do
not all men go to one place?

7. All the labor of man is for his mouth: yet the soul is not filled.

8. Then what has the wise more then the fool? and what less has the poor
man of knowledge; to walk before the living?

9. The eyesight is better then the walking of the soul. Also that is vanity
and vexing of the spirit.

10. whatsoever one be, his name was given of old: and it is known that he is
earthly man, and is not able to contend with him that is stronger then he.

Chapter. 7.
1. When there be many things that increase vanity what permanent good thing
can a man have?

2. For who knows what is good for a man in life, the number of days of the
life of his vanity which he shall spend as a shadow; for who can show unto man
what shall be after him under the sun?

3. A good name is better then a good ointment, and the day of death then the
day that one is borne.

4. It is better to go to the house of mourning then to go to the house of
feasting, because this is the end of all men: and the living shall lay it to
his heart.

5. Sadness is better then laughter For under heavynes of countenance the heart
may be merry.

6. The heart of the wise in the house of mourning: But the heart of fools is in
the house of mirth.

7. Better it is to hear the rebuke of a wise man, then that a man should
hear the song of fools.

8. For as the noise of thorns is under the pott, so is the laughter of
fools. This also is vanity.

9. Because oppression may make the wise madd* and rewards destroy the heart:

10. The end of a thing is better the^ the beginning: The pacient in spirit is
better then the hauty in spirit.

11. Be not rash of spirit to be angry. For anger lodges in the bosom of
fools.

12. Say not, how comes it to pass that the former days were better the^
these. For thou can not ask that from wisdom.

13. wisdom is good with possessions: and an excellent commodity for men while
they behold the sunn.

14. For wisdom brings shadow: money brings shadow* but knowledge has the
preeminence* wisdom keeps alive them that have it.

15. Consider the work of God. And who can make straight that which he has
made crooked?

16. In the day of good, use the good* and in the sore time, consider it. God
has so set the one by the other that man cannot find no blame in him.

17. I have seen all things in the days of my vanity. There is a just man
that perished in his justice, and there is a wicked man that continues long in
his malice.

18. Be not thou just much: and be not too wise: wherefore should thou undo
thy self.

19. Be not too wicked: neither be a fool. wherefore should thou perish
before thy ordinary time.

20. It is good that thou lay hold on this: but yet withdraw not thy hand from
that. And he that fears God shall come out of them all.

21. wisdom shall strengthen the wise man more then ten mighty Princes that
are in the city, can give strength.

22. Though there is no man just in all the (...) Iam. 3. 2.
earth, that does good and misseth not.

23. Take not heed to all the words that men speak, least thou do hear thy
servant speak evil of thee.

24. For often times also thy heart knows that thou also have spoken evil of
others.

25. All this have I tried by wisdom. I thought, I vvillbe wise: but it went
far from me.

26. That which is far off, and deep, deep, who can find it out.

27. I turned me heartily, to know and to espy, and to seek wisdom and
conceytes and to know the mischief of folly and foolishnes of madness.

28. And I find one thing bitterer then death: Even the woman, who is nets,
and her heart snares: and her hands be bands. He that pleases God shall be saved
from her: but the sinner shall be caught by her.

29. Behold, says Koheleth, this have I found, examyning one by another, to
find out conceyts.

30. But this which further my soul sought, I found not out.

The conceytes of a man one of a thousand I Koheleth blames not wom^ kind: as
would translate him many: but their de^e slights: as experie^ced in his own
wives who deceaved him.
found out, but of a woman with all these qualityes, I found not out.

31. Only behold this have I found out, that GOD made Adam plain: but they
sought out many conceytes.

Chap. 8.
1. Who is like the wise? and how rare is he that knows the nature of
matters? VVisdome in a man will lighten his face: and the hardness of his face
will be altered.

2. I say, regard the Kings mouth yet after the oath to God.

3. Be not rash to go out of his sight: stand not in an evil matter. For he
can do whatsoever he will.

4. where the word of the King is, power S. Paul R. 13. ha^dleth this place
against Jews which would not obey heathen: and preventing the Popesty ranny,
that should a rise in Rome.
is. And who may say unto him, what will thou do?

5. He that keeps the law shall feel no evil thing: and the wise heart will
know time and judgment.

6. For every thing has his time and jugment: But the mischief of man is much
upon him:

7. Because he knows not what is to come. and how things will fall out, who
ca^ tell?

8. Man is not ruler over the spirit, to retain the spirit: neither has he
power in the day of death: nor armor for the battle: and no striving will
help them that use it.

9 All this have I seen, setting my heart toward every work that is wrought
under the sun: That there is a time when a man From auctority and government
represe^ting Gods presence.
rules over men to his own harm.

10. And in that sort I saw the wicked come to the grave, and they passed away,
and went from the holy place, and they were forgotten in the city where they
had so dealt. So this was a vanitye.

11. Because sentence upon evil dealing is not executed quickly, therefore the
heart of the sons of man is fully bent in them to do evil.

12. Though a sinner do evil an hundredth times and long continue: yet I know
that it shall be well with them that fear God, which reverence his presence.

13. But it shall not be well with the wicked: neither can he long continue
days, which are but a shadow: he which lives not in fear before God.

14. There is a vanity which is done upon the earth, that there be just men, to
whom it comes according to the work of the wicked: and there be wicked men to
whom it comes according to the work of the just: I thought that this also is
vanitye.

15. And I praised joy. For a man has no better thing then to eat and to
drink and to rejoice* for this will stick to him of his labor, the days of
his life that God has given him under the sunn.

16. When I applied mine heart to know wisdom, and to behold the business that
is done on the earth, how day and night a man would not see sleep with his eyes,

17. Then I marked all works of GOD that man cannot find out the work which
is done under the sun, Though man labor never so much to seek, yet he
cannot find it: yea allthough the wisest think to know it, he cannot find it.

Chap. 9.
1. FOR all this have I applied unto mine heart: even to try out all this; that
the just and the wise, and there works are in the hands of God: neither love
nor not manifested by outward things: yet sure of reward to life eternal in
paradise: when they co^me^d their soul to the hands of God.
hatred does men discern, by all that is before them.

2. Even all they find, as if all had one happ, the just and the unjust: the
good and the clean, and the unclean, the sacrificing, and he that sacrifices
not: the good and the bad have alike: the swearer as he that reverenceth an
oath.

3. This is the most grievous of all that is done under the sun, that all
have one hap. Also the heart of the sons of man is full of evil, and madness
is in their hearts whiles they live, and afterward they go to the dead.

4. For all that be yet accompanied unto all the Living It is evident that
these words are spoken in the person of the wicked: and should be pronounced
as imitating their person. So have I printed them in another character.
(say the men of an evil heart) they have assurance. For it is better with the
dog alive, then with the Lion that is dead.

5. For the living know that they shall dye: but the dead know nothing at
all: neither have they any more a revvard. For their remembrance is forgotten.

6. Also their love, and their hatred and their envy is already gone and they
have no more portion for ever, in all that is done under the sun.

7. Go, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a cheerful heart.
For God now accepts thy works.

8. At all times let thy garments be white and let not oil be lacking upon
thine head.

9. Enjoy life with the wife which thou do love, all thy days of vain
life: which HE has given thee, under the Sun: all thy vain days. For this
is thy portion in life, and in thy Labor which thou do take under the sunn.

10. All that thy hand can find to do, do it; as thou can. For there is
nether work, nor invention, nor knowledge, not vvisdome in the grave vvhither
thou go.

11. Again I marked under the sun: That the suift win not the race: nor
the valiant the victory: nor the wise the bread: nor nor the subtle, riches*
nor the cunning, favor: But a time and occurrent happens to them all.

12. For assuredly man knows not his time. As fishes are taken in a
mischevous net, and as birds are caught in the snare* So they, the sons of
man are entangled, at the evil time when it falls upon them sudde^ly.

13. I have also seen this wisdom under the sun* and me thought it great.

14. A little city had few men in it, and a great King came against it; and
compassed it about, and builded fortes against it.

15. And there was found therein a poor and wise man: and he saved the city by
his wisdom. But none remembered this poor man.

16. Then said I. Better is wisdom then strength, yet the wisdom of the
poor is despised, and his words are not heard.

17. The words of the wise are more heard in quietness then a Lords cry over
fools.

18. Better is wisdom then weapons of war as one vncircu^spect destroys
much good.

Chapter. 10.
1. One dead fly putrifieth, and corrupts much precious ointment* so does a
little folly, him that is in estimation for wisdom, for glory.

2. The heart of a wise man is at his right hand* but the heart of a fool is at
his left hand.

3. And also when the fool goes by the way his heart fails, and he tells
unto all that he is a fool.

4. If the spirit of him that rules, rises up against the, leave not thy
place. For a soft cure pacifieth great sins.

5. There is an evil that I have seen under the sun: as an error that
proceeds from the face of him that rules.

6. Folly is great height* and the rich sit in low place.

7. I have seen servants on horses, and princes walking as servants on the
ground.

8. He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it: And he that breaks down a
hedge, a serpent shall sting him.

9. He that removes stones shall find sorrow thereby* And he that cleaves wood
shall be heated thereby:

10. when the Iron is dull, and the man whetteth not the Edge, but uses might.
But the best help to bring a thing to good pass, is wisdom.

11. when the serpent has bit before charming then the cunning charmer
profits nothing.

12. The words of the mouth of a wise man give grace: but the lips of a fool
devour himself.

13. The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishnes and the later end of
his mouth is wicked madness.

14. And the fool will multiply words. But the man knows not what shall be.
And who can tell him what is following him?

15. The labor of the foolish does weary him. For he knows not how to go
into the city.

16. woe to the O land whose King is a child: and whose princes eat in the
morning*

17. Blessed art thou O land, whose King is the son of nobles: and whose
Princes eat in time, for strength, and not to drink.

18. By slothfulnes beams come to decay: by holding down the hands the house
droppeth through.

19. Men making feasts to be merry, that wine make glad the living and money
must affoard all.

20. Curse not the King no not yet in thy thought, neither curse the rich in
thy bed chamber: for the foul of the heaven will carry the voice, and the
winged bird will declare the matter.

Chapter* 11.
1. Cast thy seed upon the moist ground: for after many days thou shall find
it.

2. Give a portion to seaue^, and also to eight. For thou know not what
evil shall be upon the earth.

3. If the clouds be full, they will pour fourth rain upon the earth: And if
the trees fruit fall toward the South, or toward the North, i^ the place that
the trees fruict falls, there fruit gatherers will be.

4. He that looks upon the wind, will not sow: and he that looks upon the
clouds shall not reap.

5. As thou know not the way of the wind, as nor of the bones in the belly
of her that is with child* so thou know not the work of God that works
all.

6. In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening remit not thy hand. For,
thou know not whether will come to good: this or that: or whether both
shall be alike good.

7. Surely the light is a pleasant thing: and it is a good thing to the eyes to
behold the su^n.

8. But though a man may live many days, and in them all, be merry, yet let him
remember the days of darkness, that they be the many. whatsoever comes will
be vanity.

9. Rejoice, O young man, in thy childhood, and let thine heart cheer thee, in
the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of
thine eyes. But know that for all these things God will bring thee to judgment.

10. Put away Gods anger from thine heart and remove evil from thyflesh. For
childhood and yonghead is vanity.

Chap. 12.
1. Therefore remember thy Creatours in the days of thy youth, Before the evil
days come, and the years approach, of which thou will say, I have no pleasure
in them.

2. Before the sunn is dark, and the light, and the moon, and the stars, and
the clouds return after the rain.

3. when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow
themselves, and the grinders shall cease because they are few, and they wax
dark that look out by the windows,

4. And the doors shall be shut by the streat, with the base sound of the
grinding, and a man shall stand up at the voice of the bird: and all the
daughters of Music shall be brought low:

5. And men will dread every high place, and fears will be in the way, and the
Almond tree will flourish, and the Grasshopper will be a burden to it self: and
all lust will be dissolved: and a man goes unto his long home; and mourners go
about in the street.

6. Before the silver cord is loosed: and the golden ewer broken, and the
pitcher burst at the well, and the wheel broken at the cestern:

7. And dust return to the earth as it was, and the spirit return to God that
gave it.

8. Vanity of vanities, says Koheleth, all is vanity.

9. And this is a matter of excellency, As Koheleth was wise, still he taught
the people knowledge: and weighed and examined and fitted many parables.

10. Koheleth studied to find words delightful, and scripture rightful:

11. The words of the wise: as goades, and as nails fastened in the
sheepefoldes* being given from one shepherd.

12. And my son give all diligent heed to them. There is no end in making
many books and much reading is a wearynes of the flesh.

13. The sum of the matter is, all being heard: Fear God and keep his
commandments. For this is all the man.

14. For God will bring every deed unto judgment: with every hid thing, whether
it be good or evil

The sum of the matter is, all being heard: Fear God and keep his
Commandments; for this is the man. The Mossorite note I. Th. K. K. Esaias.
Malachy. Lam. Eccl. by the Eb. first letter.

Four rare sentences in the heavenly Ebrew are repeated in the end of the
book, that men should evermore thinck upon them:

Lam. 5. TVRNE US O ETERNAL UNTO THEE, AND WE SHALL BE TVRNED: RENEW OUR DAYS
AS OF OLD. This shows that all comes from God that pitieth. So this v. of
Koheleth moved S. Paul to abide all grief, to keep men from Daniels flames:

So Esaias 66. FROM MONTH TO MONTH AND FROM SABBAT TO SABBAT SHALL ALL FLESH
COME TO WORSHIP BEFORE ME SAYS THE ETERNAL. This shows an utter abrogating
of Moses: seeing all nations cannot come every week to Jerusalem.

The last is, Malachi v. last save one: BEHOLD I SEND UNTO YOU AN ELIAS A
PROPHET, BEFORE THE GREAT AND FEARFVLL DAY OF THE ETERNAL COMES: From that
speech closing the prophets, the Angel Gabriel begins the New Testament in
his speech to Zachary of his Malachy John. So sweetly both Testaments Kiss one
the other: that none of wit or grace should ever think Tobies foolish fable or
Iudithes ridiculous ly to be from any sad purpose of a writer.

To the reader.
In this empty space, a spech worthy of place every where, may be added: which
Gregor. Nazian. speaks upon Chapt. 3. who cosidereth the spirit of man which
ascends, Thus he says: (...) That is I saw in the low places: a dongeon of
punishment, receaving the wicked: and an other place appointed for the Godly.
Thus the father, who knew that Abraham and such were in heaven, yet speaks as
heathen did. This sentence gives light, for the understanding of the Greek
fathers.

Finis.
Faults escaped in this edition of Ecclesiastes.
Eccles. Chap. 2. ver. 26. Read it thus, God gives vvisdome and knowledge and
gladness.

Chap. 3. ver. 14. for ever: to it nothing can be added and from it nothing can
be diminished: and God etc.

Ver. 19. the other: and they all have one spirit: and man etc.

Ver. 20. All go to one place: all come etc.

Chap. 4. ver. 3. his neighbor: Thus also is vanity and vexation of spirit.
Ver. 17. the house of God, and be nearer to hear then to give the sacrifice of
fools etc.

Chap. 5. ver. 4. It is better that thou should not vow, then that thou
should not pay it.

Ver. 5. Let not thy mouth etc. And so change the figures in all the other
verses follovving to the end of the Chapter.

Ver. 8. as it is here, but ver. 9. being corrected, read it thus, has not
fruit: This also is vanity.

Ver. 11. being corrected, Read thus, whether he eat little etc.

Chap. 8. ver. 15. Read thus, no better thing under the sun then etc.

Chap. 9. ver. 18. weapons of war; but one uncircumspect etc.

Chap. 10. ver. 6. Folly is set in great height: etc

Chap. 12. ver. 10. righful; words of truth.


