Concerning PVBLIKE-PRAYER, AND THE FASTS OF THE CHURCH. Six Sermons, or
Tractates. By Io. Br. B. D. Their several Contents are set down in the next
page.

S. Aug. de Temp. Sermon. 230. Adversus Daemonum nequitiam, quae nobis DOMINVS
arma Matthew. 17.21. This kind goes not out, but by Prayer and Fasting.
ostendit, debemus utique retinere; sc. Orationem and Iejunium. LONDON, Printed
by Richard Badger, and are to be sold in S. Dunstans Churchyard in
Fleetstreet at the Shop turning up to Cliffords Inn. 1636.

THE CONTENTS OF THESE SIX SERMONS FOLLOVVING.
Sermon. I. Of Religious fear and Reverence in Gods House. II. Of the
Subordination of Church Duties in reference (chiefly) to the people. III. Of
the Duties, Nature, and Laws of Public Prayer. IV. Of the necessity and order
of Gods Service by Prayer and the Words Ministration: chiefly in reference to
the Clergy. V. Of the Grounds and Reasons of Set times for Fasting. VI. Of the
manner and quality of Church Fasts.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, MY SINGVLAR GOOD LORD WILLIAM, Lord MAINARD, Baron of
EASTAINES, and one of His Majesty's Lords Lievtenants for the County of ESSEX.
Right Honorable, and my very good Lord;
I Could never have thought these Sermons, or any thing else coming from me,
worthy the view of so learned an Age. Neither have I ever shunned ought more,
then to come in public. Yet I know not how it now happens, that I am at this
present drawn forth into open view: urged, partly by the advice and earnest
request of some good friends, who judged these Sermons, when preached,
necessary for these times; partly by the mistake of some, otherwise (I doubt
not) well affected Christians, who nevertheless not well understanding my
meaning, have misreported both it and me. To satisfy both, I deemed this the
best way: necessary also perhaps, besides other reasons, hereby to prevent the
publishing of them by any other hand, since some Copies have gone abroad, not
through any desire of mine, but by the request of those friends I could not
gainsay. That I present them to your Lordship, is not without great good
reason: you not only having been a chief Auditour at the preaching of some
of them; but also, which I may never forget, nor can sufficiently recount,
being my most noble, free, and bountiful Patron. Wherefore I could not, but
here follow the example of our Blessed LORD and SAVIOR, joining the
remembrance of Mary's Spikenard with the Gospel preached; that is, with these
Sermons sent abroad into the World, the thankful acknowledgment of your
Honors bounty. For since in our books and writings we honorably mention
those Worthyes in Learning, whose more able studies have furthered or advanced
ours; we should, by as good reason, inscribe our books or writings to those
Noble Personages, worthy of all Honor, whose rightly employed wealth or power
have (under GOD) supported, upheld, or encouraged our otherwise disheartened
studies. Thence Gratitude has made it a custom with us, even anciently
practiced by sundry Heathen, that where Honorable greatness and goodness
has by any nourished the life and sap of Learning for the present, there by
a due retaliation Learning and Arts should honor and eternize their memories to
all future Ages: that thus they, by whom we live now, may by us or ours in an
happy and blessed memorial, live for ever. I cannot promise your Honor by
this poor work any such lasting monument: nor am I one of those that can any
way arrogate that title to my self: My desire only is, hereby to acknowledge
to the World, how much I am your Lordships; that seeing I appear in public, I
may stir up others, if any shall receive any benefit by my poor labors, to
praise and pray GOD for your Noble Lordship: Whilst I shall always pray and
beseech His Heavenly Majesty, to bless your Honor, your Noble Lady,
Children, and Family with all increase of Heavenly Joys, and earthly
happiness, Remaining whilst I live.

Your Lordships, in all affectionate service and duty, most bounden: JOHN
BROVVNING.

THE FIRST SERMON CONCERNING RELIGIOUS FEAR, and REVERENCE, in GOD's HOUSE.
ECCLES. 5.1. Take heed to thy foot, or keep thy foot when thou entrest
into the House of GOD.


THE House of God is the house of Prayer, Esaias 56.7. Esaias 56.7.
Hither we enter, that we may offer: not as at Jerusalem, in one place; 1 Timothy
2.8.
hot every where calling upon GOD in Spirit and truth, John 4.23. John 4.23.
For, from the rising of the Sun, says the Lord, even unto the going down
of the same, Mal. 1.11.
my Name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place Incense shall be
offered unto my name, and a pure offering: And what that is, Verse 8.
there at the 8. verse is showed by the contrary; If ye offer the blind for
sacrifice, is it not evil? If ye offer the lame for sacrifice, is it not
evil? 1 Cor. 11.29.
Yes doubtless, very evil, and the sacrifice of fools; that, as Blind,
cannot see, not discerning the Lords Body; 1 Cor. 11.22.
therefore no reverence in offering: that, as Lame, cannot bend, or bow,
despising the Church of God, M. Minucius Felix in Octavio p. 51.
and therefore no reverence in entering.

It is the saying of Minucius Felix to the Heathen: De vestro numero carcer ex
estuat, nullus ibi Christianus, nisi aut suae religionis rous, aut profugus. I
would we could say so too. No such matter: our prisons are full. And what is the
reason? because our Churches are empty: Empty at those public Prayers, when
we should prevail with God for a blessing, both for our private and public
good: when by being ready to hear, and obey God, and his Church, we may cause
Him in His Church to be ready to hear us, and to give us his blessing out of
Sion. Thus empty of offerers: Nay, empty of hearers (strange in this Eare-age:)
either we hear not at all, like the deaf Adder; or else we hear not as we
should hear. We have the Word of God in respect of persons; we pronounce
This, or that, or such or such a man, (for the most part such as they should
not be) Hear ye him: Or else, we (that are your Prophets, as you call us)
are as the Prophets of old; we are unto you as a very lovely song of one, that
has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an Instrument; Ezekiel. 33.32.
you hear our words, but you do them not: your Entrance is without reverence:
your Hearing (for the most part, unless you respect the person) without
attention: your Prayers and Offerings without devotion: and your departure (I
am affraide to tell you) if you continue such, must needs be without grace,
blessing, and benediction.

Let me not (beloved) be your Enemy, for telling you the truth. I had intended
to have brought you other matter, stronger meat; but (as the Apostle to the
Hebr. 5.12. Hebr. 5.12.
) Ye that for the time ought to have been Teachers, have need that one teach
you again, which are the first Principles: Ye, as Children, have need of
milk: ye, as Children, must be taught to Hear, to Speak: as Children, ye
must learn to Go, how to go into the House of God.

And indeed this Chapter touches the vanities in divine service: And
therefore, as they that will learn any thing, must first unlearne what is
amiss: So, if we will serve God aright, Praecepta dat vitae, and non vult
offendere euntes ad Ecclesiam, S. Hieron. in locum. Tom. 5. oper.
we must unlearne the errors and vanities in His service: and this with the
first, the error of the Foot in entering: then next, the error of the Ear in
hearing: last, the error of the Mouth, Heart, and Hand in praying and
offering. And this, I suppose, will give you the order of this, and the next
verse.

For the words themselves, The Division.
without any great curiosity, you may observe these two parts in them.

I. The Warning it self: Custodi, etc.

II. The Person warned; Ingressurus, or Tu quum ingrederis, Thou, whosoever
thou art that entrest into the House of God.

From both these in general, we observe this Proposition, or Observation: viz.

[Reverence and Preparation is necessary to, and in all holy duties.]

Admonition, or Caveat we consider,

1. The Matter, and substance of it, even that which is enjoined; and that is,
Custodia: And that implies Care, Labor, watchfulness, and diligence in
keeping: Whence this second is inferred, viz.

[Every kind of Reverence, or Preparation which we think fit, is not
sufficient:] and therefore in the second place, we consider:

2. The Specification from the matter and object: it is Pedem, and Pedem tuum:
from whence we observe:

this Care, Heed, and Keep, in our Reverence and preparation, ought to be
universal; to reach even to the abject, and meanest parts; even from head to
foot; over the whole man, both body and soul;] from this word Pedem, thy
Foot, or as Tremellius reads it, both thy feet.

This Care, Heed, and Keep, as it ought to be general, or universal, over
every part of our selves; so ought it to be particular for the Person, only
restrained to our selves:] and that from this word, Tuum, Take heed to Thy
foot.

Person admonished or warned, to whom this caveat is given; and that is,
Ingressurus, etc. from whence we ground this Observation: viz.

This Custody, Care, Keep, diligent and reverent attention, as it is always
necessary; so then especially is it most necessary, when we enter into the
House of God.]

And if when we enter Domum Domini, Gods House; then most of all is it more
necessary, when we not only salute Dominum Domus, the Lord of the house: but
chiefly and especially above all, when He by the graces of His Spirit, either
in the Word or Sacrament, ingressurus est, is about to enter into us, and to
make us Domini Domum, the Temple of the living Lord.

And first, of the two first Propositions, wrapping them up together (as much
as I can.)

FOr the former, Proposition I. and II.
That Preparation and Reverence is necessary, etc. I suppose no man, that
knows either that there is a GOD, or confesses himself to be a man, dare,
or can deny the evidence of this truth, being grounded upon these two most
confessed Principles.

For first, he that knows himself to be a man, knows himself to be a
sinner: For, Romans 3.23.
in Adam all have sinned, and are deprived (or come short) of the glory of God.
And here we must confess, Pedem lapsum, that our foot has slipped: Nay,
labentem, that it does daily slip: for, Prove. 24.16. Prove. 24.16.
The most righteous man falls seven times a day: and in many things we offend
all, James 3.2. James 3.2.
And if not so; yet at least we must confess, Pedem labilem, that our foot
may slip: For omnis homo mendax, Every man is a liar, Romans 3.4. Romans 3.4.
and 1 Cor. 10.12. 1 Cor. 10.12.
Let him that stands, take heed lest he fall. Therefore there is at least a
Potentia, a possibility of falling: And where either the foot is weak, or the
way is slippery, we had need, Custodire pedem, Take keep of our feet.

Secondly, he that confesses a God, confesses also, that this God is good,
true, pure, holy, and sincere: seeing to be God, must needs be, to be such;
What agreement (then) is there between light and darkness? between Christ and
Belial? Plato in Phaedon. t. 67. Tom. 1. and apud Plutarch. de Isid. and
Osirid. fol. 352. Synesius Epist. 57. and Epist. 137. S Greg. Nazianzen. alibi
saepius, etc.
between Heaven and Hell? It was Plato's argument in this very kind, (which
was often used, even by the Christians also in their Church censures: (...):
That which is pure, may not be touched by that which is impure. Hence it was,
that by the light of Nature amongst the Heathen; some were secluded, and shut
out from the services of some gods: none being admitted but such, who were
entered, and initiate: and amongst them, none might intermeddle, but such who
had clean hands. For, not to name their often lustrations, and expiatory
washings, so zealous were they in some places, that in the Egyptian Temples,
especially of Isis, Plut. de Isid. and Osirid.
all excrements of men and beasts were utterly forbidden. Hence (says
Plutarch) they used white linen garments for their Priests, to signify, that
the greatest cleanness or purity that man can have, is not sufficient for so
pure a God. For, Behold, Job 15.15.25.5, 6.
(says Eliphaz) he found no steadfastnesse in his Angels; yea, the heavens and
stars are not clean in his sight: how much more then is man abominable, and
filthy, that drinks iniquity like water? Job 15.15.

Thus, whatsoever the Heathen practice might be, I am sure their ground is
good: Nay, their very practice, Vide S. Cyril. Alexand. ubi infra.
(if we may believe Saint Cyrill) is approved by God. For, whereas amongst the
Egyptians no man might enter into their Idol temples with shoes on his feet,
because they were made of dead beasts skins; and therefore accounted a
pollution: God at his first appearing to Moses in the bush; though he had
called him, yet bids him, Come not nearer; Put off thy shoes off thy feet,
Exodus 3.5.
for the place where thou stand is holy ground.

The like we find commanded Joshua also, Josh. 5.15. Josh. 5.15.
Thus God, to show that he would not be behind the Heathen false gods, in
exacting all due and possible Reverence, calls for it from Moses and Joshua,
who both had seen this custom in Egypt, by a ceremony common, and well known
unto them.

Where observe, I pray you, by the way, that (even by Gods warrant in
commanding such an one) it is lawful, and warrantable to use a Ceremony, taken
even from Heathen and Idolaters. For that it was the custom amongst the
Egyptians, we need not doubt it, S. Cyril. Hom. 28. Paschal. fol. 283. Vide
eund. in Glopby. lib. 2. fol. 217. Vide S. Epiph. in Ancor. cap. 104. and post,
cap. 117. and S. G. Nazia in Pasch. Hom. 42.
S. Cyril, who was Bishop of Alexandria, who lived amongst them, an
eyewitness, giving us the testimony. Besides, another foot-step of this
custom I find in Proclus the Philosopher, who (as Marin. in Procl. vita p.
169. Gr.
Marinus reports) Being to salute the Moon then rising, put off his shoes
from his feet, As also Iamblich. Protrept: in Pythag cap. 20: Symb. 3. p. 132.
and 136.
Pythagoras long before put it among his precepts: (...), id est, When thou
sacrificest, or worshippest, put off thy shoes from thy feet; Which,
doubtless, as Proclus and the rest of later times amongst the Heathen, had
from him; so he at the first, received it from the Egyptians, whose custom
first it was. And if I may interpose mine own conjecture, the Holy Ghost even
in this my Text, aims at this custom among the Heathen, teaching us
Gentiles, by a Gentile custom, as he did both Moses and Joshua; that Every
one that calls on the Name of Christ, depart from all iniquity, 2 Timoth. 2.
Take heed, 2 Timothy 2.19.
even to his very feet, when he enters into the house of God: which is the
third Proposition (wherewith also for brevity, I must shut up the fourth.)

Proposition III. and IV.
That this Care, Heed, and Keep, ought to be universal; to reach even to the
most abject, and meanest part, even from the head to the foot: over the whole
man, both body and soul: from this word Pedem.

What is here meant by the Foot, we need not much question. All agree (in the
first place) that as there is an outward, so there is also an inward man: and,
as there are feet of the Body, so are there of the Soul, the Affections; So
much the more truly feet, because by them, not only the Body and bodily feet;
but the Soul it self is moved and carried. From these feet of the Soul,
Reverence, etc. (if it be there) it goes over and through the whole man; from
the Soul to the Body, over all the body: It moves even the external and
outward foot: If there be love and affection, the foot will be most willing,
most ready to come: If fear, the foot will be reverent when it is come: If
zeal, the foot will be careful how it comes: If desire; nothing will
hinder the foot, but that it will come, it cannot be hindered, but that it must
come: Therefore God is careful, first to call for the Heart: Prove. 23.26.
Prove. 23.26.
for that brings all the rest: God must and will so be worshipped; with all
thy heart, with all thy soul, Deuteronomy. 6.5.
with all thy might, and that with all thy mind, Mat. 22.37. Mat. 22.37.
Surely, if we mind it as we should, we can do no less: the least
carelessenesse in this kind drawing an heavy curse: Ier. 48.10.
For cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently. And what is
negligence, but want of the least care, want of the least respect? Our care
therefore must be to avoid all sins, the sins of the head, the sins of the
hand, the sins of the feet. Nay, if there be any sin so grown into thy nature
by custom, so that it becomes as easy in use, or as dear in esteem, as
thy right hand, or thy right-foot; yet thou must not own it: Mat. 5.29.18.8.
If thine hand offend thee, cut it off; If thine eye offend thee pluck it out;
Nay, if thy sin be never so little, never so mean; if it be but pes tuus, thy
foot, thou must cast it from thee. Thus thy care must extend from head to food;
yea, ad pedem utrumque, to both thy feet: otherwise, as a man, that halts on
one foot, is as truly lame, as he that halts on both: So thy reverence, if it
be but in part, what is it, but halt and lame? This Keep therefore extends to
both. Nay, if thou have yet more feet, Artemidorum Oneiroc. li. 1. c. 49. and
50. etc. Achmetem, and Apomasar. cap. 114.115.
thou must take keep of them. The ancient Oneirocriticks tell us, that by the
interpretation (...) are (...): our feet are our Children, our Servants, our
attendants, or whosoever are subject and inferior to us: therefore this
custodia must even extend to them. Psalm. 101.7.
For this we have David's example, Psalm. 101. There shall no deceitful person
dwell in my house: he that tells lies, Josh. 24.15.
shall not tarry in my sight. For this we have Joshua's resolution, I and my
house will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15. Thus thou must even for every servant
have a due care, that they also serve and fear GOD. Nay, here is not all. It
seems, rich and great men may have more feet: Dion. Chrysostom. (...). Lucianus in
Toxari. Exodus 20.10. Olympiodorus in locum. Pedes sunt corporis sensus, qui
ferunt nos extra nos: maculantur in nobis: Portat visus ad mulierem, et ibi
maculatur: indiget lavari: auditus ad de tractionem: Gustus ad crapulam: and
sic de caeteris. Qui igitur lavatus est in Baptismo, and post maculatus, pedes
istos lavari curet: aliter cum Deo partem non habet. Dixit enim Petro, si non
lavero te, no habebis partem mecu^. Hug. de Sanct. Vict. Miscellan. lib. 2 Tit.
117. Salonius in locum. Prove. 23.26.
for by another Heathen they are (...), Worms with many feet: and the Cythian
in Lucian reckons his Cattle for his feet: the command therefore of this duty
reaches as low as these. As thou must take keep of thy children and servants,
that they do honor GOD: so must thou also have custodiam, an eye to thy
cattle, thine Ox, and thine Ass, (Exodus 20.) that they dishonor him not:
for they likewise are Pes tuus, thy external and outward foot.

But especially (says Olympiodorus) it is meant of the feet of the soul:
Custodi anima tuae pedem in omni opere tuo, cum, etc. Take heed (says he) to
the feet of thy soul, thy affections, in whatsoever thou art about, when thou
entrest into the House of God. Nay, according to Salonius, Bishop of Vienna,
This is, if not only, yet the chief and maine end of this command. This GOD
calls for every where: Fili, da, etc. My Son, give me thy heart. And good reason
for it; for the heart is that, which must custodire pedem, take heed and keep
of thine outward feet: like the weights or springs in a Clock, it sets all the
rest a going.

And these affections of the heart are the feet of the soul: without these, as
the body without the feet, every action falls to the ground, being no longer
able to stand or subsist. If these be clean or pure, the whole man is pure and
clean. This our Savior teaches us; that He that is washed, needs not save
to wash his feet only, but is clean every whit. John 13.10.
And good reason for it. For,

1 As the feet are the lowest parts of the Body: so the affections are the
lowest part of man's rational Soul, Prove. 17.12. Arist. Ethic. lib. 1. c. ult.
being (as the Philosopher calls it) (...): a part unreasonable in it self, but
yet possible by this custodia, this care, this keep, this good take heed, to
be made partaker thereof. Without this keep it fares with them, as with water
after fire, returning to its own nature, it grows more cold: so these
without reasons custodia, returning to their own bent, become more brutish. To
instance in either.

In the Irascible part; Anger, if not moderated, how furious is it, how beyond
all measure unreasonable? It is better to meet a Bear robbed of her whelps,
(says the Wise man, Prove. 17.12. Prove. 17.12.
) than a fool in his folly.

In the concupiscible, (the other foot) Love (on the contrary) how violent is
it, how above all force unresistable! Amor sicut mors fortis est: Love, Cant.
8.6.
and affection is as strong as death. Therefore GOD also, Vt custodiat, to
keep them in and under, deals with these two feet of the Soul, as we with
the feet of unruly Colts, or offending Malefactors: He claps bolts, gives,
shackles, and fetters upon them. On the one, viz. the Irascible: Exodus 20.
Thou shall not murder: Thou shall not bear false witness against thy
neighbor. On the other, the Concupiscible: Thou shall not steal: Thou shall
not covet thy neighbors House, nor his Wife, nor his Ox, nor, etc. These
fetters upon these two feet, He puts into Reasons Rule, He gives into the
understandings hand, with this charge here given: Custodi pedem tuum, Take heed
to both these feet.

2 As the feet being next the earth are most likely to be defiled, because of
the dirt and filth they must needs pass through: So these two feet of the
Soul requite the more care, Card. Cajetan. in 13. Ioannis.
because (as Cajetan observes) terrenis se oportet immiscere officiis cibi,
potus, rei familiaris, and similium: they must have to do with these earthly
performances of meat, drink, apparel, household-government, and the like.
For this cause in the Sacrifices of the old Law, Levit. 1.9.
Lev. 1. God will have the inwards and feet especially washed, and so offered;
to teach us (says Philo) (...): Philo lib. de Victimis.
that is, in the Apostles phrase; not to seek the things that are below, but
rather to have our conversation in Heaven. For as a man would custodire pedem,
take heed for his feet, to keep them as much as he can from the dirt, and wet
he must needs pass through: so ought every man having to do with the things
of this world, take heed that he sink not in, that he set not his heart
thereon. It is the Apostles counsel; 2 Cor. 7.31.
Use the world as if ye used it not: and our Saviors advise, Luke 12. Luke 12.
Take no care for the things of this life, what you shall eat, or what you
shall put on: but rather (as the Apostle S. James; Let it be our care to keep
our selves unspotted of the world, James 1.27. James 1.27.
True it is which S. Bernard delivers: S. Bern. Ser. in Caen. Dom. fol. 127.
Pedes animae affectiones, dum in hoc pulvere gradimur, ex toto mundi esse non
possunt: It can no ways be, that the feet of our soul should be altogether
kept clean, whilst we are in the way: Nevertheless it must be our care, to
keep them as clean as may be. And for the filth we have already gotten, we
must, like them that will enter from the dirt into a curious swept room,
(...). James 1.21. James 1.21.
Cast away all uncleanness; that so, like mannerly and fit guests, we may
enter into the House of GOD.

And thus we are come to the second General part: the Person warned, The
Person warned.
Ingressurus, etc. In which there is a threefold reason implied, like a
threefoldcoard, to make us more wary.

The first, Ab objecto: Keep, take heed to thy self, but especially, custodi
pedem, take heed to thy foot.

The second, A tempore, aut action; custodi pedem tuum, etc. keep and take
heed to thy foot always; but especially cum incedis, when thou go.

The third, A loco, custodi, etc. Take heed to thy foot always when thou
go; but principally, quum in Domum Domini, when thou go into the House of
GOD.

From whence this last Proposition arises, consisting of these three degrees;
viz.

That this Custody, care, Proposition V.
etc. is then especially most necessary, when, etc. Vide supra.

It is reported of Chiron, Antaeus, Caeneus, that they were invulnerable; yet
nevertheless they came to their end: and of Achilles it is storied above the
rest, that he could no where be wounded, but in his feet: Fulgent. lib. 3.
Mytholog. c. de Peleo.
Which Fables teach us no other moral (says Fulgentius,) but that the best of
men have their faults and slips. Thus the purest Gold has its dross: the
cleerest Glass its spots: the fairest Day its night: and the brightest Body
has its shadow. And though hereafter the Saints, like the Sun and Moon, and
those heavenly Bodies, 1 Cor. 15.41, 42. Mark 10.18.
shall shine in glory, 1 Cor. 15. Yet here together, with the Sun and Moon,
they must suffer their Eclipses, to teach us all, that There is none good but
God alone.

Thus the best Man at the best, is but like Daniels Image; though his head be
of gold, yet his feet are part of iron, part of clay. I need not remember you
of Noah's drunkenness; Lots incest; Abraham's lie; David's murder; Peter's
denial. These sins were truly their feet. For as the feet are the basest parts
of the body; so these were the basest actions of their lives: in these, as in
their feet, they were all defiled; and whilst they were only thus, they were
not clean: For whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet fail but in one
point, he is guilty of all, James 2.20. James 2.20.


Good reason therefore for this custodia, even quia pes.

1. Custodi Pedem.
For the beginings of sin are modest; Satan would but have CHRIST to fall down
to worship him, or to work a needless miracle; for well he knows; foot, he
may possibly attain to the hand, Mat. 4.
and so to the head, and so the whole man is his. Ephesians. 6.11.4.14.
These are (...): the Devils method: This is the order of sin, Ephesians. 4.14.
which, like a Gangren, creeps from the foot to the head, over the whole man,
both body and soul. For as there is a neerenes of parts; so is there of sins:
for lust, when it is conceived, brings forth sin; and sin when it is
perfected, brings forth death, James 1.15. James 1.15.


Thus ones example is another excitement: the foot teaches the hand to sin,
either more, or more freely. --

A pedibus didicere manus peccare proterve, says the Poet. Martialis.


The prevention therefore of all occasion of sin, was that which made the
ancient Heathens bare and uncover their bodily feet; Orpheus. ap. Fulgent.
myth. lib. 3. c. de Peleo. and Pierius Hierogl. l. 35. c. 47. Arist. Prob.
Sect. 4. Prob. 5.
which some affirm to be the seat of lust: Hence that of the Philosopher, That
the keeping of our feet cool and naked, abateth the lust and concupiscence of
our flesh. This therefore teaches us, how necessary even the bodies
humiliation is, for our due and reverent preparation: viz. That we ought to
subdue and keep our bodies under by fasting; by abstaining from all worldly
pleasures; from lustful incitements; from pampering meats and drinks; from
all incentive provocations. Thus the Primitive Christians being to receive the
holy Eucharist, abstained from all manner of food; and from all company, even
of their own lawful Wives: For well they knew, the body not kept under, was
naught else, but an unruly Colt, a disobedient Handmaid, a treacherous inmate,
even (...), a fugitive, and runaway servant, (as Hesychius calls it: Hesychius
(...) cent. 1. 33.
) and therefore lest it should run from GOD, had need, ut custodias, that thou
should keep it in or under, even quia pes, because it is a foot.

But the next Reason is another bond to make this guard the stronger; quum or
quia incedis, Quum incedis.
when thou go, etc. The time of our going is the moment of our care: For
whilst we sit or rest, our foot seldom takes hurt: if once we begin to go,
our foot may slip, our bodies fall, and our selves miscarry. Yea far more
requisite in these of our soul, our affections, than in our bodies feet: and
that for a twofold reason. For,

1 In our bodily feet, either our eyes may foresee our way; our care may
prevent our danger; or a staff may support our weakness. But in these feet of
our soul, our affections, there is more certain hazard, and more uncertain
help, where our greatest care we can possibly take, is not enough: (...)
(says the Apostle) See to it, Ephesians. 5.15.
have a care, take heed therefore that you walk (...), circumspectly, exactly,
warily; not as fools, but as wise. All rashness is banished from GODS
service: it is no sudden work: yea rather it is such a business, that
requires our exactest care, our greatest attention, our best wits; nay Wisdom
it self, but to go about it. It is observed by Physiognomists, Arist. Ethic.
ad Nic. and Physiogn.
that the most courageous, and discreet men, have not the speediest pace; but
rather, a quiet, decent, and settled kind of gate: whereas an hasty pace, is a
certain sign, (...) (says Adamantius) of a rash, Adamant. Physiog. lib. 2.
c. 28.
heady, foolish, and illiberall man. Surely howsoever, rashness is not so
hurtful in all other business, as it is most dangerous in GODS service, and
the duties of Religion: Therefore, as men that go advisedly to work, we are
commanded to walk decently and orderly, (...), with a comely pace, 1 Thessalonians.
4.12. 1 These. 4.12.
Romans 13.13.
and that with another caution, (...), as in the day time, when all men see us.
Romans 13.13.


2 In our Bodily walking, that which for the most part may most likely trippe
us, is some natural and bodily substance, for the most part without life; such
as are earth, wood, or stone, etc. But in our Spiritual walking before GOD, in
the duties of Piety, and Religion, we have many stumbling blocks, and those
of different kinds; the more dangerous, because they are less seen; more
spiritual, and therefore less discernable. For we wrestle not against flesh
and blood; but against Principalities, and Powers, against the Princes of the
darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness, and those (...), in
high places, Ephesians. 6.12. Ephesians. 6.12.
So that ten to one we can never get over so high, without a fall; or if we do,
yet in so rough a way, we had need with those, that eat the Passover, Exodus
12. Exodus 12.11.
have both our staves in our hands, and our shoes on our feet; yea (...), have
our feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace, Ephesians. 6.15.
Ephesians. 6.15.


Thus must thou be quum incedis, when thou go: 3 In Domum Dei.
At least, quum in Domum Dei, when thou go into the House of GOD: Which is
the third, and maine reason of our Reverence, and Preparation. Pythagoras,
Iamblych. Protrept. Symb. 1. f. 131. and 134.
that when we enter into the Temple to adore, serve, and worship; (...); we
must not so much as speak, or think of any worldly business: and again in
his second Symboll; Idem ibid. Symb. 2. f. 131. and 135.
that we must not make God's service (...), a perfunctory, idle, and lazy
work: that is, we must not turn into God's House, as from our journey to an
Inn, without any Reverence, without any preparation. For (says Iamblychus) it
is apparent, Ibid. f. 135.
that GOD being the Prince of the whole world, must have the principal
respect, honor, and reverence done unto him: For GOD is a Spirit, In templa
autem, etc. passim omnes sordidi ac flagitiosi sine ulla penitus reverentia
sacri honoris irrumpunt. Salvian. Massill. lib. 3. de Gubernat. Dei. Genesis
28.16.17.
and they that will worship Him, must worship Him in Spirit, and truth, John
4.24. John 4.24.
And if this be true every where, then is it most true in the Church, a place
consecrated, and set apart for the service and worship of GOD; even the place,
where His honor dwells, Psalm. 26.8. Jacob (we see) having seen that Vision
of the Angels ascending and descending, falls out into a passionate
exclamation: Surely, the LORD was in this place, and I was not aware: And
again; How fearful is this place! this is no other but the House of GOD, and
this is the gate of Heaven. This respect made Abraham, wheresoever he talked
with GOD (though but once) to build an Altar; as accounting that place ever
after holy and sacred: So we read: Genesis 12.13. and 15. Genesis 12.13, 15.
Chapters. For this Moses and Joshua are bid put off their shoes (as you heard
already) to remember them, that the place, where they stood before GOD, was
holy. For this cause must we also, that enter hither, be holy as He is holy,
1 Pet. 1.16. 1 Pet. 1.16.
because as the Prophet David confesses, Psalm. 93.5. Psalm. 93.5.
Holiness (o LORD) becomes thy House for ever. S. Cyril. Mystag. Catechet.
5ta p. 544. Liturg. S. Iaco. p. 30. Lit. S. Chrysostom. 65. S. Basilij 47.
This was the reason, that in the Primitive Church, especially before the
receiving of the blessed Eucharist, the Deacon stood up, and cried with a loud
voice: (...): Holy things be to them, that are holy. And even amongst the
Heathen themselves (by the light of nature) before they began their Sacrifices,
the Priest, first beholding the people round about him, demanded, (...); who is
here? etc. The people answering; (...): many, but those only, that are good:
Intimating, that if there were any there guilty to themselves of any foul
offense, they should separate, and go apart from the rest, as unworthy the
view, and presence of such holy mysteries.

But what needs (will some say) such Reverence, Objection.
such preparation, as though this place, or the duties here performed, being so
holy, could not make us also holy?

To which I answer with our SAVIOR. Matthew. 21.13.
Answ.
Vos fecistis: It is most certain, this House cannot sanctify us; but we may
defile, and pollute it: Ezekiel. 23.38.
Ye have made my House Qui domo Dei non utitur ad Orationis Domum, is eo
devenit ut speluncam latronum efficiat eam Fr. Iunius lib. 1. Parall. 38.
a den of theives. They have defiled my Sanctuary, etc. True it is, Temples,
Altars, and Sanctuaries, even by humane laws, have had the privileges of
defending, and preserving the nocent from the hands of their pursuing enemies:
but against our Spiritual adversaries, they are of no more force, then is a
stately house, in the Horace. Non domus, aut fu^dus; non aeris aceruus, etc.
Poets judgment, able to defend the owner from a gout, or ague: for even here
sin lies at the door, nay hither it enters; and rather hither then into any
other place.

Because Satan is most busy in the House of God: I.
Thus, Job 1.6. Job 1.6.
Satan stand's amongst the sons of God. And 1 King. 22. 1 King. 22.22.
He is a false witness in the mouth of the Prophets. So true is that Proverb:
Where GOD has His Church, the Devil has his chapel: According to that
story of the saint in the Legend, who for one Devil in the Marketplace, and
him altogether idle, saw ten thousand in the Church very busy at every man's
elbow: and surely, Gulielm. Neubrigens. hist. de Reb. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 21. p.
1. Empedocles ap. Plutarch.
had we that gift, which ( Neubrigentius says) one Kettell had (at Farneham in
Yorkshire) of seeing and beholding the Devils where they are: doubtless we
would confess Empedocles his position to be most true; (...): that this air,
and place, where we are now assembled, has thousands of Devils and commanded
spirits, all busy about us, to see if they can by any means divert us from
GOD, and goodness, and turn away our minds from that service we come here
about.

2 Were it so, that Satan were kept out, yet even with us there enters sin
and corruption enough, to make us unfit for GOD: For every one bears about
with him the Body of sin, Romans 6.6.
as the Apostle calls it: And such a Body it is, where the whole head is sick,
and the whole heart is heavy, even from the sole of the foot to the crown of
the head, Isay 1.5, 6.
there is nothing whole. No marvel therefore, if God jealous of his honor
command a Brazen laver to be put between the Tabernacle of the Congregation,
and the Altar, for Aaron and his Sons to wash their hands and their feet, Exodus
30.20. Rab. Maurus in Exodus lib. 4. c. 12. p. 719.
Ne moriantur, lest they dye, Exo. 30. This did they do twice a day,
signifying (says R. Maurus) the laver of repentance, which we have always need
of: Maxim autem cum mysteriis coelestibus ministraturi appropiamus. For this
cause, our Church imitating the ancient forms, has put the (...) or
confession of sins in the first place; as it were a striking off the dirt from
off our feet, as soon as ere we enter. And because without Gods grace we can
do nothing, as also the Devil is then most ready to hinder us, when we are
most desirously bent to serve and praise GOD, Vid. Cassian. coll. 10. c. 10.
and P. Lombard in Ps. 69. Vid. Bonartium. de horis. Canon. c. 30. Vid. Hug.
Vict. De Eccles. offic. lib. 2. cap. 1. and Gemmam animae. De Antiq. Ritu Miss.
lib. 2 cap. 1. and. 18. and Amalarium Fortun. De Ordin. Antiphon. in Prol. f.
504. Auct. BB. PP. Psalm. 95.6.
those short Antiphonaries are set in the next place, which anciently were used
by the religious of Egypt, and are found in the beginning of the ancient
Liturgies, as also in the Jewish more ancient Service: O Lord open thou our
lips. O Lord make haste to help us. O Lord make speed to save us. And lastly,
because notwithstanding Gods grace given, we are ready to reject it, and cast
it off by our irreverence, and neglect: That fearful example of the Jews
rebellion, and backsliding, is set before us in the 95. Psalm, as also our
selves are stirred up (by the way of an introit) to a reverent manner and
gesture in praising GOD: O come let us worship, and fall down, and kneel
before the Lord our Maker. Of this the Primitive Christians were put in mind,
as by the same Psalm, so also by those often acclamations of the Deacon,
Oremus: Attenti simus, etc. And we by these of, Praise the Lord. Let us pray.

And doubtless if we mark it; by this care of our foot, the reverence of our
foot is also especially intended.

For first, it is a Rule of all Divines in the interpreting literal sense will
stand, there we must stand to it; we may not vary: Here therefore we must
cleave close to the letter, as also in that other Text to the same purpose,
Phil. 2.10. Phil. 2.10.
That at the Name of JESUS every knee shall bow, etc.

greater is commanded, the lesser is included. If GOD call for the soul, much
more does he call for that, which has its being, and motion from the soul;
the body: If he command the reverence of the whole man, we doubt not, but he
requires the reverence of every part: For as the body cannot move without the
soul; so God injoyning us the reverence, and affectionate care, and keep of
the soul in his service; requires every motion of each part of the body,
agreeable thereunto. There is no doubt (will any say) but GOD requires the
reverence of the heart, the foot of the soul: therefore there is no doubt
(will I say) that GOD requires the reverence of the feet of the body; and that
the motion of the one be agreeable to the affection of the other: and this he
does here expressly.

House, (...), (Beth Elohim) as the Mother Church called it, and we from it,
Church, that is, The Palace of the great King. And shall we not perform that
reverence here to GOD, which we do to any King; to every King? Nay, shall we
do more reverence in the Court of an earthly mortal King, than in the Courts
of the everlasting King of Kings?

i. e. Come near, or approach in good order: a word borrowed from the March of
Soldiers, which, if not in good order, (ye know) what danger follows: This
care, or keeping of our foot is shown in our orderly, and reverent coming
near.

Again, the very part concerning which; and foot is that part, whereby (of all
others) we testify our reverence, and our obedience to our Superiors: and
that we testify by no means so much, as by the keeping in, or keeping back of
this very member, the foot: for by the reverent moving, or bowing, or as it
were keeping in of our foot, we testify our duty, reverence, respect, honor,
and worship to our superiors: Therefore, whilst God calls for thy foot, he
calls for thy reverence by thy foot. For thy reverence, when thou entrest;
for this is the House of God, and this is the Gate of Heaven: For thy reverence
when thou prayest in it; for we must worship, and fall down, and kneel before
the Lord our Maker. It is Nilus his precept: Psalm. 95.6. Nilus Ep. Admon. 130.
(...), etc. When thou art in the Church, be not lifted up; behave not thy
self proudly. For they that stand before the King, dare not laugh, or look
big. So the poor Publican stood afar off, (where standing afar, is put for a
reverent, awefull, and submissive prostration:) Mary Magdalen fell down at our
Saviors feet: and so did David, when he prayed, Psalm. 5.7. Psalm. 5.7.
I will come into thy House in the multitude of thy mercies; and in fear will
I worship toward thy holy Temple: as also the 2 Samuel 7.18. 2 Samuel 7.18.
Who am I (O Lord) and what is my Fathers House, that thou have brought me
hitherto? Thus these holy men fell down at Christ's feet; and good reason for
it: For as the feet are naturally inferior to the head; being therefore placed
and put under it: So are we to Christ. For He is our Head, and we are His
members, Ephesians. 5.23. Ephesians. 5.23.30.


V. S. Epiphan. Physiog. c. 12.
They say of the Peacock, That after he has swollen himself with the glorious
show of his goodly feathers, he is presently dejected with the bare sight of
his ugly feet: so should we at the sight of our sins, which are our black
feet, humble and cast down our selves, etc.

duty we come here about: it is to pray, and to confess our sins; but the
proper gesture of prayer, is kneeling, prostration: Therefore (says the
Apostle) I bow my knees daily to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians
3.14.
etc. The very remembrance of this, should make us bow at the door: but when
we pray, and confess our sins and miserable condition, what gesture can be
fitter, S. Basilius de Spir. Sanct. c. 27 Notandum id, quod de precibus
omnibus. Hugo. Victor. Preces (ait) e persona eorum dicuntur, qui quotidie
cadu^t, and nituntur resurgere per poenitentia. Hugo. de. San. Vict. de Eccles.
offic. l. 2. cap. 1.
than that which is the most liveliest express confession of the most wretched
condition? It is S. Basils observation; That by falling to the ground in
prayer, and rising again after prayer, we do show, that by sin we are fallen
to the earth; and are by the only love of our Maker and Creator, raised toward
Heaven again: By the one we confess, that our sin is the cause of the
earths, and of our own curse, of our own death; that for it we justly are
earth, and to earth shall return again: By this, we acknowledge with Abraham
our Father, that we are but dust and ashes, and worthily deserve a worser, and
a lower death; but by the other, we confess our hope of a better Resurrection,
and standing up: when by GODS love, and CHRIST'S merits, we shall be able to
stand at the last day.

Again, it is the Apostles precept, Col. 3.16.
that we should teach and admonish one another, in Psalms, and Hymns, and
spiritual songs. How do the faithful admonish one another by singing Psalms?
etc. Is it not by that cheerfulness? by that devotion they see in one
another? So, does not the reverent entrance of one that enters, as he should,
stir up the fainting devotion of them that pray? Does not the devout kneeling
of those that are about us, put us also in mind of the duty, and earnestness
of our prayers, we are about? And so, whereas the Priest preaches to the ear
only, every one in this his devotion, and by his example (which is most
forceable) preaches to each others eye.

Again, this bodily reverence, as it adds heat others; so it is truly an
incentive of devotion to our selves: for the body, as it receives life and
motion from the soul; so it returns also a further life by motion to it
again: as strings touched in the same instrument, move one another; or as the
bodies warmth warmes the clothes, which reciprocally preserve, and return the
bodies warmth again.

Moreover, is it not a testification of GODS presence? faith is in thee,
concerning the same? Why do thou (says S. James) boast of thy faith, why
talkest thou of prayer, the act of faith! Show me thy faith by thy works, and
thy prayer by thy reverence. We use to say, Vid. Vitruvium Archit lib. 13. c. 1
and Cardan. de subtilit. lib. 11.
Ex pede Herculem: and it is the conclusion of exact Naturalists, That by the
length of the foot, the length and dimensions of the whole body may be
discovered: sure I am, the foot of the soul may be known by the foot of the
body; and it is then a sign men have reverence in their hearts, when they show
it in their feet.

command, Exodus 20.5. Exodus 20.5.
Thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve them? and Deuteronomy. 6.13.
Deuteronomy. 6.13.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him. Fear, from the soul; an
expression of this fear, in the reverent service of the body. And is not all
this, that which GOD commanded before at the 6th Verse. Deuteronomy. 6.5.


Saints and Angels in Heaven use the same. For do not they, Rev. 4.10.
( Apoc. 4.10.) fall down, and worship, and cast their Crowns before the
Throne? Can any thing by them used, be idle, or needless, or superfluous? Nay
rather, is it not our prayer, and should it not be our desire, that we should
so serve God, as they do? that His will be so done by us, as by them it is?
The Church, (beloved) what is it but Heaven upon Earth? Therefore the rule of
her actions can she draw from no place better, then from thence.

Sure I am, it was the care and reverence of those first Christians, truly to
keep their feet, when they went into the House of God: this made them, at
their entrance into their Churches, humbly bend and bow themselves in a most
reverent, and awefull manner toward the upper and Eastern part of the Church?

And the same lowly demeanor was used by their Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,
Vid. Liturg. S. Iac. Basil. Chrysostom. Petri, and Marci, etc. Vid. Eucholog. and
Horolog. Graecorum passim.
as often as they were occasioned to pass either to, or fro. These they then
called (...). The same are at this day by the Eastern, and Oriental
Christians, now by another name called (...); as humble expressions of their
devoutest submission and repentance.

In like manner, the Western Church had the like care and keep of theirs. Ad
domos statim Dominicas (says Salvian) currimus, Salvian de gubern. Dei lib. 6.
p. 237. and Rit.
corpora humisternimus. Their feet were ready to run thither: and no sooner
there, but down they were there: and if it chanced any came after prayers
begun, in the time of reading, (S. Isidors Rule was observed; S. Isidor. Hisp.
lib. 1. de Eccles. Offic. c. 10. R. Maur. de institut. cleric. l. 2. c. 52.
) first to adore, and then to listen and fall in with the rest. Thus this duty
was duly by them performed, as it was strictly by GOD commanded. Take heed, or
keep thy foot, when thou entrest into the House of GOD.

But what? will some say: If God be so careful for the reverence of the foot;
surely is he not much more careful for the reverence of the Head? If he be so
careful, for the service of the meanest part; he will be much more to have it
in the best manner from the best member. If he be so strict for our reverence
when we enter; he will be much more for our reverence, when we offer, praise,
or pray unto him. And so he is: I pray you read but the 1 Cor. 1, 2, 3. etc.
Verses.

I need not (I hope) remember you, what (the last time I was here) I observed
upon this, both from the Eastern, and Western practice: What the Apostle
commands; what they did then, let us do now. I will but remember you, what our
Holy Mother, Vid. Can. and constitut. Eccl. Angl. Can. 18.
the Church of England commands, Can. 18.

It suffices (Beloved) that heretofore we have served God after our own
will worship; after our own lusts and pleasures, (if that may be accounted
service) Let us now for the time to come, come as we ought to come. Let us
remember Eli his speech, though a remiss one, 1 Samuel 2.25.
to his sons: If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him; but if
a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? As also that severer
speech of the man of God to Eli, V. 30. Verse. 30.
Them that honor me, I will honor, and they that despise me shall be lightly
esteemed; says the Lord God of Israel. Let us recount, when we come hither,
that we come for Gods worship; and shall we not worship him as he would have
us, as he commands us? Let us remember, that whither we come, it is the House
of God, (...), and shall we not do it that reverence, we do to the Kings
Chamber! Let us, that come, remember, that GOD made the whole man, and shall we
render a piece, or a part only to him, that made us all? that requires all?
You have heard, Genesis chap. 12.13, 15.
how Abraham the Father of the faithful, in every place where God appeared,
though but once, built him an Altar; held the place holy and consecrate: and
do not we desire to be the sons of holy Abraham? You may remember Jacobs
example in the like kind; how reverently he spoke and thought of that place,
where God appeared: surely, The Lord was in this place, and I was not aware.
Genesis 28.16.
(Mark that,) What would he have done? How reverent would he have been, had he
known God had been there! His words show in what respect he held it: How
fearful is this place? Verse. 17.
This is no other than the House of God, and this is the Gate of Heaven.

Moses and Joshua (as you have heard) are bid put off their shoes from their
feet, because the place where they stood, was holy, Exodus 3. Joshua 5. Acts 7.
Nay the Turks, Jews, and Heathen shall rise up against us, for our want of
reverence: For this very thing commanded Moses and Joshua, is performed by the
Turks even at this day, Lavaterus in Josh. 5.15.
as often as they enter into their Moschits: as also the Jewish Priests in all
their Sacrifices still observe the same, Io. Drusius in Com. in locum. Josh.
as learned Drusius has observed out of Moses Gerundensis. The same is still
done also at this day by most of the Eastern Nations of the World. And is it
not an eternal shame, and reproach to us, in so great light above all others,
after so much and long preaching, not to perform or retain any, the most
necessary reverence in our Churches; when all those Nations in less knowledge,
in dimmer light, with no instructor, after so long a time, almost four
thousand years, do still perform, notwithstanding to their no Gods, a most
troublesome and irksome reverence? Is it not a shame, that after so long a
time, such as they still continue to do so much, and we still continue to do so
little? O tell it not in Gath! publish it not in the streets of Askelon! etc.
Is it not strange which S. Augustine reports: 2 Samuel 1.20.
That the Heathen (though conquerers) so much respected the Christian Churches;
S. Aug. de. civ. Dei. lib. 1. c. 4, 5, and 6.
and do we so lightly reckon of them; nay, of Gods reverence in them? O
dismal decay of Christianity! O Apostatising fall! O backsliding generation!
But I refrain my self: I have said enough: only let me say for a conclusion;

That if we be men; (me thinks) we would hear the voice of Nature, that
teaches this reverence to the Heathen her children. If Christian men, let us
hear the voice of God, and Scripture, which requires it of us.

Let us hear the voice of God our Father, who commands it.

Let us obey the Church our Mother, who enjoyneth it.

Let us follow those first, and true Christians, that practiced it: or if not
them,

Let us not be worse than the Heathen, Jews, Turks, or Infidels, that still
perform it.

Let us worship, and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker.

Let us, as often as we enter into the House of God, take heed to our feet; and
be more ready to hear (what is here commanded) then (as the many do) to offer
the Sacrifice of fools.

FINIS.
THE SECOND SERMON OF THE SVBORDINATION OF CHVRCH Duties, chiefly in reference
to the People.
ECCLES. 5.1. And be more ready to hear, then to give the Sacrifice of fools:
For they consider (or know) not, that they do evil.


THIS Chapter most fully notes the vanities, follies, and wickednesses
committed ordinarily in GODS divine Service; as our holy Mother Church in the
contents of the Chapter has most rightly observed. Such follies, as either
declare men to be 1 Ignorant fools, that do them; because they know not other,
or better: or else 2 Wilful fools, that when they may and do know better,
yet notwithstanding are still such, as will not consider that they do evil.
With the former we have here to do, to teach them knowledge; to let them know,
how, and what they should do: how they should enter: how they should hear:
how they should pray: how they should offer: etc. With the latter (though least
with them, yet with them) we have here also to do, to convince them, and to
let them know, they do not as they ought to do; namely, that their entering,
their hearing, their praying, their offering, (if any such there be) are not
any pleasing and acceptable Sacrifice unto GOD; but truly and indeed (as they
are here termed) the Sacrifice of fools. And indeed, the Text, though it
speaks of the latter, that they know not that they do evil: yet, because
they will not know, it speaks only to the former; Take thou heed to thy
foot, when etc.

For them, which will not know, (for such are these Scripture-fooles) which
have ears, and hear not: which hear not, nor understand, Matthew. 13.13.
Matthew. 13.13.
which are willingly ignorant. 2 Pet. 3.5. 2 Pet. 3.5.
which (as it is, Prove. 1.8. Prove. 1.8.
) will neither hear the instruction of (GOD) their Father, nor the Law of (the
Church) their Mother: For them I have nothing, but with the Apostle, 1 Cor.
14.38. 1 Cor. 14.38.
He that is ignorant, let him be ignorant still: nay, (...); as we may read
it with the vulgar; Qui ignorant, ignorabitur; He that will not know, shall not
be known. As here they say unto GOD. ( Job 21.14. Job 21.14.
) Depart from us, we will not the knowledge of thy ways: So GOD will say to
them, ( Matthew. 7.23. Matthew. 7.23.25.44. Luke 13.26.27.
) Nescio vos, I know you not; I never knew you: Depart from me, (all, ye
fools,) all ye workers of iniquity.

But we hope better things of you: and therefore now (by GOD's favor, and
grace) undertake to show you the follies of wicked, and ungodly fools; that
seeing we cannot mend them, we may amend our selves by them.

The first folly, and vanity of fools, that do evil, is; That they have no
affection, or desire to come; no care, or religious reverence in coming; that
they come out of custom, or fear; rather then out of conscience, and in the
fear of GOD. And when they are come, they carry themselves neither according
to fear, nor conscience. These are taxed in the first words; Take heed to thy
foot, etc.

There are two more follies noted in this verse; one more in the second, and
another in the fourth: Those in this verse, are either in hearing, or in
offering: Or according to the threefold end of the House of GOD: the first is,
in that, which is first after our due entering, hearing: the second is, in that,
which is the end of all our hearing, prayer; the third is, in that, which is
the end of our Prayer; Sacrifice, and offering.

And indeed this Text is, as an exhortation to the Jews, and all the Church of
God for their entire, and perfect obedience: So a Prophecy also, that the
Jewish Sacrifices should cease, and that in stead of them, in GOD's House, Esa.
56.7.
being proclaimed the house of Prayer, to all Nations, Prayer, and other
Christian Sacrifice should succeed, according to that of Malachi the 1.11. Mal.
1.11.
From the rising up of the Sun unto the going down of the same, my name
shall be great among the Gentiles; and in every place incense shall be offered
unto my Name, and a pure offering.

This not only the context shows, in the following verse; where GOD's will
is laid down concerning public Prayer, the true Christian Sacrifice; but also
the Text most plainly: For, whereas we read, be more ready to hear; the
Hebrew has (...); the Septuagint Greek, (...), the old Latin vulgar,
Appropinqua ut audias, Come near, that thou may hear: plainly implying,
that the Jews, if they would hear, that is, obey indeed; (for so the word
here also signifies) must yet come nearer to hear; and that, besides Moses,
another also was yet to be heard, namely CHRIST JESUS the promised Messiah,
the SAVIOR of the World, Emmanuell, GOD with us, that great Prophet; He that
was to come, etc. of whom even Moses had fully foretold, Deuteronomy. 18.18. Deu.
18.18.
A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise you up of your brethren, Acts 3.21,
22.7.37, 19.
like unto me, Him shall you hear in all things, whatsoever he shall say unto
you. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken unto the
words, that he shall speak in my name; Acts 3.23.
I will require it of him: or as S. Peter repeateth it: That soul shall be
destroyed from among the people. To hear him, was to come near to hear.

But this Precept being disobeyed, the Prophecy is fulfilled, and now is become
an History, teaching us, and all succeeding Generations, both 1 who these
fools are, namely, such as with the Jews will not hear, who will not know
that they do evil; as also 2 to beware of their folly, and disobedience by
their fall, and punishment.

Both are here set down in the Text: 1. Their wilful error. 2. Their
shameful punishment.

In the Error, we consider; 1. The Persons; They are mere fools. 2. Their
Number; they are many, 1 Because a whole Nation, many Nations; many
Generations: 2 Many Fools; because many ways fools: fools in entering;
fools in hearing; fools in praying; fools in sacrificing and offering: every
way, any way, fools. 3. The Reason of this folly; Faciunt malum, They do that
which is evil. 4. The Ground of this reason. 1 Privative; their Ignorance,
their wilful ignorance; Nesciunt, They know not, they will not know, nor
consider, that they do evil. 2 Positive; their ill performance: They do but,
Dare sacrificium; they do not offer, they will not: they do but Give
Sacrifice: This is their error, their folly.

And to this their sin, their punishment (as Justice requires) is answerable.

1 They will be fools, and therefore they shall be fools: they will not hear
GODS Prophet; and therefore GOD bids his Prophet, Esaias 6.9. Esaias 6.9.10.
Go tell this people; Hear ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed,
but perceive not: make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears
heavy, and shut their eyes: lest they see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed. As
they will not hear the Son of God: so they shall not hear the Son of God:
Therefore (says our Savior) speak I unto them in Parables; because they
seeing see not; and hearing they hear not, nor understand, Mat. 13.13. Mat.
13.13.
Mark 4.12. Mark 4.12.
etc.

Luke 8.10. John 12.40.
2 As they did reject the Word of God by his Apostles; so God by his Apostles
did reject them: Paul and Barnabas; Acts 13.46.28.27.28. Acts 28.27, 28.
to the Jews at Antioch; it was necessary that the word of God should first
have been spoken unto you: but seeing you put it from you, and judge your
selves unworthy of everlasting life; lo, we turn unto the Gentiles: and Acts
28. the Apostle Saint Paul repeating the Prophet Esay's words to other Jews at
Rome; tells them plainly the cause: Therefore be this known unto you (that will
know nothing else) that the salvation of God is sent unto the Gentiles, and
they will hear it. Mark; they will hear it; God grant we may. Take thou heed
how thou entrest; take heed how thou hear, etc. As for them, they are
fools; I have nothing to do with them; only take thou heed.

3 As they will not know GOD; so GOD will not know them: he turns his back
upon them; though he speak of them, yet he will not so much as once speak to
them: (he speaks to another) only of them, Luke 12.20.
as of the Rich man ( Luke 12.) that he is a Fool: Luke 16.19.
or of the other ( Luke the 16.) that he was a Glutton: or as of the Pharisees,
that they were Vipers, (Mat. 3.7. Mat. 3.7.
)

4 As they loved darkness rather than light; so they shall have darkness for
light: Egyptian darkness here; everlasting, endless, utter darkness
hereafter: (...). Mat. 22.13.


1 They will not know what to do as they should do.

2 Though they do know; yet they know not to do it.

3 They do evil; because they know not what it is to do it; namely, how
fearful a thing it is; how their wilful ignorance draws on woeful
vengeance: and their evil of sin is accompanied with the evil of punishment;
their evil doing, with evil suffering.

5 (For one more punishment is there in this Text, that) though their name be
forgotten, their memory, as their bodies, rotten: yet it shall always be
remembered, as by God, to reward them; so by us, to beware by them: it must
never be forgotten, that they have done evil. This must stand like Lots Wives
Pillar, or Sodomes ashes; to teach us, that come after; that we should not be,
as they were, fools; that we must not do, as they did, evil. Ierusalems
destruction, and the Jews dispersion over the face of the earth amongst us
Gentiles, must warn all the Gentiles, must teach thee how thou must enter into
the House of God; how thou must hear the Word of God; how thou must call on
the Name of God.

In the Name of God (beloved) let that voice of the Holy Ghost in the 95.
Psalm, Psalm. 95.7. Heb. 3.7.
be written upon the doore-posts of our hearts, never to be forgotten. To day
if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, Verse. 7, 8, 9,
as in the provocation, in the day of temptation in the Wilderness: when your
Fathers tempted me, and proved me, and saw my works. And as in my Text, so
there, 10.
their folly is recorded: Forty years long was I grieved with this generation,
and said; It is a people that do err in their hearts, they have not known my
ways: 11.
And their punishment; Wherefore I swear in my wrath, they should not enter
into my rest. This story the Apostle alluding to, 1 Cor. 10.11.
(1 Cor. 10.) tells us; It was written for our admonition. And more plainly in
the Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. 3.
repeating this Psalm, where this story is written, applies it to the
Christian Church; whence this Psalm in the Church of God has been used by
the Church of God in all ages; Psalm. 25.
for an Introit Psalm, to put us in mind, 1 how we should enter into the House
of God, in the 6. Verse. O come let us, etc. 2 How we should offer, Verse. 1. O
come let us sing unto the Lord, Let us heartily rejoice in the strength of our
salvation: Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving, and show our
selves glad in him with Psalms: for the Lord our God is a great God, etc. 3
How we should hear, and come near to hear, Verse. 7, 8. To day if ye will
hear his voice, harden not your hearts, etc.

The Text agrees with the Psalm. Both of them teaching us our duty.

by Precept, for entering, hearing, and offering.

by the contrary Error; that they do err in their hearts, and are but fools
that do otherwise.

by the fearful punishment, that follows their folly; Heb. 3.18.
They shall not enter into his rest; they shall be as they will be, fools;
GOD will not know them, that will not know him: They shall not enter into GODS
joy and rest, who are so careless to enter into GODS House; so careless of
their behavior in Gods House.

And indeed, both the Manner and Order, The Division.
to be used in Gods divine service, and worship, is here set down.

1 The Manner, 1 how we must enter, 2 how we hear, 3 how we must offer, and 4
how we must come near to hear.

2 The Order, that, as we must first enter, before hear, so we must hear,
before we can offer, pray, or praise GOD, as we should.

From both these (the Manner and the Order) We for better order sake, will
digest all our duty into these three Propositions.

First, [That we must first (after our due entering) ]

Secondly, [That in the House of God, we must hear the Word of God.]

Thirdly, [That we must not only hear GODS offer unto God: And,

That we may offer, as we should, We must come near to hear.]

And here (Beloved) the better to show you these particular duties, we will do,
as Mariners ofttimes, in describing dangerous Coasts; show you where others
heretofore have made shipwreck, where others have committed folly; that you
may avoid their sin, and so escape their punishment.

FIrst, for the first Proposition, or Observation; hear; first, Take heed to
thy foot how thou entrest. 1 Duly enter.


And even here some are so ready for hearing, that they skip over the duty of
entering, Take heed to thy foot, etc. They are persuaded coming late, (for so
they please to come, not till the Sermon begin, that they may be sure there be
nothing but hearing;) then if they come, (for come they will not, unless they
may hear; and no hearing, if no Sermon:) when they come thus late, they hold
it (I say) unlawful, nay, superstitious to fall down on their knees, to offer
any prayer unto God: the reason, say they, is in my Text; because forsooth,
they are commanded to be more ready to hear, than to offer the Sacrifice of
fools. Miserable men, according to the old Proverb, (...); thrice fools: for
so many times, for such, are they condemned, even in this Text they cite.

1 For their late entering: for hearing being their timeliest exercise, they are
commanded to be ready to hear, that is, to make haste to the House of God, to
be swift to hear the Word of God; to be as diligent in Gods service, as the
Centurions Servants were in his, Matthew. 8.9.
Mat. 8. When he bids come, to come, and not to go from hence, till he bids
us go. It is the Law of our Church in the 18. Canon, That no man depart out of
the Church, during the time of Service and Sermon.

And it was the ancient custom of the first and ancient Church. Io. Cassianus
Instit. l. 3. c 7. and li. 4. c. 16. Council. Agathens. Can. 47. Psalm. 122.1.
Cassian tells us, that they which came after the first Psalm was begun, were
subject to censure. And the Council of Agatha, with diverse others; That they
that were too ready to depart from hearing, should be alike censured: thou must
make haste, and be ready to hear; not over ready to depart from hearing.

The second folly, for which they are condemned, is for ill entering; that being
come late, they will thus enter: that having committed a sin, and folly in the
one, they will notwithstanding add another folly in the other: that being not
ready to hear, they are over-ready to leap over their lesson in the first
words; Take heed to thy foot when thou entrest.

It is reported by Buxtorfius, Io. Buxtorfius de Synag. Judah. cap. 5.
that the Jews being moved by the authority of this Text, have an Iron
Instrument placed at the entrance of their Synagogue, with which they pare off
the dirt off their feet, before they enter. Thus they abuse the Text to their
superstition. But these men far more abuse it, and more wickedly; making this
Text the Patron of their impiety. Let us see and examine it, and we shall soon
see, that Ink serves as well to make Paper white, as this to maintain their
folly: Nay, does it not rather condemn them?

1 For first, is it not the first, Take heed to thy foot? etc. Wonder it is how
they can hear that which is not; leap over this duty, and never see it! Let
them but do the first, Take heed to their feet, when they enter; and let them
then be as ready to hear, as they please.

2 This word here used for hearing, signifies to obey; so Genesis 26.5. Genesis 26.5.
because that Abraham heard (or obeyed my voice:) it is so usually taken in the
Scripture: even this sense it has also in this place: Thus to hear, is to
hear indeed.

3 This word Cherob signifies an orderly coming near: 1 Samuel 15.
and therefore such as best agrees with this reverence; it being a means for
our orderly hearing, if we come near, as we should do: We will go into His
Tabernacle, and fall low on our knees before His footstool, Psalm. 132.7. Psalm.
132.7.


4 This hearing being for offering and prayer, as we shall see hereafter; it
must needs be, that GOD must needs best accept that, for which our hearing is
ordained, Romans 10.13, 14.
Romans 10.

5 Besides, the word Bethelohim, the House of GOD, shows, that the way to
take heed to our feet, is to enter by prayer first; because, even the House of
GOD is the house of Prayer.

Psa. 56.7.
6 Again, there is an hearing in prayers: Attention to them, is a duty of this
hearing also: And do not the words, (be not rash with thy mouth) infer
as much? And if GOD forbid the rashness of the foot in the former words, and
the rashness of the mouth in the following; does He not much more forbid the
rashness of the ear, which ought first to be opened by Prayer, according to
that of the Psalmist: Psalm. 40.7. Non enim ingredi Domum Dei, sed sine
offensione ingredi, laudis est. Si esset, etc. S. Hieronymus in locum. Seu
Alcuin. in locu^. Basil. edit 1531
But mine ears have thou opened. We pray for the one; LORD open thou our lips,
that our mouth may show forth thy praise. And ought we not to pray for the
other? Surely, it is not so easy a thing to hear as they suppose. It is the
saying of Alcuinus, and others of the ancient from Saint Hierom and Saint
Austen: Si esset omnium, qui in Ecclesia Dei, etc. If it were so ready, or
easy a matter, for all, that are in the Church of GOD, to hear the Word of
GOD, etc. Surely, (say they) the HOLY GHOST would never have bid us; Come
near, that thou may hear. I may ad; if the HOLY GHOST had thought it
needless; He would never have made this a Rule for His Church: Take heed to
thy foot.

But they object again: Objection.
Prayer in time of Reading or Preaching, is a private worship; and therefore
unlawful in the time of public Service.

I answer: It is not, unlawful: Answ.
for did not Saint Peter, and Saint John, Acts 3.1. Acts 3.1.
make their petitions, after the Christian manner, in the Temple, the Jews
being at their public Service? Did not Samuel's Mother ask a Son of GOD, 1 Samuel 3.10.
in the time of Divine, and public worship? Yes surely: And may not we do
the like? No doubt we may: Doubtless we must not otherwise. Remember, this is
an entry to hearing; Take heed to thy foot, when thou go into the House,
etc. And remember this also; Appropinqua ut audias: Come near, that thou
may hear: And thus much of our due entering. Now of the second duty; our
hearing.

That next after due entering; we must hear. And after due entering, Hear.
Hearing is the sense of discipline: It is that, which GOD first requires of
you: It is the first in our Commission; Go, teach all Nations: For as he that
is borne deaf, and never heard; is always dumb, and will never speak: So
he, that never hears the Word of GOD, can never invocate the Name of GOD. How
shall they call on Him, of whom they have not heard, Romans 10.13. Hence, it was
the custom always in the Church, that first they heard: So was it in the
Church of the Jews; Nehem. 9.3. Nehem. 9.3.
They read the Law one fourth-part of the day; and another fourth part they
confessed and worshipped the Lord their God. After their Prayers, as Josephus
describes it, followed their Sacrifice. This order being observed afterward in
the Christian Church, (as it is most obscurely collected from the 1 Cor. 11.
etc.) the whole Service, was called by the Greeks (...); as also by the
Latins, Ordo. And indeed, as the Catechumeni, amongst the Greeks, and mother
Church; and Audientes amongst the Latins, was the first step to Christianity,
or rather the preparation to it; So likewise the Prayer of the Catechumeni,
Council. Laodicen. Can. 19.
or Hearers, was the first Prayer of the three: So that ancient Counsel of
Laodicea reckons it: So the Greek Dionysius, Saint Chrysostom, Clemens, and
all the ancient record it: and the same order the Church of England has most
justly followed; that, as in our Churches the Pulpits are placed below, the
Altar above, or in the highest place; so we should first hear, before we
presume to offer. Thus, Levi. 2.13. Mark 9.49.
amongst the Jews, every Sacrifice must be seasoned with salt, the Symboll of
knowledge: And GOD requires our heart, the seat of knowledge. Hos. 6.6.
I will have mercy, and not sacrifice: and the knowledge of God more then burnt
offerings. So true is that of Lactantius: Lactantius. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Neque religio ulla sine sapientia suscipienda; nec ulla sine Religione
probanda sapientia. Romans 12.1.
It is our reasonable service GOD calls for: For, as He has given us reason,
so He would we should chiefly show it in His Service. For this cause the
Egyptians made them eyes and ears of gold and silver, and hung them in their
Temples; intimating, that they should first hear, before they presumed to
offer. Hence also that Symboll of Pythagoras; That we must not speak of GOD
sine lumine. And indeed, the calling upon GOD, is called the seeking of God.
Esa. 55.6. Matthew. 7.7.
The Woman in the Gospel, before she sought, first lighted her candle. The
like must we do: we must light the candle here, that must light us at the
Altar; we must first hear.

And as we must hear first; So we must hear Gods House, Gods Word: Hear
GOD's Word. Psalm. 119.105.
for that, as the Psalmist tells us, is that, which is a light to our feet,
and a lantern to our steps. A light indeed, not only to show us our way; but
also to guide us in our way. The Church is Heaven upon Earth: and the
Scriptures, the Old and New Testament, are the lights in this Heaven. Therefore
amongst the Jews, in their Synagogues, there was the reading of the Law, and
the Prophets: Acts 13.15. Acts 15.21.
and every Sabbath day Moses was read in all their Cities. Semblably did the
first Christians, even in the Apostles times; reading, as we do, both the Old
and New Testament. To this the Apostle alludeth, Colos. 4.16. So more fully,
Ephesians. 5.19. Call. 4.16. Ephesians. 5.19. Colos. 3.18.
But most plainly, Colos. 3.16. Let the Word of God dwell in you richly in all
wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs, singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord. And whatsoever
ye do in word, or deed; do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks
to GOD, and the Father of Him. Where, the whole order of the Church Service,
being summarily comprised, is in like sort observed by our holy Mother, Hoc
officium, sicut quodlibet aliud praeter nocturnum Oratione co^cluditur: Domine
Deus Pater, qui nos ad principium Dici, etc. Hug de S. Vict. De Eccles. Offic.
li. 2. c. 2. Vide Ejusdem. c. 16.
the Church of England: Her prayer of the Catechumeni, (as Hugo de Sancto
victore, gives us cause to distinguish it) ending at the first Collect, is
entirely the Word of God: even many entire portions of Gods most holy Word. (1)
The Psalms, (2) First and Second Lessons, (3) Evangelicall Anthems, most fit
to express our joy in CHRIST, our praising God for the Word of God. (4) Those
short and pious Ejaculations, all entirely the Word of God. And as in the
first; So in her second Service, where, after the due entrance, by a particular
Confession of our sins in every Commandment; the first thing we hear, is the
Word of God, in two other Lessons, Epistle and Gospel. And as we call, use,
and order them, so were they used in all ages and Churches; Plentiful
testimonies may be brought concerning this, not only out of the most ancient
Counsels, and first Fathers; but also out of those first Liturgies, of
Antioch, Alexandria, Jerusalem, Constantinople; As even at this day, they are
in the same order observed, by the Graecians, Indians, Russians, Abissines, and
Aethiopians, not to speak of the Latin, and Western Christians. So you see;
we do what we should do, what has always been done, by all, in all places,
at all times. And in doing thus, you see, the Church of England is truly
Catholic.

But are there no follies in hearing? Yes surely: else, what need our blessed
SAVIOR say, Take heed how ye hear: Many follies there be in hearing, and
these two are the greatest. 1. That men think, all Religion consists in
hearing only; these do not offer. The 2. That they think, there is no hearing
without a Sermon: these forget this, that they must come near to hear. And
indeed, as in coming, there is foot after foot, one step after another; as
degrees in coming; So are there degrees in hearing whereby we come near to
hear.

The first, and nearest degree in hearing, Degrees in hearing. 1
whereby we come close up to God; is, the hearing of the sacred Oracles of God:
God's original very Word, properly so called in the Old and New Testament;
having in the Old a double difference of the first, or second Canon; or books
Canonical and Apocryphal; received also as were the rest from the Jews, to
whom were committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3.2. Romans 2.5.
And therefore the Christian Church durst not reject them; though, because they
received them not alike from all, they had them not in the like reverence.
These books, though distinguished from the other and valued under them; yet
were far preferred before all Ecclesiastical writings, whether of particular
men, or Churches: they were read in the Church, (next the Scriptures) for
manners, and instructions in lesser points: the other being received only for
the undoubted Canon, and rule of faith. So you see the first degree, whereby we
come nearest to hear, and wherein we are safest in hearing, is in Hearing God
Himself.

The second degree, 2 Degree.
whereby we come near to hear, (though not so near, as before; nor so sure,
as the other) is the hearing the Word of GOD applied, either by general, or
particular Churches, in their (1) Catechismes, their (2) Councels, (3)
Confessions, their (4) Ritualls, their (5) Homilies, which, next the Word of
GOD, are most worthily preferred before all other private works, or Preachings,
being the works of (1) many, and those most learned, and holy men: (2)
discussed with the clearest judgment: (3) penned with the maturest study: (4)
delivered in the shortest manner: (5) applied in the most familiar phrase: (6)
ordered with the plainest method: (7) showing the most needful points: Lastly
(8) comprehending most fully the sum, substance, and body of Christian
Religion. This degree, though not so near as the former, yet by these eight
steps, if not many more, it comes nearer up to hear, then the latter; Which is

3 Degree.
The third kind of hearing the Word of GOD: from particular, and private men in
their Sermons, or Homilies; which, being the works of one man alone, are
therefore most subject to error: large discourses, and therefore more apt to
be mistaken; more hardly understood; ofttimes not so applied to the meanest
capacities: many times conversant (as the Text leads us) about unnecessary
truths, and high disputes: confused and intricate in their order, manner, and
method: partaking of many imperfections, weaknesses, and ignorances, in respect
of those many wants, even in the best of any of us all: For we are (though sent
from God) but men, subject to infirmities; failing (I say) many times for want
of study, want of time, want of books, want of means, want of learning, want
of judgment, etc. and these, and many more, even in the best of ours.

Not to speak of the greater part of Sermons, for the most part, the worse in
all; perchance not penned at all, delivered with little, or no study, ofttimes
with little judgment, by men of small knowledge, learning, or reading; without
any scanning, discussing, or clearing; following their own private fancies,
rather then the Word of GOD, in the received Tenets of the Christian Church.

Not to speak of those Sermons of turbulent, factious, and seditious men,
(worthy of no name, memory, or mention; but the mention of Pilate) who, as he,
out of a desire of pleasing others, or profiting themselves by gain, lucre, or
vain glory, dare do that, which I dare not speak of; nay, which I tremble to
think of, opposing God and His Church, Christ and His Spouse; rending,
tearing, and dividing CHRIST'S seamelesse Coat; nay, dismembring, and renting
His most glorious body.

So you see, that Sermons are the least, and last degree of hearing, whereby we
least come near to hear, in which, greatest danger of hearing.

And surely, give me leave to tell you, where Sermons, and private expositions
have prevailed, and the Word of God it self, either neglected, or despised, or
any way thrust out in public, there follies have been multiplied, fools
have abounded, not knowing that they do evil: This experience shows us, (and
because my Text is Historical) I will briefly show you in the Jewish,
Eastern, Western, and Muscovy Churches.

1 In the Jewish, the Jews neglecting the more public authority of the Word
of God, and leaning to the doctrines of men, in their traditions, they fell at
last to build the Law of Moses upon their Talmud, Misnah, with their Gemarahs
by doing evil, they became fools, that knew not that they did evil; their
Religion now being naught else, but a mass of fools, and a pack of extreme
follies.

2 In the Church of Greece; one siding with Cephas, another with Apollos; even
in those early days: men getting them an heap of Teachers, having itching
ears, hating sound Doctrine, and multiplying foolish errors; Sermons were
restrained to some few, to Bishops only in their several Diocesses, or some
from them: and now, as it seems, they little venture beyond their (...).

3 In the Church of Rome, the Scriptures once read constantly, as with us,
through the whole year; whereas, being after hid in an unknown tongue, and
Legends obtruded for them: their Sermons began to be frought with follies, the
Truth of GOD began manifestly to be corrupted.

4 Lastly, the Church of Mosco, and Russia, neglecting the truth of God's Word,
and giving ear promiscuslouy to private interpretations, and Sermons of men
unlearned in the Scriptures, and GODS Divine truth, were at last feign to have
private Sermons, and Preaching, as we properly call it, suppressed, and public
penned Homelies read in their places.

I cannot stand now with any more reasons, which I might produce to show you,
that howsoever these other be excellent degrees of hearing; yet in them there
must be caution, as before for entering, Take heed to thy foot; So now for
hearing, Take heed how you hear; whom you hear, and what you hear. As for
the Word of GOD, it is the touchstone, the rule it self; that (...), the
sincere milk; that sure word of prophecy, 1 Pet. 2.2. 2 Pet. 1.19.
whereunto ye do well, that ye take heed, as to a light, that shines in a
dark place. Our Sermons howsoever, in respect of this light, are but as
candles to the Sun. This is the way, whereby we may and do ( God be praised)
come nearest to hear. Certainly, howsoever we do, (as I hope we all do read
the Scriptures at home) yet the Word of God, as it has most right to the House
of God; so then most of all has it God's blessing, when in God's House, it is
delivered by God's Minister, in the person and presence of God. Where two or
three are met together in my name (much more, if in His own house, Matthew.
18.20.
to His own Word) there am I in the midst of them: Thus you see, how we must
come near to hear.

But we must not only hear: It is at this day, the folly of the Jews, that
they think they may turn their Temples into Schools, but they may not change
their Schools into Temples. And is not the same folly found at this day also
with us? Not to speak of Schools kept here for Children, an abuse certainly
none of the least amongst us. Do you not think, that all Religion consists in
hearing? Are not our Churches made only Schools? and of Oratories, and houses
of Prayers, are they not made Oratories (in another sense) for preaching, and
hearing only? I appeal to our selves: how we throng on all hands to the one,
a Sermon? how scarcely, or not at all are we seen at the other, Prayers? As if
we were all ear; but where then is the body, 1 Cor. 12. 1 Cor. 12.19.
the body of Religion? It was not so in the Apostles times, when
notwithstanding being new converted, they had more need of hearing. I am
persuaded (says the Apostle) that you are full of all goodness, filled with
all knowledge, able to admonish one another, Romans 15.14. Romans 15.14.
Teaching, and admonishing one another, Coloss. 3.10. 1 Cor. 14.35.
Ephesians. 5.19. Ephesians. 5.19.
The women must learn from the men at home, 1 Cor. 14. And the Children from
the Mothers, 1 Timothy 2.15. 1 Timothy 2.15.
The Apostle chides the Hebrews, Heb. 5.12. Heb. 5.12.
that when for the time they ought to be Teachers, they have need again to
be taught the first principles. And it was the Apostles censure of some bad
ones, 2 Timothy 3.7. 2 Timothy 3.7.
that they were ever learning, and never learned. Beloved:

There is a time limited for the learning of every science; S. Chrysostom. Hom. 3.
in Coloss. f. 1378.
and Saint Chrysostom expostulateth with his people: How long shall we be
teaching you faith, and good manners? shall we always dwell in hearing? (...):
It was not so in the Apostles times. They, when they had instructed any, passed
them by, and made them Teachers over others; and thus they went (says he)
over the whole World.

And indeed the first and best Christians, after they had learned their first
principles in their Catechism, they gave themselves continually to Prayer,
Acts 1.14. For, as in our Church Service, Acts 1.14.2.42.6.4.
the Creed, the Confession of the faith follows next after the hearing of
GODS Word; to show us, that faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word
of GOD, Romans 10.17. Romans 10.17.
So, after the Confession of our faith; our faith confessed, presently shows
it self in Prayer. This, as the order of the ancient Churches in their
Liturgies, is observed by our holy Mother, the Church of England, being that
very natural order, which the Apostle most plainly lays down. Romans 10.13,
14.
Whosoever shall call on the Name of the LORD, shall be saved. How then shall
they call on Him, in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe on
Him, of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher?
So then; The end of our Preaching is, that you may hear; The end of your
hearing is, that you may believe; The end of all our believing is, that we may
all pray, invocate, and call on the Name of GOD. Thus the end of all our
hearing is, that we may offer.

And indeed, (as Saint Cyprian, S. Cypr. lib. 2. Ep. 2. S Chrysostom. orat. 2. de
precat. 8 46. T. 1.
and all Divines note) in hearing God comes near to us; God speaks to us:
but in Prayer, we come near to Him; we speak to Him; his being the true
Sacrifice, which, after the abolishing of those bloody Sacrifices; now only
remains in the Church of God, the house of prayer. Esa. 56.7.
And surely, after GODS Law transgressed by Adam, as the bloody Sacrifices were
necessary for a threefold end. 1. To signify what man had deserved for sin,
viz. to dye, as the poor beast did. 2. To Type out CHRIST JESUS, the true
Lamb of God, slain from the beginning for sin. 3. To testify their perfect
thankesgiving and entire obedience for their Redemption from sin: So
likewise, CHRIST being come, it was requisite they should cease, and others
should succeed in their rooms, for the same ends and use.

It is very remarkable, that the Genealogies of their Priests being
confounded, and their Temple destroyed (to which their Sacrifices were tied,
Deuteronomy. 12.26. Deuteronomy. 12.26.
) now, at this day, the Jews comfort themselves in that of Hose. 14.4. Hos.
14.4.
We will render the calves of our lips; acknowledging this in their Prayers,
at this day, to be the true Sacrifice. And indeed both to them and us, there
were always three kinds of Spiritual Sacrifices, whereby in our prayers we
come near to offer.

Degrees in offering.
1 The Sacrifice of Penance: that as the beast was should dye to sin. This we
have in that Paenitentiall, Psalm. 51.17. Psalm. 51.17.
The Sacrifices of God, are a broken and contrite heart: a broken and contrite
heart, o Lord, thou will not despise. This Sacrifice our Mother Church intends
we should offer in that laborious Paenitentiall Prayer, the Letany, which
anciently using, (as does ours, that form of; LORD, have mercy on us, from the
Paenitentiall, Psalm. 51.1. Psalm. 51.1.
was called (...), and being performed in all devout humility, in the very
words and forms of beseeching, were called (...): and lastly, continued with
fasting, and all earnest laborious constancy, was called (...). Acts 12.5.


The second is the Sacrifice of Mercy: It was mercy, that another, namely
Christ Jesus, typed in the Sacrificed beast, should dye for them, for us, for
all. And therefore GOD, as He shows mercy to us, so He requires mercy from
us: Hos. 6.6.
I will have mercy, and not Sacrifice, Hos. 6.6. This Sacrifice, as it was
anciently observed in the Communions of the first Christians, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2.
in their collections (they thence being called (...) by the Greek, and
oblations in the Latin Church:) So is it also commanded in our Offertories, as
being that Sacrifice, with which God is well pleased, Heb. 13.16. Heb. 13.16.


The third is the Sacrifice of thankesgiving, and obedience: 1 Sa. 15.22, 23
1 Samuel 15.22. and for praise, Psalm. 50.14. Psalm. 50.14.
Offer unto GOD thankesgiving; and pay thy vows unto the most high: and Verse
23. Who so offers praise, he honors me. 23.
We praise God in the Psalms; but more peculiarly we give Him thanks in our
thankesgiving, the blessed Eucharist; wherein, offering not Christ Jesus unto
God, (for we need not, we cannot; He did it Himself perfectly, being once
offered,) but offering His body; we offer our selves in Him. They are the very
words of our holy Mother, the Church of England, in her post-Co^munion: And
here we offer, and present unto thee, o Lord, our Souls and bodies, to be a
reasonable, holy, and lively Sacrifice unto thee: The very words of the
Apostle, Romans 12.1.

Romans 12.1.
By the first, the Sacrifice of Penance, in humble fasting and prayer, we kill
the Sacrifice, we crucify the old man, we slay the body of sin, we turn
from sin, return to God, and seek His face, Esa. 55.6. Esa. 55.6.
this is that first degree of our coming near.

By the second, we come nearer by works of mercy, and almesdeeds, imitating
in doing good, the Author of all good, being made like unto our heavenly
Father, Matthew. 5.48.
Mat. 5.

By the third, our thankful and faithful obedience, we come close up to
offer; being conformed to Christ, following His example, walking in His steps:
and by an obedient tendering of our selves unto God, in the blessed Eucharist,
receiving His body and blood, 2 Pet. 1.4.
He living in us, and we in Him, we are made partakers of the Divine Nature.
And truly, obedience is the end of all: the end of all; to fear God and keep
His Commandments, Eccles. 12.13.
Eccles. 12. It is the principal thing in our duty: the chief in the Text: It
is our perfect hearing; our perfect offering; our coming near. So some
expound it; Offer ut audias, making this offering to be all in all: For this
we hear, that we may know to do our duty: For this we pray for Grace
always, that we may be able always, at all times, to do our duty. This is
that, which God accepts in Abel. Genesis 4. Genesis 4.
which He commends in David, Psa. 40.6.
Psalm. 40. which He command's in Saul, 1 Samuel 15.22. 1 Samuel 15.22.
which He requires of every one.

A true Sacrifice indeed, where we offer not strange flesh; 1 Cor. 16.20.
but as Saint Austin, Gregory, etc. our own will unto God. A true Sacrifice,
where we offer not only nostra, that which is our's; but nos ipsos, our bodies
and souls, a true Sacrifice, where we offer, not the dead bodies of
unreasonable beasts; but a Spiritual, reasonable, living, and holy Sacrifice,
Romans 12.1. Romans 12.1.
And indeed this is that, for which we are all made an holy Priesthood, to
offer up Spiritual Sacrifice, Pet. 2.5.
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ: and thus in Him we truly and indeed come
near to offer.

Our Prayers are offered in His Name; by faith in His Name; they begin and end
in Him. He is our Mediator, to present these unto God, 1 John 2.2. 1 John 2.2.


Our Alms (if we look, they should do us good) must be in His Name also, Mat.
10.42. Matthew. 10.42.
at least He accepts them so, Mat. 25.40. 25.40.


Our obedience must be tendered in our thankesgiving for Him. Whatsoever you do
in word, or deed, Colloss. 3.17.
do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God, and the Father of
Him. By Him (says the Apostle) let us offer the Sacrifice of praise to God
continually, that is the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to His Name, Heb.
13.15. Heb. 13.15.


And now (beloved) having passed over many things, which I should have showed
in the duty of our coming near to hear; I have only contented my self, in
declaring the order, and manner to be observed in Gods divine worship. An order
truly, as appointed by God, so truly and fully observed by our holy Mother,
this famous Church of England. An order truly it is; so the Church always
called it: And orders (you know) are to be obeyed, to order us, and to keep us
in order and obedience. Let all things be done decently, 1 Cor. 14.40.33.
and in order, 1 Cor. 14.40. For God is not the author of confusion; but of
peace, as in all Churches of the Saints. And indeed, the ancient Fathers, as
they were nearest those times; and therefore might best tell us: So they are
bold upon it, that this order was appointed by the Apostles, and by them
together with the Christian faith propagated in all Christian Churches. It is
fit therefore we all stoop to this order.

And truly in my Text, which is the more remarkable, the very same words,
that express Gods will for this order, do also peremptorily set down Gods
command for our obedience. So the word, to hear, with the Text, is by the
marginall citations referred to that of 1 Samuel 15.22. To obey, etc.

2 So the word, to offer, is extended to obey; seeing that obedience is the end
of all our offering, Psalm. 40.
Psalm. 4.

3 The word, Charob, is so by some rendered, Offer ut audias; making this
offering all in all. And indeed, as the Prayer, and Sacrifice of fools, that
is, sinful and wicked men, is an abomination to the Lord, (Prove. 15.8. Prove.
15 8.21.27.
) as the cutting off a dogs neck, and the offering of swines blood, Esa. 66.3.
Esa. 66.3.
So likewise our hearing, prayers and offerings, are but types and means for
obedience. Obedience (as S. Austin calls it) is the mother, the guardian and
keeper of all virtues. The sons of Ionadab, how are they praised, even by God
Himself ( Ier. 35.2. Ier. 35.2.
) because they obeyed their Father, in a temporal obedience, in abstinence
from things lawful, and though indifferent, yet in some sort necessary! How
far more glorious is it, to obey God our Father; Christ Jesus our Lord; the
Church, our Mother, in, and for spiritual obedience? God, that has set His
Church over us, requires obedience to His Church from us, Heb. 13.17. Heb.
13.17.
Obey them, that have the rule over you, and submit your selves; for they watch
for your Souls, as they that must give account for you, etc.

And indeed, as in hearing, (if we hear not him, that stands next us, there is
little hope we should hear those, that are a far off: So, if we hear not the
Church of God, whereby God comes near to us, there is little hope, we will
obey and hear God. As it is in love: If we love not our brother, etc. 1 Ioh.
4.20. So it is in obedience; a duty of love: If we obey not the Church, which
we have seen, how shall we love God, whom we have not seen? Divines are wont to
compare Obedience to Jacob's ladder; the lower part of obedience to the Church,
stand's on Earth; but, as Jacob's ladder, it end's in Heaven: And, as there, so
here God stand's at the top of it: And, as in Jacob's ladder no ascending to
the highest, but by the lower steps; So, no obedience to God, unless we obey
His Church. He that hears you, hears me; and he, that despises you,
despises Him that sent me, etc. Luke 10.16. Luke 10.16.
So Ezekiel. 3.7. Ezekiel. 3.7.
God tells His Prophet, that the Children of Israel will not hear thee because
they will not hear me: And Christ bids us, that he that will not hear the
Church, should be as an heathen, and a publican. Mat. 18.17.


No hope of such wilful fools: And therefore my Text, as out of hope, though
it speak of them; yet it speaks not to them: as out of all hope to do any
good upon them: It only, and boldly speaks of them, this; that they are,
fools indeed. And truly, Is it not folly, for one man to oppose the whole
Christian Church of God? Is it not folly, for one man to think himself wiser
than Gods Church Catholic over the world, assisted with Gods Spirit in all
ages?

Is it not folly, for things indifferent to break the union, and peace of all
Christian Churches? Is it not folly in the highest degree, that though they
have been convinced of their follies, they will notwithstanding go on still
in their folly, and not know, or acknowledge, that they do evil?

I am not hasty to apply sentences of condemnation: I wish from my heart their
conversion, who are thus perversely affected. As I said at first: my Text
speaks not, nor I (as I hope) to any such here: yet I desire, that, they that
will not hear from me, from us here; may at least, hear from us by others
here: Our prayers shall be for them; our studies and endeavors (if it may be)
to do them good.

Exhortation
In the mean time, my Exhortation is to you.

First, for obedience to our Mother Church, and conformity with her to the best
and purest Churches. Surely (beloved) it is not safe to disobey; seeing he that
dispiseth her, cannot choose (as I have showed) but displease God; being in a
great forwardness to make Him turn His back upon him: and upon his Cain-like
offering.

2 For caution in hearing; how and whom you hear: seeing it is not likely,
that they should teach obedience, who are themselves the authors of
disobedience. It is S. John, 2. Ep. v. 10. Ioh. 2. Ep. v. 10
If there come any to you, not having this Doctrine; receive him not into your
house, nor bid him, GOD speed.

3 For particular obedience to this order in GODS divine, and public worship,
that you be careful how you enter; whom, when, and how you hear; what, and
how you offer: That you be careful so to offer, that you may profitably come
near; so to come near, that you may obediently hear; so to hear, that you
may religiously, and piously offer.

And if thus we offer; it shall be truly, as some read it, Super donum
insipientum Sacrificium; a Sacrifice far above the Sacrifice of fools. It
shall be the savor of life unto life; a Sacrifice truly acceptable to God, in
the Merits and Passion of Jesus Christ.

FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED IN CHELMSFORD, AT A QVARTER-SESSIONS. 1632.
Ecclesiastes 5.2. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty
to utter any thing before God: for God is in Heaven, and thou upon Earth;
therefore let thy words be few.


I May not wave this Text, because of the Occasion; nay rather, this Text best
fits the Occasion: for even here behold a Sessions also.

1 The Judge upon the Bench GOD in Heaven.

2 The Offenders at the Bar. Coram: before GOD the Judge, Thou (whosoever)
upon Earth.

3 Faults committed, Abuses to be reformed: Errors censured, Rashness in the
mouth, Hastiness in the heart, the two most usual and common offenders.

4 The Laws to be promulged, the Charge that is given, and that of both sorts,
both negative and affirmative, as well forbidding, as bidding and commanding.

Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty, etc. Let thy
words be few.

And indeed these Sessions have the advantage of Matters about which; they are
such as concern the High Court of Heaven; or our Petitions to the Star Chamber
Prayer. 2 For the Judge, it is GOD, as far above all here, as Heaven is
Offenders, it would be considered, whether they that be Judges here below, be
not as others, guilty Offenders at this bar here. Especially, this would be
thought upon with the first, Whether these Sessions in this place, well held,
would not make way for the better performing ours. And doubtless so they will;
For what better in the entrance and beginning, than that, with which (if they
begin aright) all men do begin withal, Prayer, the Lock of the Night, the Key
of the Morning; the entrance to every action: Without me (says CHRIST) ye can
do nothing, John 15.5. John 15.5.
Not judge, I am sure: for justice and judgment are the Lords, and fetch them
down we must by prayer, as David did: Give thy judgments, O Lord, unto the
King, and thy righteousness to the Kings Son, Psalm 72.1. Psalm. 72.1.


But the reason of your meeting is for abuses to be reformed; then what more
needful to be reformed, than our Prayers? If amiss we begin (as they are our
first beginning) what hope ever of a good ending?

But the end of our meeting is for peace, for civil peace; and what more
assured way for this, than to lay the foundation of religious peace? Religion
(my Text shows it) bridles the Tongue, that untamed member, that sets the
world on fire: it restrains the Heart, the root of all outward actions.
Religion is the soul of the State, the life of the Commonweal: and surely, as
in a Glass, face answers to face; so does the peace of the State, to the
peace of the Church: like Hippocrates his Twins, they laugh and weep together:
as Castor and Pollux: ominous it must needs be, if the peace of the one be
sundred from the other. Solomon's Temple was first built, 1 Kings 6, 7.
then Solomon's House: and the same wisdom, that taught him so to build, taught
him so to reform by the same Order. It is observeable, that Solomon entreating
of the remedying of follies, in these following Chapters, begins in this
beginning of this Chapter, from the errors and vanities in Religion; plainly
teaching us, that, as follies and iniquities in Religion, are the ground of all
other follies; so the reforming of these, is the way to establish all the rest.

But of follies in Religion, those are the greatest, which are in the greatest,
and nearest degree to the honoring and dishonouring GOD; such are they, that
are in Prayer: for this is the Ladder of Heaven: the Christians Sacrifice: the
just man's Safeguard: the Devils scourge: the Spirits earnest: this is the Nurse
of love: the Friend of peace: the Souls solace: our Access to God: the Means
of salvation: For, Whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord, shall be
saved, Joel 2.32. Joel. 2.32. Acts 2.21. Romans 10.13, 14, 15.
etc. For this (as I have showed) is all our preaching, hearing, believing,
Romans 10. Our entering, hearing, offering, in the former words, hither are they
referred all of them, here the greatest danger if we miss, herein the greatest
comfort if we hit: and therefore here, as for that unum necessarium, I
challenge your best attention. Where you may please to consider these three
things.

Errors indicted, the follies arraigned, defect, or excess of religious
duties. Secondly, the Precepts, Charge, and Injunctions given; which are these:
Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing
before God; and let thy words be few. Thirdly, the Reason and Ground of all;
For God is in Heaven, and thou upon Earth.

1 Errrours in the defect of religious duties, and devotion. 1. Folly in not
offering. Psalm. 14.2.
In the words before, you heard of the offering of Fools; so an offering they
have; Yet, there is a Fool, that has said in his heart, There is no God,
Psalm. 14.2. Doubtless, where no GOD, no offering: folly in the highest kind.
Yet such are rather Madmen than Fools; yea, Beasts rather than Men; yet
Beasts, the worst and wildest, The Lions do seek their meat of God, Psalm.
104.21. Psalm. 104.21.
So they acknowledge GOD, yea, they serve him. They continue this day according
to thine Ordinance, for all things serve thee, Psalm. 119.91. Psalm. 119.91
Therefore, they are nor Men, nor Beasts, but Devils: nay, The very Devils also
believe, and tremble, Iam. 2.19. James 2.19.
As S. John said of Cerinthus, so we of them; They are the Devils firstborn,
worse than their Father: Not Cain, not Saul, not Judas so bad as they; for
Judas was amongst the Apostles, Saul among the Prophets, Cain even among the
Offerers; yea, the first of them, Genesis 4.3. Genesis 4.3.
It is a Rule in Reason: Where the Principles are denied, no arguing: where the
Foundation is rased, no building: where the fire and every spark of grace is
quite put out, no hope of any burnt offering. Therefore my Text omits them,
only it speaks, and I with it, of Offerers, and follies in offering.

But here again, what Offering? 2 False and undue sacrifice, or offering.
Is it any Burnt Offering, or Sacrifice for sin, as of old amongst the Jews,
The blood of Bulls and Goats? No such matter, those were but types of CHRIST,
and therefore until CHRIST; but to dream any longer of these now, is such a
folly, that the Jews are not guilty off: They do not, they dare not
acknowledge them now: they well knew the commandment, and the place for those
Sacrifices, his Temple only, Deuteronomy. 12. Deuteronomy. 12.5.13, 14, etc.
Therefore with the Temple, down went their bloody Sacrifices, even one
thousand and six hundred years since: Now they have no other Sacrifices (as I
showed the last time) but the Sacrifice of Prayer, Hos. 14. Hos. 14.1, 2.
Nay, they plainly dispute against the other, they argue for this alone. R.
Maimon, R. Maimon. More Nebochim. part 3. cap. 32.
the learned of the Jews, most christianly concludes, that these Sacrifices
of prayer, of Alms, of Thanksgiving, are Sacrificia primae intentionis, Psalm.
140.2.50.
the Sacrifices that are first intended by God, first commanded to us: and
indeed, so it is, as in the Ps. 40.6. so here; Not any longer the bodies of
slain Beasts or Oxen: but thy mouth, thy heart. Be not rash with thy mouth, and
let not thine heart be hasty, etc. God shows, that both mouth and heart must
be (though neither rash) both must be parts of this Sacrifice.

3 Defect in the gestures of Prayer.
And they indeed, as principal parts of this Sacrifice: Other parts there are
also, and a prime folly it is, of which we are guilty, that we use them not;
namely, Eyes lifted up to God in Heaven: So David, Psalm. 123. Psalm. 123.1, 2, 3.
Behold, even as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their Masters, and
as the eyes of a maiden unto the hands of her Mistress: so our eyes wait upon
the Lord our God, until he have mercy upon us. The knees with the body cast
down to the earth, whence, and of which we are; so the Apostle, Ephesians. 3.14.
Ephesians. 3.14.
Therefore bend I my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. The hands
again raised up, as the Apostle also, 1 Timothy 2.8. 1 Timothy 2.8.
Therefore I will, that men pray every where, lifting up pure hands without
wrath, Psalm. 121.1.
or doubting. As our Eyes cast up to the Hills, from whence comes our help:
to show our love, joy, hope, and help to be there and thence only: and our
knees cast down to the earth, a sign of that condition of dust, earth, and
ashes, to which sin has brought us, Genesis 3. Genesis 3.
so our hands lifted up, a sign that all we can do, is too little to give him
thanks for that he has done for us, and that all which we do (our Sacrifice)
we desire should be accepted in the Blood, Passion, and Merits of Jesus Christ.
It is observeable, (which the first Christians observed,) that in the gesture
of Hands lifted up, the figure of the Cross is evidently represented. So they
used this Ceremony, even from the Apostles times: Homo vel orans forma crucis
visitur, S. Hieronymus in Marc. 15. Tom. 6. f. 87. Just. Martyr. Apol. 2.
(says S. Hirome:) and Justin Martyr, with others, said the same, three
hundred years before his time. They thought they had command for it, that
perchance of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.8. (...), etc. Max. Taurin. Hom. 2. De
passione, and cruce Domini. s. 608.
I will and command, that every where you pray, lifting up pure hands, etc.
Surely Maximus Taurinensis grounds it somewhere: Ideo elevatis manibus orare
praecipimur, ut ipso quoque membrorum gestu passionem Domini fateamur. So
prayed Moses also (say all the Ancient) when with Lifted up hands he prayed,
whilst Joshua or Jesus, the Type of our JESUS, Exodus 17.12.
fought against Amalek.

Therefore also the Eastern Christians used the 140. Psalm in their Evening
Prayer, Psalm. 40.6.
Vid. S Chrysostom. in Psalm. 140. Et S. Aug Ser. 8. de sacrific. Vespertin. Vid.
etiam Eucholog. Graecorum, and Horolog.
every one there being taught to pray, Verse. 2. Let my prayer be directed as
Incense, and the lifting up of my hands be an Evening Sacrifice. Namely, that
their and our Prayers may be accepted in that Sacrifice of Christ Jesus, who in
these last days, as in the Evening of the World, was sacrificed for the sin of
the World. And indeed, both eyes and hands lifted up; as also knees and bodies
cast down, are but as the mouth to the heart, outward Interpreters of the
inward devotion of the soul: Certain it is, whilst the Principal and
Chief, the Mouth and Heart, are named, even the lesser and inferior are
implied, and we here convinced of folly, for not using them.

4 Defect in vocal prayer in public.
But what if the mouth it self be wanting? This is a folly, whereof (it
seems) the Holy Spirit supposes none would be guilty; therefore, as
supposing the use, that no man would omit it, he gives a Precept only, for the
not abusing it. And indeed this is a folly, whereof we are mainly guilty;
condemned by the evidence of GODS Word; by the testimony of ancient, later, and
modern Churches. Public prayers (for of such only do we speak) ought to be,
as they are called, Public. They are not, they ought not to be the dictate of
one alone: Al, as they hope for a blessing by them, must bless GOD in them;
every man, as he looks for a part, must bear a part: even (...), he that
is most private; even Women, that may not speak, 1 Cor. 14. 1 Cor. 14.16. Number.
5.21. Deuteronomy. 27.
may, nay must answer, Amen. Number. 5.21. Nay, to those curses, Deuteronomy. 27. to
every one it is commanded, that All the people should say, Amen: and if to
those curses, even against themselves; for such especially is the last, Verse.
26. as the Apostle shows, Gal. 3.10. Gal 3.10.
Then much more are they bound to do it to those blessed comprecations made for
them, and by them. Certainly, so did the Jews (the Church under the Law,) They
sang together by course. They, when they praised the Lord, all of them shouted
with a great voice, Ezra 3.11. Ezra 3.11
And when the Covenant of Restitution was made, All the Congregation answered,
Amen. Nehem. 5.13. Nehem 5.13.
Was it not so in the Christian Church? The Apostle commands it; he supposes
it necessary for all: 1 Cor. 13.16
How shall he that occupies the place (...) of a private man, etc. Every he
that is a private man (as in the Church, besides the Ministers, all are) must
and ought to set to his Seal, and to subscribe, as it were, making it his own
deed, by his own Amen. This, as it is a command of ours, so was it also the
practice of the best Church, even of the purest times. All the people (says
Justin Martyr) answered, Amen: All: nay, Just. Martyr. Apolog. 2. S. Hier.
praefat. ad l. 2. Comment. ad. Gal. f. 133. C. S. Ambrose. in Hexam. lib. 3.
cap. 2. S. Basil. in Hexam. hom. 4. f. 53.
so loud was their Amen, that (as S. Hierome tells us) the Temples and places
adjoining, were shaken by it, as by a clap of thunder. S. Ambrose tells us, That
the Church, like the Sea, with the beating waves, resounded again, with the
responds of Men, Women, and Children, like to the rushing of mighty waters. And
for the Greek Church, S. Basil is as good a witness, saying; The voice of
their prayers and responds, was like the noise of waters beating against the
Rocks. They all joined in their public prayers, even in their Reading-Psalmes
(as they call them, for other they had none) and Thanksgiving; with which they
were so familiarly acquainted, that Women and Children had them by heart for
public use. Afterward in the Church compared to the Moon, (Cant. 6.10. Cant.
6.10.
) Piety in the wane: First the Quire supplied the place of the People; and now,
the Quire being vanished, all is thrust into the mouth of the Minister alone.
Behold, by what steps we are gone downward! A man, that comes into our
Churches at prayer, would think, that either the people are gathered together
to hear one speak or read, or that the Minister were preaching only: or else,
if they were Prayers, either that they no ways concerned the people; or else,
that they not at all understood them. Surely the Papists, whom we blame, shall
rise up against us. Are our prayers so turned into Sermons only, that we
entertain them with the ear alone? Where is our mouth, our tongue, our voice?
Are we ashamed to confess God before Men in public? or will God now accept
(that, which he never did before) Fishes for Sacrifices? Mutus ut Piscis. Prove.
Can they be our prayers, to which we assent not, in which we join not? How
many helps have we, which our Forefathers knew not? Our prayers the shortest,
I believe, that ever were before us; in a tongue known and familiar to us;
themselves most easy for us; and yet made more easy by Books in every Man's
hand amongst us: Nevertheless, we still continue like the Pillars of the
Church, without any voice: nay, in this worse perchance, some of us, then they;
for they return an Echo: Shall not they judge us? Surely howsoever we may
spare our mouth in mental and private prayer, yet in public the mouth and
voice has always been judged necessary, for these following Reasons.

1 Because this Honors God: He that praises, honors me, Psalm. 50.23.
Psalm. 50.23.
It is a confessing of GOD before Men, Romans 10. Romans 10.10.


2 It is a part of our Thankfulness unto GOD; who, as he made all, must have
all; must be worshipped, as with our soul and spirit, so with our body also;
as withal our heart, so withal our might, Deuteronomy. 6.5. Deuteronomy. 6.5.
And strength, Mark 12.30. Mark. 12.30


3 It is a duty of reason; That we should as freely yield, so show our yielding
and assent to our own Prayers, 1 Cor. 14. 1 Cor. 14.16.


4 The nature of Public Prayer commands it: for they are, as we call them,
common to all; and of them especially it is most true: They are the fruit and
calves of our lips, Heb. 13.15. Heb. 13.15. Hos. 14.3.


5 Scripture injoyneth it, as a means of salvation: With the heart man
believes to righteousness; but with the mouth confession is made unto
salvation, Romans 10.10. Romans 10.10.


6 Our obedience to this Church, and in it conformity with the Church of GOD
exacteth it: for this is the pillar of truth, led and guided by the Spirit of
GOD.

7 Our own benefit requires it; for hereby (namely by the voice and our
outward gestures) we stir up our own devotions, we drive away drowsinesse and
sleepiness; we rouse up our spirits, we cheer our minds, we quicken and
kindle our zeal, speaking (as the Apostle commands) to our selves, Ephesians.
5.19. Ephesians. 5.19.


8 The exercise of our faith requires it; for prayer is the proper act of our
faith; and no where so fit is that saying of S. James: Show me thy faith by thy
works, James 2. James 2.


9 Charity, in the good of others requires it; for by our voices
cheerfulness, we cheer, encourage, and edify one another; Teaching and
admonishing one another, Col. 3.16. Col. 3.16.


10 And lastly, our heart and affection requires it of us: for if the heart,
the leading part be in our prayers, our prayers will quickly appear to be
hearty in our mouths.

It is one of the three wonders of the face and visage, that all the affections
show themselves therein; nay, it were a wonder they should not do so:
Difficile est crimen non prodere vultu. Mat. 12.34.
Our heart, our affections, can be no more hid, than fire in our bosoms: Psalm.
39.4.
David shows it: At the last I spoke with my mouth.

And surely, that the mouth should be wanting, never was it heard til our
frozen age: the complaint was then, This people draw near me with their
mouth, Esaias 29.13. Mat. 15.8. Ier. 12.2. Ezech. 33.31.
( Esaias 29.) Thou art near in their mouth, (Ier. 12.) They show much love with
their mouth, (Ezekiel. 33.) Their tongue still ran before their wit. Their mouth
was, howsoever: GOD liked well of it; he would have it so still; he would not
have it left out. And therefore only he gives an order for it: Be not rash
with thy mouth.

5 The fifth folly, the mouth before and without the heart.
And so we come to the fifth folly; The mouth before the heart, without the
heart, (as you see it here placed in my Text) No, thus the mouth is awry, out
of order; So it must not be, neither must the mouth (as with us) be left out at
all; nor must it come before all, out of due order: Be not rash with thy mouth:
No, the heart is the leading part, the mouth must and shall come after. Neither
must the mouth be without the heart: this a maine folly also; as to pretend the
heart without the mouth, so to intend the mouth without the heart. Great cries,
no cause: the Devil is subtle as a Serpent; he will make us believe that GOD
will accept of a piece of a Sacrifice; what needs the whole burnt offering?
(...): As little cost as may be: either the heart alone, or the skin with a few
bones; as Prometheus mocked his Jupiter. This hypocrisy crept in betimes; as
amongst the Jews, so in the Christian Church. This made Macarius, and some
others of the Eastern Church, even of old, call for less mouth, and more
heart. This made some Latin Fathers say, Non clamor, sed amor, etc. This made
Erasmus, and others of later times, most justly blame the tumbling over their
prayers in the Latin Church; he rightly concluded, it was a sign they had no
heart at all to their prayers. And is it not so with us? The tumbling,
mumbling, mangling, posting, passing over our prayers, as though they would
never be ended: as it argues contempt in them, that so perform them; so it
causes also contempt in the people that are present at them. I would that this
folly were as severely censured with us, as it is in the Apud illos enim
Sacerdos si inter legendum aut erret, aut lingua titubet, aut vocem aliquam
depressius enunciet, gravissimo proptere a ab auditoribus objurgatum, qui eum
et sacro loco indignum, et libros alii tradendos unanimi voce proclamant. Vid.
lib. Leon. Epist. ad David. Chytraeum. de Russar. Releg. page 239. Muscovit.
Theolog. Acts 2.1. Luke 1.70. Acts 4.32.
Muscovie Churches: then doubtless the reverend and careful carriage of the
mouth, would fetch the heart again, and make it as better esteemed, so more
religiously devout. Surely Oration, is but oris ratio, the heart appearing in
the mouth; which whilst by many tongues, in one place, praying the same words,
praising the same GOD with one accord, in the same faith and love, as they did,
Acts 2.1. is but as the Scripture calls the mouth of the Prophets, Luke 1.70.
One mouth, one voice; as from one heart, one soul, Acts 4.32. Howsoever,
whatsoever is become of the heart, for the most part in our Churches, there is
but one mouth left, the mouth of the Minister, and that for the most part a
rash one too; even too rash, too hasty, to precipitate. Let me therefore speak
to that in the words of my Text. O, be not rash with thy mouth.

6 The last folly, the Heart too hasty. Psalm. 10.17. Prove. 16.1.
And so we come to the last folly: Let not thine heart be hasty: the heart also
may be too hasty. As there was a preparing of the Sacrifice: so must there be
preparations of the heart, Psalm. 10.17. Prove. 16.1. Without these it is too
hasty, when it neither weighs it self, nor the matter, nor the manner, nor
the words of our prayer: But all is sudden, neither considering to whom, nor
with whom, nor how, nor what, nor where we pray; when it fails in any part
or measure, of due or true attention, the heart is then, too hasty.

1 The Heart, that is, the Affections are then too hasty: when it weighs not
it self, whether it come in a right faith or no, in sincerity and integrity,
for GODS glory, more than for other ends; cleansed and purified from all
uncleanness: If not cor mundum, a clean heart, and pure hands, then not fit
for the Holy place, Psalm. 24.4. Psalm. 24.4.
Such an heart is too hasty. Remember God is in heaven, whose pure eyes can
endure no uncleanness: John 19.31. 2 Timothy 2.19.
God hears not sinners: but Let every one that names the Name of Christ,
depart from iniquity.

2 The heart is then too hasty, when it is not hearty to all others; wanting
the hearts affection, and true Christian charity; not only pardoning and
forgiving others, but praying for them, doing all good unto them: Such prayer,
as Cornelius's was, the Church with S. James calls (...), working prayer:
James 5.16.
and the School Charitativam; true effectual prayer, which, as Faith, works
by love: without this, if the heart run to the Altar, it is too hasty, it must
back again: Remember, God in Heaven is the Father of us all: Thou on Earth,
of earth for the matter of thy body, like to others; they thy brethren:
therefore if thou have ought against thy brother, lay down thy gift at the
Altar; first, go, be reconciled to thy brother, etc. Mat. 5.23.24. Mat.
5.23.24.


3 The heart is too hasty, when it wants true humility, sense, and sight of its
own weakness; to cast it self as a Worm upon the earth, accusing and
condemning it self, as a Beggar, never giving over to pray for GODS grace and
favor: such grace the Church calls (...), and the Latins Assiduam, daily,
continual, laborious, and earnest prayer: If this be not, the heart is too
hasty: Remember God is in Heaven, the Greatest and Highest Majesty, thou art on
earth; therefore as a Beggar, humble thy self, cast down thy self upon
earth: Beggars must be no choosers; Mark. 13.33. Luke 18.1.
we must stay our time, we must watch and pray, and pray continually; Ask,
seek, and knock, Matthew. 7.7. Mat. 7.7.


4 The heart is too hasty; for the matter, when it is carried either too
hastily, or too earnestly to desire earthly things: either coveting them alone,
or preferring them before Heavenly. Nay, consider thou art in earth, and
stand in need of all things: Remember Heaven is above thee, and God in
Heaven, to whom thou suest, the King of Kings. Immodest and sinful petitions
we dare not present before honest Men: vile and base Boones are unfit even for
earthly Princes: yet earth is the most that they can give; S. Basil. instit.
Monarch. c. 1. and S. Greg. Nyssen. in orat. Domin. Hom. 1. f. 618.
but (...), as the Greek Fathers use to speak. To ask a small Boon of Him,
(as that great Prince did to the Philosopher) GOD will scorn it: it is too
mean for God in Heaven to give, too unprofitable for thee on earth to receive:
thou must (...): know that Heaven contains the whole Earth in and under it; if
therefore thou first covet the earth, which thou have, and treadest on already,
know then that thy heart is too hasty: First seek the Kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof, etc. Mat. 6.33. Mat. 6.33.


5 The heart is too hasty; when not minding the Majesty to whom it prays, nor
the matter and thing, for which it prays, it roveth and runs after wandering
wanton thoughts, vain, foolish, and idle imaginations: Remember God is in
Heaven, the searcher of the heart: thou on Earth apt to be seduced, tempted,
and led away, subject to much defilement. Mat. 21.12.
Thou must (as our Savior) drive the money changers out of the Temple,
covetous desires and cares of the world; Mark. 9.24.
and the Musicians also, as He did; namely, the lusts of the loose eye, and
lascivious heart, the fancies and frenzies of concupiscence: such prayer the
Ancients call (...); as the Latins, Puram; as Job also, Job 16.17. Job 16.17.
when the heart is clean swept of all worldly thoughts. And indeed (...); who
is sufficient for these things? Evagri. lib. 12. div. Apotheg. cap. 4. Antioch.
hom. 10. de Psa. f. 305. Tom. 2. Joan. Clym. Gr. 23. Carthus. in 4. Sent. Did.
15. q. 6. f. 214. 1 Cor. 14.15.
so hard a task is it to pray indeed: and so true is that of Agathon confirmed
by long experience, That there is no work so hard under the Sun, as to pray GOD
aright; none so irksome to the flesh, none which Satan more striveth to
hinder. Therefore to prevent the one, and to provide for the other, fit it is
meditation should go before; attention, along with our prayers. And attention,
even to the heart alone is (as you hear) of so many sorts. The Apostle
reduces them all to two: 1 Cor. 14.15. The spirit and the understanding. The
School Divines to three: 1. Attention to God in Heaven, to whom we pray. 2. To
our selves, and our own heart on earth, who make the prayer. 3. To the matter
and subject, for which we pray: And all this necessary for mental prayer,
where we use no voice, no word, no mouth. But if we come to vocal prayer,
where we use voice, and word, and mouth, and all the rest before; then must we
come back to these rules again, and observe a twofold attention more, which
Divines require. Attention twofold.
1. To the words: 2. To the sense of the words, whereby we pray: we will apply it
to the Text.

Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty.

The heart and understanding, To the words only in conceived prayer.
if it be wholly busied about words, and the ordering of them, as usually it is
in sudden and conceived prayer, then must the heart be, as it were, all and
only, mouth and that attention due in other kinds must be the more broken, by
how much the more it is divided and distracted in it self: it is a true Rule
of Clymachus, who wrote both his own, as also the observations of the Ancient
(...), and therefore spoke by good experience: Joan. Clymach. gr. 28. p. 246.
Men's ad inquisitionem verborum distentatur: The mind is racked and perplexed
to express it self in words. Therefore they that have been Masters in this
Art of Prayer (whatsoever some of late have fansied to themselves) have, either
for the most part, even in private, used mental prayer; or else have prescribed
themselves a set form of prayer: for this cause chiefly among others, that the
heart being not careful for the mouth, might be the more attentive and intent
upon it self: and all this yet for private prayer. But if we come to public
prayer, which is, and must needs be vocal, with the voice and mouth; Nay,
where one (the Minister) is the mouth of all the people; then my Text, nay,
Reason, Religion, and Charity commands, That what helps Devotion may find for
it self in private, the same should be used in public, for the people also.
Be not rash with thy mouth; Thou which art the mouth of the people; must have
respect to the heart of the people, with whom thou prayest, lest otherwise thou
be too rash: and ye people, that have an heart to call upon GOD by the public
mouth of the Church, must have an heart also to understand what is prayed by
this mouth; otherwise your heart will be too hasty. But how shall this be?
Surely here it is most true, We know not how to pray as we ought, but the
Spirit helps our infirmities. Romans 8.26. Romans 8.26.
For therefore the wisdom of GOD has appointed: Christ his word has
commanded, and our Comforter the holy Spirit has always directed the Church
to two certain Rules in our public prayer.

The two Rules or Laws of prayer in public.
1 That the prayers in public should be set, that they might be publicly
known. Be not rash with thy mouth, etc.

2 That they should be short and brief: Let thy words be few. And thus we are
at last come to the Charge, where so much is to be said against the Errors of
these times to be here indicted, that I wish the hour were to begin again. But
I will be brief.

For the first: 1 A set-prayer.
it is the frantic humor of Men of our times, that because GOD has promised
his Spirit to assist his Church, bidding the Apostles, they should not be
careful what to speak, for it should be given them at that instant, Mat.
10.19. Mat. 10.19.
that therefore all set-prayer is against the ordinance of the Spirit; and we
to use sudden and extemporary only. Of this, as the grounds are false, those
places and promises being either especially understood of Martyrdom (as
Isidore Pelusiot expounds) or personal, Isidor. Pelus. lib. 4. Ep. 108.
to the Apostles chiefly, and those first times, who for their admirable
calling, and greater work, needed more miraculous assistance: so is the
position not only false, deceitful, and dangerous; but also repugnant to
Reason, Religion, and all Christian practice. For first, Otherwise, 1 It is
unreasonable. Zech. 12.10.
is it not fond once to think that the Spirit of GOD, which is the Spirit of
prayer, (Zach. 12.10.) is made the worse or weaker for advisednesse? Does
deliberation do hurt in Religion only? Does the Spirit of GOD, like the
tempestious wind Euroclydon, carry all on an hurry? Acts 27.14.
No surely, the Spirit of GOD is the Spirit of counsel and wisdom, Esaias 12.2.
Esaias. 11.2.
and therefore an enemy to all rashness and hastiness either of mouth and
heart, which are here forbidden: Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine
heart be hasty.

2 Dangerous.
And is it not dangerous also to commit all to private spirits: even that
arduum, that hard work of prayer, as the Scripture calls it? Surely the
Church has found it so; For whereas after and against the established forms
of the Church, some brought in their private conceits into the African
Churches: 3 Council. Carth. can. 23. 2 Milevitan. can. 12.
first, the third Council of Carthage, and then the second of Milevis, did
publish their Laws, that no prayer should be used in the Church, but such,
which had been first approved by the Church; and a reason is given from this
rashness: Ne forte aliquid contra fidem, vel per ignorantiam, aut per minus
studium sit compositum; that is, Lest perchance somewhat might be vented
through ignorance, or carelessness, which might be contrary to the faith: the
very ground of my Text. And surely, that there should be a set-forme of prayer,
makes much for this one mouth, Thy mouth. The mouth of the Church should be
but one: when it was otherwise, the Apostle liked it not: many mouths, a
means of confusion, 1 Cor. 14.26. 1 Cor. 14.26.
How is it when you come together, every one has a Psalm, has a Doctrine,
has a tongue, has a revelation, has an interpretation? Let al things be done
to edifying. If every one in the Church, should conceive his Psalm, what
confusion would there be of notes and voices? Yet, our Psalms are but Prayers,
and our Prayers should be as Psalms, wherein all do join: such were
anciently both their Psalms and Prayers: Council. Milev. can. 12.
Ab omnibus celebrentur, Let them be said by all (says the same Council of
Milevis.) Such is Common Prayer, as the Ancients rightly: (...): Our prayers
are common; for all say the same prayer, says S. Chrysostom. And so, as you
have heard, S. Chrysostom. Hom. 18. in cap. 8 ep 2. ad Corinth. 2 That there may
be but one heart.
it is fit all should do: A set prayer therefore necessary, that there may be
one mouth.

Again, set-prayer makes for the unity of the heart also: as Thy mouth, Thy
heart: of all but one heart; so should it be. The heart of the people should,
if not lead, yet at least go along with their own prayer: but how can this be,
unless their prayers be known, unless familiar to them, unless they be
before acquainted with them? He, that prays with others, must have respect
to others, with whom he prays: public use and order is not directed, but by
commonly known sounds: the Apostle shows it, 1 Cor. 14.8. 1 Cor. 14.8.
If the Trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the
battle? The Trumpets sound is therefore certain, because known before, set
and prescribed: And again, There are so many voices in the world, yet none of
them without signification, 1 Cor. 14.10. 1 Cor. 14.10.
Signify they do all, because they are set and certain: therefore they lead,
direct, and instruct the mind. Such must our prayers be, that they may do the
like. That the heart therefore may be but one, a set-prayer necessary: one
mouth, that there be but one heart.

Again, 3 It prevents the mouths rashness.
set-prayer prevents the danger of the mouths rashness; Be not rash. And
indeed, how many foolish Tautologies, Battologies; how many idle words,
irreverent, unmannerly, ridiculous, if not blasphemous passages fall from many,
in their suddenly conceived prayers? The Council of Milevis saw it, and shows
it well enough: Ne contra fidem, vel per ignorantiam, aut per minus studium:
Blasphemous, ignorant, careless Prayer, experience shows it with us. Judge.
11.31.
Iephta's vow alone is a witness: A man would think it a glorious zeal: The
first (says he) that comes out to meet me shall be the Lords: the very first,
that, whatsoever (even that) and no other; that, whatsoever it be. Behold a
true picture of Quicquid in buccam. 1. Anastas. Nicaenum, seu Sinaitam. Qu. 38
Hug. de Sancto Vict. tract de filia Iepte. Tom. 3. f. 234.
It might have been an Ass, or a Dog, as well as his Daughter: God therefore
(as Divines note) forbad him not, as he did Abraham, but suffered him to do,
and offer the sacrifice of fools: Only by him, God has taught us; thee and
me: our mouth should not be rash; much less the mouth of thee and me, and
many more: The mouth of the people, the Minister, neither for matter nor manner
may be rash; He tied to a form: A set-Prayer necessary for him, that he
prove not rash with his mouth. 4 It prevents the hearts rashness.
But suppose all well; no error in such conceived Prayers; yet the mouth of
the congregation, the Minister, 1. By understanding them.
as he must not go before his own heart, so neither before the heart of the
people, whose mouth he is: Either way the mouth is too rash. Fit it is their
own heart should lead, at least accompany their own Prayer. A set-Prayer
necessary for the people also.

2. By meditation before.
But if so; yet the heart may be too hasty, if not filled by meditation.
Meditation is (as the Schools rightly) applicatio mentis, Intellectus
contemplativus: a raising and applying (the Heart) the understanding, that it
may lead (the Heart) the will and affections after it: Therefore preparation
necessary before prayer. But how can this be, if that they should meditate
upon, be unknown unto them? Therefore a set-prayer necessary for this end also.

But yet not all: As meditation before, 3. By attention in them.
so Attention is necessary in our prayers: Prayer is Intellectus practicus, The
earnest desire of the heart: All kind of attention and intention is for the
heart most needful; and for this cause, 2. The Churches practice.
that the hearts desire may be the more earnest, whilst being eased for the
mouth, it is most busied upon it self; 1. Before the Law. Genesis 4.26. Puto
vertendum; Tunc inceptum est invocari nomen Domini, ut dicat, eo tempore ritus
certos colendi Deum institutos fuisse, quos observarent filii Dei, hoc est,
Membra Ecclesiae, quam in posteris Seth haesisse multi arbitran. tur. Joan.
Drusius in Difficilior: Genescos. cap. 15. p. 30. 2. Under the Law. Number.
6.23.24 Joel 2.17. Deuteronomy. 24.14. 3. Under the Gospel.
a set-prayer is necessary for this end also. Be not rash with thy mouth.

And indeed, as GOD has commanded, so the Spirit, who teaches us to pray:
Romans 8. has always directed the Church in all ages to a set-forme of prayer
in public. In the old World, and the Church before the Law: Genesis 4.26. it is
said: Then began men to call upon the Name of the Lord: that is, say
Interpreters, they began to use Rites and set-formes in public.

After under the Law, there needs no proof: God in many places prescribed
set-formes unto them, which the Jews even use to this day: Numb. 6.23. Joel
2.17. Deuteronomy. 24.14. Infinite are the places: It is too notorious to be denied: I
have proved it already before. So a set-prayer they also were directed to.

Last of all, under the Gospel: A set-prayer they had from the beginning: JESUS
CHRIST the corner stone, laid the first stone in the building; viz. the Lords
Prayer: from this the Church increased it in the Apostle's times: as from 1
Cor. 11. and 14. 1 Cor. 11.14. chapters.
Chapters: 1 Timoth. 2. 1 Timothy 2.
Colos. 3.16. Col 3.16.
Ephesians. 5.19. Ephesians. 5.19.
Acts 12.5. etc. might be abundantly proved: Besides the testimonies of St.
Chrysostom, Basil, Austin, Acts. 2.5.
Cyril, the Greek Dionysius, Proclus and many others: yea, the common
Liturgica, found in all Christian Ritualls, do plainly evince this, that with
the Faith it self, set-prayer was established in all Christian Churches.

Thou art on earth. Thou art on earth.
Remember this; that though the Spirit assist us, yet dwelling on earth, nay,
in earth, in houses of clay; we have this treasure but in earthen vessels; 2
Cor. 5.1. 2 Cor. 4.7.
and therefore, because in earth, we should be jealous and suspicious of this
earth, careful and watchful over our selves; Be not too rash with our mouth.

God is in Heaven; God is in heaven.
wherefore if, as mistrusting our manifold infirmities, even when we speak
before men, our equals; or but to men, though our betters, we are so
careful, as to pen and weigh our words before hand, that we offend not:
Then how much more careful should we be, when we speak before GOD, nay,
unto GOD? O here be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty:
Let thy words be few. And indeed, our words here would be as few our own, as
might be (If any) in public: They would be in the Church, as the Church
allows, as she speaks, The words of the Church: Thy words, It is spoken to
the Church: A set-forme in public, when we pray in public.

2 Law of public prayer.
Nevertheless, though her words; yet here another law for the Church, and her
public prayers, That they should be Short: Let thy words be few. Few words
imply short speech: Short prayers they must needs be, where there be few words;
words are the hearts earnest, and should, as come after it, so come under it.
The tongue and mouth are the hearts index; and as indices to books: so should
the mouth, as it were, but refer God to the heart, where he may read more.
It is the property of a full heart, not fully to express it self; and the
duty of a good Christian's prayer, as not to speak, more then he means, so to
mind much more then he speaks: Let thy words be few.

But besides: Short prayers make long devotions: the affections, that vent
themselves quickly, loose their vigor: and the heat, that evaporates, spends
it self the sooner. Sorrow, when it has made a vent, cease to be sorrow;
and the tongue, that declares, abates the hearts fervor. The mouth is to the
heart, as the mouth of a glass, or vial; which, if it be of the biggest,
powers all out at an instant, whereas if it be narrower, it holds the liquor
the longer, and makes a pleasant murmor in the issuing. I know not how, but a
strange speech it is of a Quidam vet. Sapient. Hebraeor. ap. Drusium l. 1.
praeterit. in 6. Mat. 7. Ecclus. 7.14. Matthew. 23.14. Matthew. 6.7.
wise man: That he fears not God from his heart, that makes long prayers.
And Ecclus. 7.14. Make not much babbling, when thou prayest. Sure I am, where we
find this froth in the mouth, there always find we some fault at the heart.
The Pharisees made long prayers: Matthew. 23.14. but there was hypocrisy at
their heart. The Heathen made long prayers: Matthew. 6.7. but there is infidelity
at their heart. Be ye not like unto them (says our Savior ( verse. 8.) After
this manner therefore pray ((...)) So; Let this direct you for the length of
your prayers. He gives us, as the matter, and order; so the measure (at least
of our public prayers) (...): S. Chrysostom. Hom. de Anna. f. 965. Luke 18.1. 1
These. 5.17. Romans 12.12. Mark. 13.33. Mat. 7.7.
says an ancient Father. The Lords prayer, a set form, as a president to the
Church, she should do the like; so a short form, as a pattern, the Church
should not go beyond. As the Widow, pray continually, Luke 18.1. without
ceasing. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Instant in prayer. Romans 12. Watch and pray. Mark
13.33. Ask, seek, and knock. Mat. 7.7. The very manner of these and the like
speeches, shows the manner of our prayers, that they should be (...): (as
one) thick and short. And how the ancient and first Christians did expound
these and the like places, S. Chrysostom. hom. 2 de Anna. f. 965.
S. Chrysostom will show us: his words are remarkable, (...). Christ and S.
Paul command us to make our prayers thick and short, with little spaces and
distances betwixt, for these causes, namely;

1 That the weakest devotion of the meanest Christian may not be oppressed.

2 That the people might have space and place to join with the Priest, and
give their assent to their own prayers.

3 That by their often responds, the mind of the people might be kept from
wandering.

4 That their devotion (thus) might be the more excited and stirred up.

5 That their attention (thus) might be kept waking, by their often responds,
which were expected from them.

6 That hereby they might show their confidence in GOD'S mercy by CHRIST'S
merits, as contrary to the Heathen practice, Mat. 6.7.

7 That by such means the Priest also might in such spaces be both eased, and
refreshed in the time of prayer.

8 That there might be a space for meditation.

9 But especially that our Saviors command might be observed, who has thus,
both by his precept and example, commanded.

And as CHRIST has commanded, so has the Spirit directed; and so has the
Church always practiced. S. Epiphan. (...). c. 24.
In the Greek and Mother Church ( Epiphanius tells us) their prayers were (...):
with all frequent and fervent brevity: short and thick prayers. In the Latin
Church, the Collects, Des. Erasmus. lib. de modo orandi.
Antiquissimae preces (as Erasmus rightly styles them) the most ancient prayers
were all short, not exceeding the length of the Lords Prayer. Such were their
prayers in the African Churches (as Cassian, Ioh. Cassian. Institut. lib. 2. c.
10. etc. S. Aug. Ep. ad Probam. 121. de orando Deum. cap. 10.
and out of him S. Augustine relates) Creberrimae and brevissimae, most thick
and short. And the more earnest their prayers, the shorter were they, and the
more frequent their answers. The Apostle uses two words usually to express
their twofold forms; (...): prayer and supplication: to the one, the same with
our Collects, the people answered, Amen; to the other, agreeable with our
Letany, etc. they answered as we, with diverse and sundry answers: for the most
part, (...) etc. or the like. From whence, as from the frequency of their often
petition, these prayers were called (...) and (...), being in substance, form,
and order, the same, which we have in this Church of England: Gilb. Cognat.
precum f. 302. etc. 312. Operum, quem vide.
therefore Gilbertus Cognatus a most learned Germane, even an hundred and
thirty years ago, laying down the forms, Veteris Ecclesiae, of the ancient
Church, lays down the very prayers of this Church of England.

Application
Thus you see I have brought our Text home to our doors; where because the time
and Text put me in mind, I will only add two or three words more for the
conclusion of these our Sessions.

These even as few as may be, and therefore but three only to conclude and shut
up all: Viz.

A word of Confutation, a word of Exhortation, a word of Gratulation.

1 The first shall be Verbum confutationis, A word of confutation, reproof,
and reprehension. There are a sort of people in the world, who because they
most admire their own fancies, and are only in love with themselves, like
therefore no prayers, no devotions but their own: nor these have they any, but
of the longest; wherein they may sooner lose themselves, and their blind
zeal, than find GOD, whom they pretend to seek. With these men Set-prayer is
Parrat-prayer, lip labor; compared to an Horse in a Mill: (so dare these
fools blaspheme.) The short, and therefore fervent ejaculations of the Ancient
Church, most fit, either for public or private devotion, are shreds of prayer,
etc. any thing, but what they are, or should be. And because our blessed
Savior in that most perfect form of His, the ground and pattern of all ours,
still stands with us, and his Churches practice: therefore forsooth, His also
(that you may know what spirit they are of) He also (I say) and His most
perfect Prayer is rejected by them. That prayer, say they, in no sort to be
used by us. So we have heard them speak and write; witness their Vid. Franc.
Johnson cont. Io. Carpenter de praescript. ab hominibus precat. form.
Amstelrod. in 4. 1610.
Books. But I pray you then, to what purpose serves the Lords prayer? It is
(say they) given us for a pattern and president for all our prayers. Well and
good: if so; then must all ours be, as that is, 1. Set and prescribed. 2. Short
and brief. Thus are they again (like that Nequam servus) condemned out of
their own mouth; and unwittingly snared in their own words. But (say they)
set-prayers limit and prescribe the Spirit. What spirit do they mean? The
Spirit of GOD? Nay rather, that blessed Spirit is best (in us) furthered by
them: due meditation (as it may here best) preceding, to them preparing our
devotion, and in them augmenting the vigor of our intention. For this cause he
has always prescribed such to his Church: such has the Church always used
till our days. He that first brought the other in amongst us in public, was
he that either first broke the Churches peace, or did at least begin to renew
the Schism amongst us. Consider, I beseech you, my brethren of the Clergy (to
you I now speak) whether such an one be a fit president or example for us.
Consider whether such prayers privately framed, and publicly used for the most
part, be not against public order and private zeal: whether they do not much
more circumscribe and limit the Spirit. Consider I beseech you in the fear of
God, whether these have not been the means to disgrace and discredit the
Churches, and all other our true public devotions. Surely much better, as
safer, was the practice of former Ages: in which nothing (for matter of
invocation) was publicly used, but what was publicly approved: they using
none before their Sermons (in this place of exhortation, the Pulpit) but either
the Lords Prayer only, or (as in elder times) this short form, Post vero
lectionem Legis and Prophetaru^, Epistolaru^ nostrarum, Actuum, and Evangelii
Ordinatus salutet Ecclesiam iis verbis, Gratia Domini nostri Jesus Christi, and
charitas Dei Patris, and communicatio Spiritus Sancti sit cum omnibus vobis,
Amen: and omnes respondeant, Et cum spiritu tuo. Post haec verba alloquatur
populum sermonibus exhortatoriis. Clemen. Constit. lib. 8. c. 4. Latin. edit.
Lugdun. 1565. p. 355.

Observatum hoc idem in Orientalibus Ecclesiis docet, S. Chrysostom. Hom. 3. in 1
cap. ad Colos. his verbis. (...) ( Episcopum designat, Presbyteri enim
utebantur solita illa formula, Gratia Domini, etc. quum tamen interea
Episcoporum magis propria fuerat Salutatio illa altera, Pax vobis) (...)
(pergit ille) (...).

Simile fuisse institutum Ecclesiae Latinae and Occidentalis, liquet ex illo de
Macario apud Optatum lib. 7. p. 201. quod cum Balvinianae editioni deesset,
doctissimus vir Mericus Casaubonus suo loco restituens, ad calcem libri 3.
subjecit. Siquidem ostensurus Optatus Macarium non tractasse, id est,
praedicasse, vel concionem habuisse ad populum; Hoc enim erat illu tractare: id
probat, eo quod verba habiturus non salutabat populum Contra (ait Optatus)
Episcopalis tractatus probatur ab omnibus sanctitate vestitus, salutatione
scilicet geminara. Non enim aliquid incipit Episcopus ad populum dicere, nisi
primo in nomine Dei populum salutaverit. Similes sunt exitus initiis. Omnis
tractatus in Ecclesia a nomine Dei incipitur, and ejusdem Dei nomine
terminatur, etc.

Ex quo liquet, Episcopos tum in ingressu concionis, tum in ejusdem exitu
populum his verbis salutasse: Quod etiam supra allatis verbis confirmat. S.
Chrysostomus, (...). Absolventes enim suas exhortationes benedicebant Episcopi,
sicuti and Presbyteri (...). Adeo haec eadem formula utraque and salutatio and
benedictio: quam tamen Optatus salutationem geminatam appellat. Vbi autem
Episcopis receptum postea, diverso ritu a Presbyteris salutare, Council.
Bracharensi 1. Prohibitum id fuit, sancitumque Canone 21. Vt uno modo salutent,
dicentes, Dominus sit vobiscum, sicut in libro Ruth legitur, and ut
respondeatur a populo, Et cum spiritu tuo; sicut and ab ipsis Apostolis
traditum omnis retinet Oriens, etc.


The Lord with you: The Bishop thus blessing and preparing the people to hear;
and the people mutually again in that Respond, And with thy spirit; praying
for him again. Therefore let me (in the bowels of CHRIST JESUS) beseech you
all (wishing my voice might reach as far as the fault extends, to every
person and place) that you and they would all receive the second Word.

2 Of Exhortation and Admonition; that as we hold the Spirits unity, so we
would even in this also provide for the Churches peace: that we would all as
one (herein) follow our blessed Saviors command, his Spirits direction, his
Churches practice in all ages. That as we are his peoples mouth to him, we
would not be too precipitate in our selves, too unadvised in respect of the
people; whose mouths and hearts, that all may be but one mouth and heart, must
necessarily in GOD'S public service accompany and go along with ours: that
howsoever we do when we speak to the people, yet when to God we speak, that
Our words be few; Let not our mouth be rash, or our heart hasty, to utter any
thing before Him, that may make our Sacrifice to be the Offering of Fools. Nay
rather, let us be more ready to hear, that is to obey GOD and his Church:
seeing to obey is the fat of Sacrifice. Yea, 1 Samuel 15.21.
much better than all Sacrifice. Surely the Heathen man can tell us, that this
is that kept up their Sparta. How much more this obedience to GOD; his Son our
Savior; his Word; his Spirit; his Catholic and universal Church? In whose
wall, as in Noah's Arc, you and we all are only safe.

3 And truly (that I may add the third word of Gratulation) we have ever great
cause to confess and acknowledge GOD's favor and mercy to us, who are of this
English Church: and far more juster cause have we to praise Him; not (as the
Heathen Man) that we are Men only, not Women; Grecians, not Barbarians;
Athenians, not Baeotians: for now Male and Female, Gal. 3.28.
Graecians and Barbarians, are all one in CHRIST: but that we are Men, not
Beasts; Christians, not Heathen; English, the best Reformed for pure Doctrine
and perfect Discipline; which GOD has by a long and happily continued peace so
mercifully approved, so miraculously defended. Truly the Jews, in their
Beracoth, recounting the blessings their Fathers received, and themselves now
want, do daily bless, and continually praise GOD for them: How much more
justly and truly should we do this daily and hourly? We have received the
substance, whereof they the shows; the body, CHRIST, whereof they the
shadows; the truth and performance, whereof they but the promise: thus indeed
with us all Christians after CHRIST. But of so many Christian Churches, how
many, with Israel of old in Egyptian bondage, under the Turk, and other
Eastern Princes! How many scorcht, or at least in danger of the fiery Furnace,
with the three Children! How many in peace have not the clear truth? How many
in full truth, have not perfect peace! having both, how many have not that
discipline and government, that must under God preserve them! Only we (I say)
enjoy all. God grant we may take the course, by seeking God truly, to enjoy
them still. I say, we of this Nation do and have long enjoyed them all by Gods
special mercy: It being a special argument of Gods singular favor toward this
Reformation received and established in this Church, that God (notwithstanding
all our infinite sins beyond other Nations) has and is still pleased so long
to vouchsafe us such Peace, such Plenty, such a flourishing State, such inward
Content, such outward Prosperity, so many, and great Deliverances, so strange
and miraculous Preservations; such happy Government under so many Pious and
Religious Princes: having added this also in this most happy Succession; that
with the ending of that former Kingly Race of ours, neither our Peace, nor His
Truth did end: but that another and nearer Kingdom is added to us, to
strengthen our Peace, to increase our Thankfulness to God, our Obedience to
Him, and His Vicegerent.

O let us not forfeit this Peace, yea Gods blessed Truth, by any
unthankefulnesse: Let us not, as fools, still strive with God, His Christ, His
Spirit. Let us ever obey God also in this, Take His Counsel, Be not rash with
our mouth, etc.

FINIS.
THE FOVRTH; OF THE NECESSITY AND ORDER OF GOD'S Service by Prayer and the
Words Ministration: in reference chiefly to the CLERGY: Preached at the
Trieniall Visitation of the R. Reverend Father in GOD, William, Lord Bishop of
London, holden at Dunmow in Essex. Sept. 11. Anno Domini. 1634.
ACTS CHAP. 6. VER. 4. But we will give our selves continually to Prayer, and
to the ministration of the Word.


IT was an ancient custom in the Churches Synodall assemblies, that the Sacred
Bible ((...)) the Books of Holy Scripture, Vide Christop. Iustell. IC. in
Prafat. ad Codicem Canonu^ Eccles. Cathol. in initio.
the Rule of Christian Faith, were openly laid on an higher deske; the
Ecclesiastical books of the Councils, the Rule of Discipline and Order, on a
lower by them: To teach us doubtless, that both these are a safety and
defense, the one to the other: Neither Faiths Doctrine secure without the pale
of Discipline, nor Disciplines Order sound without the ground of Doctrine. Both
like those two Sisters in the Gospel, Mary and Martha; or these in the Text,
Prayer and the Word, serving the LORD in the mutual service of one another.
Behold what then was, is now again represented unto your Christian view even
those two Books opened before your eyes; or one Canon in both those Books. A
Canon truly it is, and that of the second Synod that ever was, the first and
only: yet recorded also in the Book of God; a special part of His holy Word,
and therefore most truly Canonical.

And which is yet worth our observing; As it pleased GOD, The first Synod that
ever was ( Acts Chap. 1.) in the 34. year of our Christian Era, and the next
after our Blessed SAVIOR'S Assention, was called for the settling the number
and Persons of the holy Apostles, the Churches Founders, and Governors. So
this second now, in the same year held (as Binnius and Baronius, Vid. Binium.
Tom. 1. Concilio 4. fol. 1. and C. Baronium ad An. 35. n. 1.
etc. account) does as we see (by the same providence) design and set down
their Office and Duty: and not theirs alone, but the Duty of us all, who
succeed them.

So a Synod we have in the Text, Verse 2. Then the Twelve called the multitude
of the Disciples, etc. And a Synod also at this time for some like end.

And a yearly provision it was, and it seems from the same ground, that as
That Acts 1. and This here, in the same year: so also in after ages (...) Con.
Nicen. 1. Can. 5. (...). Council. Chalced. Can. 19. Bis in anno, juxta Patrum
decreta; aut si non saltem semel. Council Tolitan. 4. cap. 3. circa Ann. Dom.
633. Turonens. 2. c. 1. Anno Dom. 570. Vid. Apostolorum Canon. 38. alias. 36.
twice every year (if need required) at least, once, the Church should have
her solemn meetings. So the Councills of Toledo, Tours, and the rest: And they
show it to have been the practice of the Eldest times, imitated (as appears
by Nicol. de Cusa Card. l. 3. de Concord. Cathol. c. 25. f. 809.
Cusanus) by the Civil State, that as in the Natural body there being an
evil feared from without, the spirits forthwith assemble, and gather to the
heart, as it were to fortify it, and secure themselves: So also in the Body
Ecclesiasticke, Council. Milevitan. 2. Can. 9. qui lib. Afric. cap. 95. and 73.
Quoties communis necessitas cogit (says the Council of Milevis) As often as
the common cause required, there were common assemblies, General Councills,
all meeting on all hands, to advise for the common good. Council. Toletan. 4.
cap. 3.
Si vero nec de fide, nec de communi Ecclesia tractabitur (says the fourth of
Toledo:) if the business were not concerning faith, and the common cause; if
the Occasion be but, as here, (...), the murmuring of the Hellenists at
Jerusalem, and the End as now, to provide for their Widows; then Erit
speciale Concilium (say the same Fathers) the Synod shall be special or
particular; only for those times and parts, the Rule to reach no farther: And
so have we here a President for such as this.

But nevertheless whatsoever the occasion be, their Resolution here is
General, Catholic, and Oecumenicall. They were for the Persons, Apostles
immediately sent from Christ, the first founders and planters of our Christian
faith: their Commission as larg as the whole world, therefore their Conclusion
able, and such as ought indeed to conclude all us. All us, who have received
the faith from their mouths. All us, Christians. All us, yet more particularly
who have received either our mission from them, or like commission with them.
All us, of the Clergy. We all, to mind the same Duties, in the same Order and
manner, with the same hight, or rather fullness and fervor of Resolution, as
they here -- But we (say they) will give our selves continually to Prayer, and
the Ministration of the Word.

The Division.
In which words you have three things principally to be considered (1) The
Persons, We. (2) The Duties, Prayer and the Ministration of the Word. (3) Their
Resolution for these Duties, and the manner of performance, (...) there is more
in this word, then we are aware of: We translate it; We will give our selves
continually to, etc.

Or, if you please, you have them thus, 1 The Officers, We. 2 The Offices,
Prayer, and the Words Ministration. 3 The Officiating, We will give our selves.


In the Persons or Officers consider, 1 Their Quality. 2 Their Dignity. 3 Their
Unity. 4 Their Imparity.


Of these two last chiefly, and of the two other in them.

In the Duties, consider,

1 Their Number, Two: though including and comprehending many particulars. 2
Their Necessity, comparatively in respect of persons and time. 3 Their Order,
in respect of each other:
First and principally to Prayer, as to the maine: to the Ministration of the
Word, as to the means. To the one, namely Prayer, as to the End. To the other,
as the Way conducing and leading to this End. To the one, as to the proper and
peculiar Service of GOD, absolutely necessary for all men and times: To the
other, as the Service of His Word, properly belonging to us (Clergy) and
chiefly necessary for those first times.

In their Resolution for these Duties Consider,

1 Their Desire, Purpose, and intention. 2 Their Solemn, and publicly vowed
Consecration and dedication of themselves, We will, etc. 3 The Oppositions
there against made, weighed and considered in this particle (...), But, we etc.
4 Their serious Execution, careful and industrious performance,
notwithstanding all dangers to be feared, or difficulties to be expected; in
this most significant word (...). We will not only employ or busy our
selves, but wholly, continually, perseverantly, manger all lets, dangers and
disturbances, We will give up our selves most stoutly and resolvedly to Prayer
and the Ministration of the Word.
And thus you have the severalls. Now we come to each in order, as far as the
time will give us leave.

I. The Persons Their Unity and agreement.
1 ANd first of the Persons, whom we both hear and find in this Word; We.

We. It is the voice of all the Apostles, not of Peter alone: They all in the
first Synod, choose alike; have equal voice and choice in the Substituting
Matthias, Acts 1. Acts 1.
In that other, about Circumcision, All decree, send, and judge alike: It
seemed good to the HOLY GHOST, and us, Acts 15. Acts 15.
Here they all pronounce and ordain alike: Neither was it ever otherwise in
after Councills, where all met, the five Patriarch's were chief; and as Saint
Peter amongst the chief Apostles, Romans 16.
Romans 16.5. So the Roman Patriarch had only (...), to sit or speak first;
not power to rule or guide either all or any. The Apostles, as they were all
sent together, John 20. Acts 1.
Matthew. 10. Matthew. 10.
So they were all inspired at once, John 20.22. To let us know, that they and
their Successors are Pari authoritate, pari consortio, as the S. Cyprian. l. de
unitate Ecclesiae. 3. Hoc crant utique and caeteri Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus,
pari consortio praediti and honoris and potestatis, sed exordium ab unitate
profici citur.
Fathers speak. That Saint Peter spoke first, Acts 15. or was by our Blessed
SAVIOR spoken to alone, was but (as we have elsewhere shown) because he was
with Andrew (...), the eldest Apostle; they thence ascribing to him, Primas
seeds, the first seats, (such were then Antioch, Alexandria, and Rome) because
he was, thus, the First; Thereby teaching and signing the Churches unity, which
by one Spirit, from one Head, is but one in all: and though many Members, yet
but one Body. We.

Again, We: Though the Apostles only speak, 9 Their imparity.
though we hear them alone, yet are there more in the work, (...); But we,
points us not only to the Apostles as chief Governors; but also to the
seventy Disciples: yea, these seven (new) Deacons also not excluded. It is an
error of the Can. 16. Synodi Constantinop. in Trullo.
Sixth Synod, and of sundry interpreters, which is greedily laid hold on by
the factious amongst us, that these Deacons were only Laymen: when as we
apparently see Stephen one of them busied in the Ministration of the word;
Verse. 10. etc. Acts 7. and 8.
and Philip in the office and duty of Prayer and Baptism. Surely as the
Apostles did not shut themselves nor their successors, the Bishops (as Stories
plentifully prove) from the governing the Deacons care about their Tables; so
they did not include that Office, only within that Table-service. They were but
(...), Ministri (as the name signifies) servants in all to both the rest: as
the Seventy were in Prayer and the Word subject and inferior to the Apostles:
These indeed being the Governors of them all. So, we see, there was always an
imparity in the Church; always the spirits of the Prophets subject to the
Prophets. 1 Cor. 14.
As Aaron and the High Priests of old; so under them the inferior Priests and
Levites. Afterward, CHRIST our Lord, as he sent the Apostles and seventy
Disciples at two several times, Luke 9.2. and 10. v. 1, 2, 3.
Luke the 9. and 10. Chapt. So thereby he directed his Church most plainly to
these two Orders: 1 The Bishops who did succeed into the Apostles place, as the
Church Governors, who were to Watch for our souls, Heb. 13.17. Heb. 13.17.
in the preserving of peace and truth. And 2 the inferior Clergy, though sent
also by CHRIST in the Seventy, yet sent after in time, after also and inferior
in place, that they might know they are to be subject to the first. Those
indeed, (the Apostles sent first, absolutely, and with Power (says the
Evangelist, Mat. 10.1. Mat. 10.1.
John 21.16. Acts 20.28.
) altogether and alike sent, as Sheepherds, (...), not to feed only, but also
to guide the flock. These, the Seventy, sent after, and apart, two by two, Luke
10.3.
and that (says S. Luke, who reports the difference fully and plainly) (...),
as Lambs, in Prayer, and the Word only, (...), to feed the flock, and to be
ordered and directed by those others: They, the Apostles, sent, (...), as
Sheep (says S. Matthew) and so superior to the rest; Mat. 10.16.
Fathers of, and Elders over, to guide and govern them. Thus as a difference
of Names and Titles, so also no less of Orders. As a Priority of mission, so
was there of commission also.

Neither was it ever otherwise, in any other place, in any after and succeeding
ages, amongst their successors. Even in the Apostles times, (not to trouble you
with after testimonies) Titus Bishop of Crete, Timothy Bishop of Ephesus, both
appointed by S. Paul; who therefore sometimes joins them and others with
himself in the Front of his Epistles to the Churches; 1 Cor. 1.1.
Paul and Sosthenes, 2 Cor. 1.1. Phil. 1.1. Col. 1.1.
Paul and Timotheus, 1 These. 1.1. 2 These. 1.1.
Paul and Silvanus and Timotheus, etc. To teach us, that those he thus joins
with himself, must and should indeed succeed unto him. After, in the Age next
after the Apostles, (...). S. Ignat. Epist. ad Trall. in initio. (...). Ibid.
Vide eundem in Epist. ad Magnes. Et ad Philadelphens. Item Epist. ad Smyr. h.
v. (...), etc.
Ignatius every where warnes the Priests to be subject to their Bishops; the
Deacons to their Priests; the People, at the least in these two, Prayer, and
the Word, to be subject to them all.

Thus was it always in all places: no where otherwise. For GOD is the God of
Order. As he will be served of us in Prayer and the ministration of the Word,
so will he be served in Order: by us, as inferior Laborers; by them as
Superior Governors; though not Mat. 20.25. Mark 10.42. Luke 22.25. 1 Peter
5.3. 1 Timothy 5.17. 2 Cor. 11.28.
(...) and (...), though not domineering, and absolutely out of the plenitude
of their power Lording it, (as the same words constantly held both by the three
Evangelists, and S. Peter the Apostle well import,) yet worthily ruling, worthy
to be accounted worthy their double honor.

For surely, though their Place is higher, and honor more; yet is their labor
no less, and their burden heavier. They not only labor in the Church, as
do we, but care for the Church; yea, The care of all our Churches laid on
them. Thus, whilst we serve GOD in private, in our Prayers and the words
ministration: they in a more public care (may I so say) do even serve the
meanest and lowest of us all. There is no service, Beloved, to that of
Government, where one serves all. And that Greek Proverb is most true in
every Family, much more in this great Household of Faith, and Family of the
Faithful, The Church of GOD, (...), that is, There is but one servant in each
house, and that is the Master. It is our Lord and Masters Rule; Mat. 20.26.27.
Whosoever will be great amongst you, let him be your Minister, and whosoever
will be chief amongst you, let him be your servant. So must it needs be, the
higher place, the heavier burden: and we know that the shoulders next the head
are the most bearing part.

Let us not therefore envy this honor to any whom GOD has set over us. Nay,
rather let us pity their persons, and that heavy burden they bear, and let
us strive by our joint and free obedience to make it lighter. Let us, as Aaron
and Hur, Exodus 17.12.
by a faithful discharge of this our twofold duty, Prayer and the Word,
especially by our earnest and serious prayers, bear up Moses arms, that they,
and we all, may as cheerfully, as resolutely (...), Give our selves without
any let or impediment from our selves, to prayer, and the ministration of the
Word. And so, though omitting much of our intended discourse, we come from the
Persons to the Duties, We, to Prayer, etc.

II. The Duties.
We cannot so easily come to these Duties, but we must again with them awhile
behold the Persons, they are here so linked together: We, to prayer and to the
ministration of the Word.

The first fruits of every thing were sacred for GODS use; Exodus 13.2.
and the firstborn of the Males, were as holy, consecrate to GODS more
special service: such were these here, the first fruits of the Christian
faith, and the firstborn that opened the womb of our Mother Church: and
therefore as such are set apart for GODS more special service; as such, they
freely and wholly give up themselves: (...): We (say they) will give our selves
continually to prayer and to the ministration of the word. Therefore they were
especially, (...), Gods portion and inheritance.

And as they, so we. Their number.
This is the twofold Duty of every one of us, who succeeded them: we truly
serve GOD, and his Church, in both. In our public prayers we serve GOD (as do
all others, Prayer being most properly his service) and are herein more
peculiarly the mouth of the people unto GOD. In the Word, which is his Gospel,
we serve his Word and Church, and are Gods mouth in his embassage and message
to his people: Thus (...), (...). De Gregentio Tephrensi Palladius in ejusdem
disputat. cum Herbono. p. 204. Et Hesych. Presbyt. in Levitic. cap. 22. p. 509.
Inde nomen (...) Sacerdotibus precipue datum; eo quod Legatorum vice
fungerentur. Exodus 4.16.
so the Greek Fathers; Mediatores, so diverse of the Latin, though S.
Augustine mislike the phrase: that, whereas neither God can speak to man,
because an infinite and glorious essence; nor man can behold or hear God, or
the Angels, because he a sinful and mortal creature, (For who can look upon
the Sun, or who can see God, and live?) God therefore has appointed some men,
who, give me leave to say it, might be as Moses unto Aaron, Gods unto men, by
thus mediating between God and man in this twofold Duty: by the which (as
Prosp. lib. 1. de vit. contemp. cap. 25.
Prosper has it) Et Deus placatur populo, and populus instruitur Deo. GOD
being by Prayer reconciled unto his people; and the people by the Word,
instructed unto God: both in us, serving GOD, and one another. For by the one,
the Words ministration, the understanding is enlightened to know and believe
GOD; by the other, Prayer, our wills and affections are raised, ordered, and
directed to love that GOD we know, and to confess him, whom we believe.

By the one, we attain the Serpents wisdom; by the other, we obtain the
Doves innocence, the gifts and graces of the Holy Ghost.

2 Their necessity, in respect of us Clergy.
They are, though divided in GODS people, yet conjoined in us his Ministers;
being, though two lips, yet but one mouth; both to preserve knowledge for your
instruction, and to breath forth the spirit of zeal and pious fear, in holy
prayers and invocation. Thus, as by the one we obtain the light of knowledge,
so by the other we maintain the life of faith, the heat of piety and devotion.
Truly, these two Duties are the Vrim and Thummim, Exodus 28.30.
which Aaron, and every son of Aaron must wear on his Breast Plate; knowledge
whereby to guide you to GOD, and holiness, wherewith to walk with you before
him. Thus, more truly than the Heathen Ianus or Cecrops, our office at once
looks two diverse ways; from God to men, by his Words ministration; from man
to God, by prayer and invocation. For this cause, the Holy Ghost, to enable
these Apostles, and all us Clergy in them for these two Duties, came down in
the likeness of fiery cloven Tongues. Acts 2.
In their divided clefts, signifying the tongue of prayer unto God; the tongue
of the Word administered unto men: both but one tongue on each, though come from
Heaven, yet in their site looking upwards, thither from whence they came,
because by prayer they tend and lead thither back again. In fiery-cloven
tongues, because in fire there is light to lighten the eyes of the blind, and
to guide their feet into the way of peace; and this by the ministration of the
Word. In fire also there is heat, to inflame and make them lively coals, (so
Arnobius calls devout Christians) or rather whole burnt offerings, by earnest
and ardent prayer unto God. This was their (...), their imposition of hands, or
rather of tongues, from Heaven: The ordination of those first Apostles, and of
all us Clergy in them; that with the Baptist we might be burning and shining
Lights: John 5.35.
Burning in our zeal, by Prayer; Shining, by the word of knowledge: That every
one of us might in Gods House, his Bethel, be like Genesis 28.12.19.
Jacobs Ladder, which he saw in Bethel, whereon were Angels ascending and
descending: so by our office and ministration, Angels might in us, ascend and
carry up ours, and the peoples supplications unto God: and Angels by us descend
to bring Gods word and message to the people. We indeed, Gods Angels in his
Heaven here on Earth, the Church, but these the Wings, whereby we are to fly.
We, the Worlds Lights and Stars, but these the Orbs wherein we are to move:
These two all our Duties, Prayer, and the ministration of the Word.

But though these our Duties, yet not both alike, III. The Order of these
Duties. First, to Prayer.
not these both equal, not at all times equally and alike necessary, nor alike
to be esteemed of us in their worth and use. As the Apostle of 1 Cor. 13.13.
Charity in respect of Faith and Hope, so I, of prayer, in respect of the
ministration of the Word; The greatest of these is prayer. Neither need I fear
to compare them; since Saint Paul comparing these three graces, yet prefers
one: nay, since all the Apostles here compare these both, and yet prefer
prayer.

Comparisons may be (as they say they are) odious amongst persons: amongst
graces and virtues not so. The gifts of the mind are deservedly preferred
before those of the body, and those of the body, before those (we call the^) of
Fortune. Yet even both these and those give place to the gifts and graces of
Gods holy Spirit. Nevertheless these also (we see by the Apostle) are not al
equal. Gifts of tongues, Prophecy, and this Words ministration, with those
other Gratis datae, are inferior to those of Faith, Hope, and Charity, the
Gratum facientes, and therefore also the act and exercise of Faith, Hope, and
Charity, I mean, public and common prayer, far superior to that other, the
Words ministration. Entia (says the Philosopher) are as Numbers, wherein there
is first, second, third; one before and beyond another, yet no wrong each to
other. God made all things in number, weight, and measure; thence their Order.
And by this order they continue what they are. This, as it is necessary to be
in all things, so is it also as necessary to be known and acknowledged: where
it is not so, as good not be. There must needs in a short time grow, where no
Order is, confusion; and where confusion's once admitted, there is all discord
and dissension. Witness the present occasion of this Synod here in the Text.
There was here dissension in the Church, and that because no due Order
observed. The Widows of the Jews so preferred, that (as they thought at
least) the Hellenists were altogether neglected. And is it not so now, at this
time, even in these two duties here? Preaching and the ministration of the
Word, so highly preferred, so exceedingly set by, that in the mean time
prayer, I mean common and public prayer, is with the most, or many too much
neglected: Prayer, I say, which is Gods most peculiar service, our daily and
continual Sacrifice, to which the Apostles give, as fit is, the first place;
this not only thrustback, but in a manner thrust out: not only not its due
place, but in a sort I fear amongst too many, almost no place at all. Beloved,
I would not be understood to think a thought, much less to speak a word to
the prejudice of preaching, and the ministration of the Word. I acknowledge the
dignity and the necessity thereof in its due place and order. I know it is a
means to engender faith where it is not begun, and to increase it where it is
already. I confess it not only to be Gods good Ordinance, and our peculiar
office and duty, most needful (as I have showed) on our part: but also, as the
word of exhortation, needful also even in the best times in respect of the
people; both to comfort and strengthen the weak, to encourage the strong; to
excite the negligent; to reprove the flothfull; to admonish the forgetful; to
inflame and kindle the remiss and cold affections of the far greater part of
Christians. Yet I know also with Saint Augustine, that Aliud est ministratio
verbi, aliud ministratio verborum: that, The ministration of the Word is one
thing; the ministration of our words, especially as it is for the most part
carried in our ordinary preaching, is another. I know also with S. Chrysostom,
that The ministration of the Word contains much more than that which we call,
Preaching. For in the ministration of the word are contained many things, even
too much also, I fear, neglected amongst us. Such are visiting and comforting
the sick, and afflicted, by the Word; the counselling, settling, and resolving
the perplexed and unsettled conscience in real doubts of practice by the same
Word: the instruction of Catechism, which the Apostle calls the 2 Timothy 1.13.
form of wholesome words; the Heb. 6.1.
principles of the doctrine of Christ, according to the same word. The more
frequent use of Church Homilies, confessions, and public works of Churches,
and other writings of Fathers, and the most learned men, the more safe and most
recieved expositions (as are judged) of the same word: and, to omit many more,
even the very same word, Ipsissimum verbum, The very word it self; I mean the
sacred and holy Scriptures, the Rule and Ground of all Truth, the measure of al
our preaching, even it self in the public readings in the Church, too much
undervalued by the most amongst us.

The Word, is wronged in these and many more particulars. Not at all, in giving
Prayer it is due place and worth. For tell me, I pray you; Are guests, such as
are these two, any whit wronged, by being sorted at the same table according to
their due worth and rank? Are Domestics, such as are these two, in the same
House of Prayer, any way injured by their master, by being designed each to his
own place and office? I hope, nothing less. Mary and Martha were sisters, yet
our SAVIOR is not afraid to pass His judgment, and in it to prefer Mary, that
she has chosen the better part. Simeon and Judah were brethren, yet Judah was
made Simeons head. Simeon indeed signifies, Hearing; Judah, Prayer and
Praising. So the Mother of them both, Leah, Genesis 29.35. Genesis 29.35.
Now will I praise the LORD, says she. As here, so there Judah has the
Scepter, the pre-eminence; And howsoever Simeon be the Elder brother, as also
Hearing, Romans 10.14. Romans 10.14.
before Prayer; though Simeon be excellent amongst the Princes, and chief
amongst the Tribes; yet to Judah, that is, to Prayer, is the Scepter given: And
as of Judah came CHRIST, the promised seed; so to Judah, that is to Prayer is
the promise made: Whosoever shall call on the Name of the LORD, shall be
saved, Romans 10.13. Romans 10. ve. 13.


Beloved, the Word, is not wronged in yielding Prayer its due place and worth.
For as I said most truly, Prayer is the principal and maine; The Ministration
of the Word but the means. This is the End; the other but the Way conducing
and leading to this End. This is the proper Service of GOD, necessary for all
men and times: the other but the Service of His Word, peculiar to us, and
chiefly necessary for those first times. It has every way the first place. In
this place first: For GODS House, this place, is the House of Prayer. In this
Text, first, To Prayer, say they, and then, to the Ministration of the Word.

Diverse Reasons of Prayers Pre-eminence.
And very good reason for it. For, first; The ministration of the Word is most
properly, Ours of Woe to us, if we preach not the Gospel. Ours it is, The
ministration of the Word a particular Duty. But Prayer the general Duty of all
Christians.
to be Instant in season, and out of season, etc. But Prayer is the public,
common and general Duty of all Christians: And were it not then fit to be made
of all in common? It is necessary, not only for all men, but also for all
times and places. Therefore we are bidden; Ask, Seek, and Knock, (Matthew.
7.7. Matthew. 7.7.
) to teach us, we should do it Luke 18.1.21.36. Mark 13.37. 1 These. 5.17. Romans
12.12. Colloss. 4.2.
always. Watch and Pray, says our SAVIOR; And, What I say unto you, I say
unto all, Watch; and again, Pray always and continually; Without ceasing,
says this Apostle, (1 These. 5.17.) Continuing instant in Prayer, (Romans 12.12.)
Continue in Prayer, (Colloss. 4.2.) Thus even with them whose the words
ministration is, Prayer has the first place, as most worthy, most necessary.
So with Moses, and the Prophets: GOD forbid, says Samuel, that I should sin
against GOD, in ceasing to pray for you: (That first:) But I will teach you the
good and the right way, 1 Samuel 12.23. 1 Samuel 12.23.
So is it with the Apostles: With the Apostle Saint Paul, (...): First of all,
let Prayers and Supplications, etc. be made for all men, 1 Timothy 2.1. 1 Timothy 2.1.
And thus is it with all the Apostles here, by this their public sanction and
Decree. To Prayer (say they here,

Prayer necessary for all times.
2 The Ministration of the Word was chiefly necessary for those first times; for
the first founding, and establishing the Church, when having converted any, S.
Chrysostom. in Colloss. cap. 3. Hom. 9.
passing them over (says S. Chrysostom) they presently betook them to teach
others, that all being converted, and giving themselves to Prayer, they might
being thus edifyed and built up, become a Spiritual Temple unto the LORD. Thus
you (says the Apostle to the Hebrews) ought to be teachers of others, Heb.
5.12. Heb. 5.12.
Thus did Apollos, but newly, and as it seems, but meanly Catechized, Asts
18. Acts 18.24, 25, 26.
The things (says Saint Paul to Timothy) that thou have heard of me among many
witnesses (that was in the Congregation) the same commit thou to faithful men,
who shall be able to teach others, 2 Timothy 2.2. 2 Timothy 2.2.
By this means, within the space of a few years ( not preaching the Gospel
where it had been preached by others) nor staying long any where; S. Paul was
able to preach the Gospel from Jerusalem round about unto Illyricum, Romans
15.19. Romans 15.19.20.23.
And the Ephesians being no more children (namely to be taught) and to be
tossed too and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine by the
sleight of men, (...). But speaking the truth in love did grow up into Him in
all things, which is the Head, even CHRIST, Ephesians. 4.14. Ephesians. 4.14, 15.
namely being instructed, edifyed, and built up for this end, did as a
Spiritual Building (thus) fitly framed together, grow up into an Holy Temple
in the Lord, (Ephesians. 2.21.) Praying always with all Prayer and Supplication in
the Spirit, and watching thereunto (...), (the word in my Text as you see,
primarily applied to Prayer) With all perseverance in Prayer, and Supplication
for all Saints, Ephesians. 6.18. Ephesians. 6.18.
Thus in a word not only the Ephesians, but being converted and made such, all
Christians likewise did both give and employ themselves. (...) (again to the
word of my Text) These all continued with one accord in Prayer and
Supplication, Acts 1.14. Acts 1.14.
And again; (...) and They continued daily in the Temple with one accord, Acts
2.46. Acts 2.46.
And again; (...). They continued in the doctrine of the Apostles ((...), etc.
in the Doctrine of the Apostles.) There is an Emphasis in the words, as plainly
referring to that (...), Romans 6.17.
that Form of Doctrine, contained then, and expressed, as we see it is, in the
Apostles Symbol, The Creed; and called as by Saint Luke, So by Saint John
(...), 2 Epist. Job. ve. 10. Revel. 2.24.
They (says he) rested content, well apayd with it; they held it enough; they
continued in it: (and mark what follows) and in breaking of bread and
Prayers. So you see the continual and whole work of Christians even then, was
Prayer: Not only with them, whose Duty the Words ministration was; but even
then, and in those times, when the ministration of the Word was most necessary:
Even then, and in those times, prayer was the chief and prime Work: It had
then, the first place. To prayer (say they) and to the ministration of the Word.

ministration of the word has the second place, Prayer is the End: The
ministration of the Word the means.
is, that it might serve this first, prayer. The Heathen man observed, that our
ears are given to frame and form our tongue: And Saint Basil rightly; That
our hearing is for our speech, and speaking: Therefore the tongue, styled by
the Prophet David his Glory, Psalm. 57.8.
and the best member: because therewith (which is man's end) bless we GOD, Iam.
3.9. James 3.9.
GOD and nature has directed our ears and hearing principally to this, our
tongues use. We see it in the contrary: For they that are borne deaf, are
always dumb; showing thereby, that our hearing is to speak; and thus to
speak by prayer. This Order (so anciently they called it) whereby Hearing and
the Word does ministrare, and serve prayer, the Apostle most excellently shows
Romans 10. Romans 10.13.
Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved, ver. 13. There Is
the end of all our Preaching, your Hearing, and the Words ministration, that
calling on the name of the Lord we may be saved. But ( verse 14.) how shall
they call on Him, on whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe on
Him, Audis ut credas, and credis ut hostia fias. Vid. Hildebert Caenoman. de
myster. missae.
of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? So
you see, the end of all is prayer. As therefore the end is more worthy then the
means; so is it, though last attended, yet first intended: therefore, prayer,
we see, is put in the first place.

4 Prayer is the proper service of God; Prayer the Peculiar Service of God.
the ministration of the Word, though a most divine, heavenly, and most
excellent Ordinance; yet but, (...) as the word imports, but the ministration,
that is, the Service of the Word: Prayer in the mean time, that is truly GODS
Service. So GOD calls it in His command unto us; Negatively, of false gods.
Exodus 20.5.
Thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve them, Exodus 20.5.
Again, affirmatively, Deuteronomy. 6.13. and 10.12.20. Matthew. 4.10.
of Himself, Deuteronomy. 10.20. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and Him only
shall thou serve. Thus, therefore GOD calls their Common Prayers of old,
amongst the Jews, publikly and daily offered up unto Him, together with the
Morning and Evening Sacrifice of slain beasts, an evident type of CHRIST'S
bloody public Sacrifice, as in our Eucharist, a manifest Commemoration of the
same: both showing, that both theirs, and our Prayers are accepted for such in
His blood: GOD (I say) calls them His Service, as some thousands of times, I
believe, may be seen in the Old Testament; being so called sixteen times in
one Chapter, Numb. 16. Thus, says GOD, He that praises me, he honors
me, Psalm 50.19. Psalm. 50.19.
Thus Annah is said to have served God day and night, by Fasting and Prayer,
Luke 2.35. Luke 2.35.
We, no otherwise call the Public Prayers then by the same name, Divine
Service: (...). So anciently the Primitive Christians, Acts 13.2. Acts 13.2.
(...). As they (ministered, or) served the Lord and fasted. So the most ancient
Syriack Interpreter reads it: As they prayed unto the Lord and fasted. Thus we
see, Prayer is properly and primarily Gods service.

And good reason for it.

For (1) in all the Creatures of the World, in all the blessings of Peace,
Plenty, etc. in His many preservations and deliverances, yea even in the
ministration of His Word in the Church, God serves us, that we by Prayer may
serve Him.

Again (2) in other things, even in our honest callings, and vocations; in the
lawful necessary, and most expedient actions of our lives, though we serve God
(as is fit we should) yet nevertheless in them all, we intend and more
immediately look to other Ends, viz. the private good of our selves; the
maintenance of our familyes; the service of our King and Country; the
profitting of our selves and friends: But here in Prayer, it is far otherwise.
All we here undertake, is undertaken, aimed, and intended for Gods service:
Whatsoever here, is done and directed, is only and solely to Gods glory. This,
therefore properly His Service.

Again, (3) in all other works, either those of a most holy and heavenly
nature, such as are, the works of Justice, Mercy, and Charity; of giving of
Alms, relieving the poor, etc. yea even the Words ministration it self; or
any other good act, or virtuous exercise of any truly good and Christian virtue
whatsoever; that we are able to do any good, whereby to serve God, other-where
or way; is from Prayer alone, by which we gain the Holy Spirits help, and
Gods assistance: For how shall not He give His Spirit to them that ask it,
Luke 11.13. Luke 11.13.
By Prayer, therefore, we obtain it: to this, as all other good things else,
He gives it. Thus the Apostles then did, and we now must obtain it. And
therefore, This, Acts 2. v. 1, 2. etc.
whereby in all other things we are enabled to serve Him, most properly His
Service. (...), etc.

Yet farther; and it is worth our observing, there be two Excellencies of
Prayer before the Words ministration, in the comparing of these two Texts of S.
Luke.

For, first, prayer is the proper service of GOD. As they (says S. Luke there)
ministered (or served) the Lord: Acts 13.2.
but here it is (...), at the most and best, but the service of his word.

Again, secondly, in the two words here: the one is (...), for prayer,
(amongst the Greeks, at the least in Ecclesiastical use) the higher and more
noble service, (...). Romans 13. Psalm. 134.
fit for higher persons, as Rulers, Romans 13.6. whereby as more nearely
attending servants we stand in his presence, wait on himself, Psalm. 134. The
other is but (...), as the Deacons or Levites, amongst the Clergy, the meanest
and lowest of all in this place.

And, indeed, so was it always, of old: The prayer of the Catechumeni, or
Audientes: of the hearers, as they called it; the former part of the Service,
wherein there were frequent readings and Lessons out of the Word of GOD, was
with them, as with us still it is, first; as the lowest step, whereby they did
ascend to their (...), their supplications; the penitents prayer: and thence to
their (...) (the word here) the Liturgy it self; and their (so they called
them) prayers of the faithful. This was their order then: the Order (so they
called it) of their established set forms of prayer, even in the Apostles
times: Such, and no other then they had, nor ever after had, in succeeding
ages, till our days, in the Church of Christ. It is worth our observing; that
whereas the Hebrews of old, called their ancient set forms of prayer, used in
public (...) Sedar: that is, An order: The Syrians (which tongue was spoken by
our blessed Savior, and his Apostles, and those first Christians) call it
(...) Tacsa: from the Greek word (...): that as the other, being the very names
of the Christians set-prayers, in both those tongues: so also the very
selfsame words, which the Apostle, Vid. Locum Apostoli. 1 Cor. 14.40. apud
Syrum Interpretem. Et Syrorum. S. severi Ritualia Syriace edit. a Guide.
Fabricio.
and his Syriack Interpreter S. Mark do both use in that Apostolical Canon, 1
Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done decently, and according to Order: showing
that then they had, as the proper name, so also the thing it self, A set form
and Order: not lawful for any then to pray as him list.

An Order, then, doubtless they had: and in this Order one being before and
above another, the word still served prayer: and the prayer of the word; namely
of the Audientes, or Catechumeni, of those that heard the word, that, served
all other prayers. Thence, as even the Heathen and Infidels were admitted to
their Sermons: so were the meanest and lowest of the Christians (the
Catechumeni) admitted to that prayer, and in being only so, were therein
accounted such. This is the cause that prayer has also here the pre-eminence;
as the most useful, most worthy, most excellent. S. Chrysostom. Hom. 14. in Acta.
in hunc locum. f. 548.
(...) (says S. Chrysostom speaking of these two Duties here) (...); Of
things necessary, that which is more necessary, is more to be preferred. It is
the judgment of Ruffinus, Ruffin. in Psalm. 60. Val. Maxim. l. 1. c. de Relig.
Nihil utilius potest facere servas Dei in hoc seculo, quam orare Deum. It is
the saying of an Heathen man, Omnia ponenda post Religionem nostra civitas
duxit, etc. We justly judge Religion above all things. For hereby we render GOD
his due, though not all we should, yet all we can. S. Bernard therefore most
excellently, imitating, it seems, the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.13. Nunc manent tria
haec, S. Bernard. Ep. 201. ad finem.
Verbum, Exemplum, Oration: Major autem horum Oration. Ea namque and operi and
voci gratiam promeretur. Now (says he) remain these three, The Word, Example,
and Prayer: but the greatest of these is prayer. For this obtains grace both
for word and work. For by this we are enabled, to speak every good word: even
we who have obtained this Ministration, to administer this word unto you. The
Apostle for this, fetches strength from prayer: Ephesians. 6.19. Col. 4.3. 1 These.
5.25.
and for this he ever requesteth the prayers of all others. By prayer we are
enabled to do every good work; and without it, nothing.

Yea, when the Word has done its part, to instruct and teach us what to do,
as at first: or to exhort, excite, and put us in mind to do, as we ought, and
know: then Manet Oration, Prayer (that) still abides, and we to abide by it
continually. Yet, again, Cum Verbum, and Exemplum, When Word and Example, yea,
even Faith and Hope, and all shall cease and be no more; When this life is
ended; yet even then, manet oration, prayer abides; I mean, the everlasting
prayers of the Saints, which are but our most perfect prayers. And indeed, both
are confessions unto GOD: the one of our wants here, the other of his gifts and
goodness: the one the aknowledgement of our miseries; the other, of his most
abundant and all-enriching mercies. The one draws us to him, because we want
him: the other having thus tasted the sweetness of his goodness, makes us
dwell with him, because we love him. And as the Saints in Heaven, by the one;
so we by both these acts of our earnest prayers ((...)) continually and daily
abide by him, and under the shadow of his wings, so making the Church, the
House of GOD, and Gate of Heaven, whilst it is, thus, on Earth the House of
prayer. Thus you see, prayer makes us fellow-Citizens with the Saints, of the
household of Faith, GODS domestic servants, even Angels (in part) whilst as
they, so we, continually praise GOD; either confessing his power in our
prayers, or his goodness in our praises. It sets us not only in Heaven, and
makes us Heirs and coheires; but (if I may so say) partners with Christ
himself in his more lasting office. For CHRIST, even Ipsum Verbum Patris, the
true very eternal Word, was a Prophet here on earth, by the ministration of
this Word, but three years and an half: so long at the most he preached: but
by his Priestly Office he continues a Priest for ever, and being our Mediator
and everlasting Advocate, sits at the right hand of the Father, by prayer,
still making intercession for us, 1 John 2.1. 1 John 2.1, 2.
Thus highly is this Duty exalted, so highly preferred, not only by his
Apostles on earth and Saints in Heaven: but also by Christ himself, that with
him it is set down at the right hand of God the Father.

Give me leave a little, Beloved: I see, I cannot touch the last string, the
third point, this their pious resolution. Yet, by your patience, I must note
one more pre-eminence of prayer, in this word here in my Text, and therewith
(as briefly as I may) conclude for all our Duty.

(...).
It is worth our observing, that though here it may seem indifferently referred
to these two, prayer, and the ministration of the word; yet elsewhere almost
ever, most constantly it is appropriate to prayer, as most peculiar to it, and
the duty by it made most truly and properly Proprie Sacerdotum est invocate
Dominu^: Quibus dicitur; Sic benedicite filiis Israel invocantes nomen meum
super illos. S. Hieron. in Commentar. in Epist. prim. ad Corinth. cap. 1.
ours. For besides the forecited places, Acts 1. verse. 14. Acts 2. verse. 42.
and 46. Ephesians. 6. verse. 18. etc. we have it also, Romans 12. verse. 12. (...),
Continuing instant in prayer. And again, Col. 4. verse. 2. (...). Continue in
prayer. The Syriack most ancient Interpreter does constantly also retain in
all those places one and the same word, viz. (...) of (...), A man, signifying
to be true, firm, constant, and continual; whence the closure of their and
all our prayers, Amen, as teaching us in our prayers to persevere with many
such: and that such devotion which is constant, is only true.

Three properties of our prayers in [(...)]
The Vulgar Latin read it Instantes: others Perdurantes; some Assidui; and
sometime Perseverantes: noting at the least three properties of our prayers,
that we may truly perform what is here in this word and duty enjoined.

1 Property, Assiduum esse.
First, that prayer should not only be the work of one day only, the Lords day,
but even the daily work of every day. That not only in private (which is the
act of private faith) but in public, which is the act and exercise of common
and general love, as the means also for uniting men's minds in common, there
should be public prayers of all, and GOD the GOD of all, be prayed to and
praised of all. Exodus 29.38.
That as every morning and evening there was a public Sacrifice offered up
unto GOD under the Law, and on their Sabbath a double one; so also there might
not be less done by us, who owe as much, and have received more: more grace,
more ample promises, more full performance, more heavenly benefits; even Christ
himself, and with him, what heart or tongue can wish. That daily and duly we
should offer up this Sacrifice, if not thrice each day, as did David and
Daniel, yet twice at least, as did GODS people then. To make it the Key of the
morning, the Lock of the evening: to enter on everything with it, and not pass
out without it. To rise with it, to lie down and sleep by it. That seeing we
can do nothing (...), as the Heathen speak, without Gods special help, we
may by prayer call at all times for it, and not only ask of him our daily
bread, but the blessing of it, grace upon us, and upon our actions there, and
the Crown of glory hereafter.

Secondly, that we should, as do it continually, 2 Property, Perseverare.
every day, twice each day; so then, not so chop it up, or make hunting Mass;
but persevere, abide, and continue at it: at least continue sometime in it. Sic
enim amat exorari Deus: For thus will God be entreated of us, namely, Luke
18.3. etc. and 11.5. etc.
as did the Widow importune the unjust Judge; the friend in the Gospel his
friend; Mat. 15.22.
the woman of Canaan our blessed Lord and Savior. Or, as beggars do with us
at our own doors, forcing that oft-times from us, which else perhaps we
would not so readily bestow upon them. We know the Proverb, (...). Beggars, as
they will take no nay; so though obtaining they will not lightly be so
satisfied: as ready to ask again, as if they had never received. Such and so
long continued requests show a true and longing desire, whereas a fearful or
faint Petition carries its denial with it. Of all other virtues and good
actions perseverance is the Crown: but in prayer it is the beginning,
foundation, and perfection of them all. This we must mind continually, that we
may be able to continue in GODS grace and favor: yea, even when publicly in
the Church we can no longer, than in private to do it, shutting our door upon
us: Mat. 6.6.
and when we may or can no longer with our voice, yet then to do it with our
heart, Exodus 14.15. 1 Samuel 1.13.
as Moses and Hannah did. Sursum corda: even then to lift up our hearts. Thus
always to do it for our selves: for our people: for all men. (...), 1 Timothy
2.8.
says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2. In every place. (...). On every occasion, Epes.
6.18. Ephesians. 6.18.
Yea, even in our sleep, if I may so say, not ceasing from this work when we
cease from al things else. And good reason for it. S. Hieron. Ep. 22. ad
Eustoch. c. 16. Quonquam Apostolus orare nos semper jubeat, and sanctis etiam
ipse sit somnus oration, etc.
For, even the sleep of the Saints (according to S. Hierome) should be naught
else but prayer. And truly such for the most part are our night-thoughts on our
bed, as are our more frequent studies on the day time. Yea (says the same
Father, and as his counsel to Eustochium, so was it the practice of many then)
Noctibus bis, terque surgendum. Cedat somnus, ut succedat oration. It being a
duty of this Text and word. And,

The third, I but briefly note, (...), 3 Property. Perdurare.
Perdurare. No perseverance in prayer, if no suffering. The word here has a
special Emphasis, this way, coming from (...), Strength, as employing our
utmost force and strength, namely, As to continue and persevere in our Prayers;
so to put to all our vigor; to continue as did David, Daniel, and all holy
men, mourning and afflicting our selves in our Prayers: that obtaining Grace
and Mercy from God, we may be comforted, Matthew. 5.3. That with fasting,
watching, and other beating down the body, the spirit and inward man may grow
the stronger, being less clogged and hindered by the flesh: That being
thoroughly touched with the sense, apprehension, and feeling of the want of
meat, drink, sleep, and other bodily refreshment, we may the sooner find,
and the better feel the want of spiritual good things, and be the more
inflamed with the love of GOD, and earnest desire of His Grace and Mercy for
our Soul, and better part. (...). Vide Andronicu^ Rhodium lib. (...), a David.
Haeschel. page 748.
For truly (...) (of which the word here) is, say the Graecians, a species and
kind of Fortitude, being (say they) the suffering of grief and labor for
some good to be obtained. And what greater good can there be, then our Souls
union with GOD! His being reconciled unto us: Our adhearing to Him: Our
enjoying His love and favor, etc. Surely, this (as all good things else) is
not attained without some suffering of pain and trouble. And when worldlings
suffer all winds and weather: all cold, hunger, thirst, and hardship, for
their private either profit, or pleasure; as we see they do in hunting,
hawking, gaming, etc. Why should we not do as much for our Souls profit, and
our delight in GOD? It is well observed by some, that there is a great
exercise, as of other virtues, so also especially of Patience, and true
Christian Fortitude in our daily Prayers: Since even they that are strong to
labor, who can endure so much toil, take so great pains, suffer so much
watching, hunger, cold, and all manner of suffering for their own private
profit or pleasure, yet cannot watch, or continue with Christ, one hour, at
their Prayers. How tedious, how irksome are they to flesh and blood, to
carnal and earthly men: how soon weary are they: how much impatient of them:
thereby plainly proving (which the Fathers so often) that Prayer (if such as it
ought) is not only an ascent to Heaven (a work of labor) and a conversing
with God; (...), etc. and mox; (...) etc. V. Asteriu^ Amas. ap. Photiu^ in
Biblioth. cap. 271. f. 1475.
but also a Renouncing our selves: a forgetting these earthly things, truly
(...), the Cross it self, the crucifying our flesh, with the lusts, desires
and affections of it. No man can thus give himself to Prayer, that is not also
crucified with Christ. Thence as Fasting with Prayer, so also this (...), is
joined with watching. Thus the Apostle Coloss. 4.2. Continue in Prayer (or give
your selves to Prayer) (...), Watching therein with thankesgiving. And, Praying
always, that is, (...). Watching therein withal perseverance, Ephesians. 6.18.
Thus did our blessed SAVIOR, leaving us an example, Luke 22.39. Luke 22.39. 2
Cor. 6.5. and 11.27. Acts 1.14. Acts 12.5.
etc. Thus did the Apostle, in watchings often, 2 Cor. 6.5. Yea all the Apostles
and Christians of those first times, Acts 1.14. though at some especial time
and occasion more instantly, as Acts 12.5. which as I have showed elsewhere; was
not only for the manner an earnest and instant Prayer; but for the continuance
with watching whole nights together. Such were the (...) and (...), mentioned
by the Ancient: and of such, even at this day, there yet remain some footsteps
in the practice of the Eastern Churches, especially in the Agends, or Ritualls
of the more ancient Christians: they truly did, Acts 10.9.30. Vid. G. Floru^
Baldwinum. Compend. de Orat. and precibo. Tom. 2. monument. pat. 4. f. 1421.
Vid. Eunde^ ibide^. and Eusebiu^ Histor. Eccles. lib. 2. ca. 23. Graec. fol.
19. De Tarsilla vide Gregoriu^ Magn. in Evangel. Hom. 38. f. 131. D.
what they promised, (...), wholly giving themselves to Prayer. Thus we see
Saint Peter, continuing at his Prayers till the sixth hour: Cornelius to the
ninth, Acts 10. And to omit what might be observed of Saint Paul, and the rest
of the Apostles: Of S. Bartholomew it is said; that Centies in die mittebat
genua, that daily he offered an hundred prayers unto God, and in the night as
many: And of S. James the Just and Bp. of Jerusalem, therefore styled the
Pillar of the People, because by his most earnest Prayers he withheld that
fore-prophesyed destruction of Jerusalem: of him I say, it is storied, that by
continual kneeling at his prayers his knees were grown as hard as Horses or
Camells hoofes. The like being reported of Tarsilla the Aunt of Saint Gregory,
and of sundry id. Joan. Clymachum. Grad. 4. page 43. B.

Vidi (inquit) inter eos quosdam prae multitudine genu flexionum habentes genua
arida and consumpta: occulos vero ad intra regressos. Vid. Locum. Vet. edit.
Pas.


others amongst the Ancient. Surely so long continued were those Prayers of
those first Christians, that within four hundred years after, the Fathers and
godly Bishops, namely, Saint Chrysostom, Basil, Nazianzen, and Cyrill, were
enforced to abbreviate and contract them Proclus Constant. Pol. (...).
(...) (says Proclas the Greek Patriarch) into a shorter form; only for
this reason, that in the decay of Devotion amongst Christians, there might
nevertheless be continued this daily and continual Sacrifice. Verily every
day did they duly, Morning and Evening, in public and common offer up their
Prayers and Supplications unto GOD. No age of elder times ever omitted this
continual Prayer; no day passed them without this daily Sacrifice. Nobis
(says Tertul. adv. Psychicos. cap. 14.
Tertullian) omnis dies vulgata Consecratione celebratur; With us (says he)
every day is celebrated after our usual manner. And Saint Cyprian, speaking of
the Clergy, S. Cypria. Ep. 54. ad Corn. Sect. 3.
Sacerdotes (says he) qui Sacrificia quotidie celebramus: We Priests every
day celebrate and offer Sacrifice. Also in his 66. Epistle, Idem. 66.
to the Clergy and people of the Furnitani concerning one Victor, who had made
Faustinus, being then a Priest, Overseer of his last Will and Testament: he
plainly tells them, the Will was void: and mentioning overly the Canon of the
first Council of Con. Carthagin. 1. cap. 6. Qui serviunt Deo, and annexi sunt
clero, non accedant ad actus seu administrationem, vel procurationem domorum.
vid. etiam. Council. Carthaginens. 3. Can. 16. Eo. n. Prohibetur, Ne quis
Episcopus, Presbyter, sit conductor, aut procurator, aut ullo turpi lucro and
inhonesto victu^ quaerat, quia cespicere debent Scriptum esse, Nullus militans
Deo implicat se negotijs Saecularibus. Verum quae sequuntur apud S. Cyprianum,
alio referenda videntur.
Carthage, afterward renewed by the third Canon of Chalcedon, viz. That no man
should make any Clergy man Tutor, or Overseer of his Will, etc. he gives this
reason thereof at large in the same Epistle, because (says he) Singuli divino
Sacerdotio honorati and in Clerico ministerio constituti non nisi Altari and
Sacrificijs deservire, and precibus atque orationibus vacare debeant, etc.

Neither was it otherwise in Saint Chrysostomes time, even in the Country, and
Vpland Parish-Churches; for the building of which he excites and stirs up the
people. S. Chrysostom. in 8. Act. Hom. 18.
(...) Every day (says he) there are Prayers and meetings for thee, and
through thy cause: and every Lords day (which is worth our observing and
practice) a Communion. Also in his 6. Idem in 1. Tim. c. 2. Hom. 6.
Homily on the 1 Timothy 2. verse 1. on those words of the Apostles. First of all
let Prayers, and Supplications be made, etc. (...) (says he) (...): That is,
says he, in our daily service. And straight he adds, (...), etc. And this
(says he) every of the faithful know, how that every day, both Morning and
Evening it is performed by us, when we power out our Prayers for all the World,
for Kings, etc. Saint Epiphanius in like manner; S. Epiphan. (...). cap. 23.
(...), that is, Morning hymns and Prayers are continually made in the holy
Church; S. Theodor. Sermon. de Martyribus. f. 121.
as also no less Evening Psalms and Prayers. Also Theodoret speaking of the
Temples of the Martyrs, and of the Assemblies of Christians in them, (...)
(says he) (...), that is, Often (says he) yea every day do we Christians
(in them) offer up our Hymns and Prayers to their Lord, (our GOD.) Salvian
also about the same time testifyeth the same amongst the Latins, and western
Christians: for disputing against the profane Atheists of his time: P.
Salvian. Massiliens lib. 1. de Gub. Dei. p. 17. and 18.
If (says he) God be as they make him, so careless of all humane affairs,
Cur ad Caelum quotidie manus tendimus, cur orationibus crebris misericordiam
Dei quaerimus, cur ad Ecclesiasticas domos currimus, cur ante Altaria
supplicamus? etc. If so (says he) why then do we daily lift up our hands to
God in our continual prayers? Why, etc.

Surely we might be infinite in testimonies of this nature, did either need
require it, or time permit it: it having been the universal practice of all
former ages, that whereas the more religiously devoted among Christians,
spending almost all their time in this duty, did set apart whole days and
nights, and ordinarily, many hours in each, for the continuing their public
devotions to God: in the mean time, even amongst Bubuli and subulci, et omnes
fere operarii ad Missam convenient; ad caeteras autem horas Clerici and
Domestici Ecclesiae. Hugo de Sanct. Vict. De Offic. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Tom. 3. Oper. f. 266.
the meanest of the many, and vulgar people, this morning and evening
Sacrifice, was not neglected, but those hours (at the least) observed by all.
And when after, this duty was any whit intermitted, either by the peoples
profaneness, or the Clergies remissness: it was then the care of godly
Princes and Prelates to lay this Omnibus diebus, etc. Council. Agathens. cap.
30. Eoque Vetustius. Toletan. 1. c. 5. Presbyter, vel Diaconus vel
Sub-diaconus, vel quilibet Ecclesiae deputatus Clericus, si intra civitatem
fuerit, vel in loco in quo Ecclesia, est aut castella, aut vici sunt, aut
villa, si ad Ecclesiam aut ad Sacrificiu^ quotidianum non venerit, Clericus non
habeatur, etc. Vid. etiam Concilium Aurel. 1. c. 30. Tarracon. c. 7. Gerundens.
c. 10. Aurelian. 2. c. 14. Aurelian. 4. c. 26. Braccar. 1. c. 19, 20. Venetic.
c. 14. Natbonens. c. 13. Toletan. 4. c. 46. etc.
charge on them afresh, in their several Councels and Assemblies. Yea, when
the people wholly (in a manner) through want of the Words ministration to stir
up this devotion, failed from it; yet even then did not the Church fail,
strictly to require it of the Clergy: the true reason indeed, why Masses
(afterward) came so frequently, as we see, to be celebrated in private.

Thus was it, (alas we may say) thus it was in former ages. But now, where is
that pristine piety, that fervent devotion, that zealous care, that continual
prayer? Where that (...), that strength both spent in, and exercised and gotten
by Prayer? Where that strong wrestling and prevailing with GOD by earnest
supplication? etc. Surely we may justly fear, that we are fallen into those
last times, when there shall scarce be found faith upon the earth: and when
men (at least for the generality) being lovers of themselves, 1 Timothy 4.1. 2 Timothy 3.5.
rather than lovers of God, shall abandon and fall from the faith, having only
a form of godliness, but denying the power of it. For now, so far are we from
this (...) here, from this continually continued prayer, that scarce is there
that public prayer, that ought. And though our prayers be many degrees shorter
than those Epitomized forms (ere whiles mentioned) of the Fathers; yea, though
they be far the shortest of any Christian Church under Heaven (for I meddle
not with some late foreign reformations, who may seem either not at all to
have received, or scarce to have established any set or common prayer) Yet
nevertheless, as though (as Tert. lib. de orat. cap. 12. Nisi exprobramus Deo,
quod nos oration fatiga verit.
Tertullian speaks in another case) we would tell God to his face how weary
we are of his service; we even curtall, and cut off these (alas) too short
already. Thus prayer scarce heard of almost in most places on the week days,
in the House of prayer, is well nigh thereout banished on the Lord's Day also:
and which is worst of all, and of all most heinous, thrust out by that which
should serve it, and help it most, the ministration of the Word.

Give me leave a while, Beloved: where is that daily Morning and Evening
Sacrifice which was of old, and yet still ought and should be in our daily and
continual prayers offered and presented unto God? Where is that our daily
Service of public and common prayer? by which every Christian, much more every
one of us, more nearly his servants should wait and attend upon GOD? Where is
that Lamb wont daily to be offered up twice each day? Where that continually
burning fire of zeal and holy devotion, which might not be suffered to go
out, Levit. 6.13. Levit. 6.13.
but daily still to be nourished on the Altar? Of this holy and sacred fire it
is recorded, 2 Maccab. 1.20.
2 Match. chap. 1. verse. 20. that after the destruction of the Temple and Altar:
the devout Priests hid it in an hollow pit, without water: where after many
years by the command of Nehemiahs, some of the posterity of those Priests
being sent to fetch it, found no fire at all; but (says the History) in place
thereof, thick water. And is it not so with us? Is not this our vestall fire
either almost altogether hid in our private (if any) devotions; or with the
many, is it not all cold, quite turned to water? Surely without doubt it is.

Exhortation.
Therefore let me in the absence and person of our most worthy Diocaesan, exhort
you my Brethren and Fathers of the Clergy; that you would do that now, for the
recovering that fire again, which then was done: that, as the Priests then by
Nehemiah's command took of that thick water, and sprinkled it on the daily
Sacrifice, that the Sun shining thereon might again revive and re-inflame it:
So also, that you (my Fathers and Brethren) would in like sort in your
continual, both prayers unto God, and exhortations to the people, no less
carefully always sprinkle of this water on their ears and hearts, that Gods
daily Service, and all our continual Sacrifice of Morning and Evening Prayer
and Thanksgiving, may be again restored into this House of prayer.

Remember (Beloved) this is our grand and maine duty: this the principal aim
of our Commission: for this purpose and end have we obtained this ministration:
that laboring in the Word, we may stir up this grace in men's hearts, and as
the Priests of old, both kindle, and kindled offer up this perpetual Sacrifice
unto GOD. GOD has made you and us all Guides and Lights unto others, for this
very purpose. He has therefore put this his most blessed Word into our
mouths, that we by it may admonish and stir up his people. He has made us
Shepherds and Watchmen over his flock, that we over and with them should watch
and continually persevere in all supplication and prayer unto GOD. Let us
remember, I beseech you, This is that Vnum necessarium: This, GODS Service,
which must be served and preserved also by this ministration of the Word.

And that I may conclude as I began with the end and use of a Synod; Since (as
you see) we are now met in a Synod, we must know and note it: that as this
here in the Text, so every Synod is called, as the 2d. of Braccara rightly,
for one or both these ends; Vel (say those Fathers there) pro emendandis
negligentiis, vel pro resecandis contentionibus: Either that men's faults and
negligences might be amended; or if any strife or debate arisen, it might be
timely and maturely ended.

Therefore if any of us do in a wrong course or way (...), give our selves
(quod absit) from these our duties to the serving the world, or his own lust
and pleasure: if instead of the Word he give himself to the World; and in
place of praying for and with the people, Prey (as do Wolves) upon them: In a
word, if any be given, or give himself to the seeking and hoarding up of this
worlds base pelf and dirt; or intend his private wealth, honor, or
advancement, instead of promoting Gods Service and Kingdom: I wish from my
heart that such might be noted by the Apostles censure, punished by their
Successors Rod.

Let us remember, (Beloved) Our calling is, neither seeing our Farms; nor
trying our Oxen; nor humouring, nor pleasing, or enriching our Wives and
Children. This is our calling, and this is our twofold Duty, Prayer, and the
ministration of the Word.

And for the other end: To cut off contention. If any debate or strife have
been (not betwixt these two duties, never was there any, nor will be ever
betwixt them:) But if any strife amongst any of us for their precedence: if any
have sinisterly preferred the latter before the former; and out of desire,
perchance of pleasing the itching ears of the world, and this ages humor,
have thrust out, or cast down Prayer, to set up the Words ministration: Let
such remember also, this strife is ended; First, by GODS decree, who has made
His House the House of Prayer: By his Apostles Order, who in this their (after
their number perfected) first Synod, give, as we see, the first place to Gods
Service, and this his peoples continual Sacrifice, Prayer.

Let all Christians observe, no man dare to invert, this Order: Let no man
presume to set up Simeon though the Elder, in Judah's throne, nor to prefer
the Words service, above or before Gods. Let us remember, all: as our charge,
so the manner and order of it thus laid down by the Apostles themselves:
Prayer first, and then the ministration of the Word.

Surely (Beloved) a Visitation now we have. The direction of such we have in
the Text. A most famous example and precedent of one, you heard erewhile in the
Chapter read for this Morning Prayer, Acts 13. v. 36. There S. Paul a chief
Apostle, Acts 13.36.
thus speaks to Barnabas: Let us (says he) go again, and visit the brethren:
(...), the very word derived from (...), whence our English word, Bishop, as if
it were (as truly it is) the office and duty of Bishops only to visit the
Clergy their Brethren; Let us go again and visit the Brethren. Mark and
observe the end of that, and also our (Now) Visitation: and Let us see (...),
How they do. What, was it their purpose only to give them a visit, as friends
do to their familiars and equals, or, etc? No surely. As it is for S. Paul the
Apostle; and Barnabas, or others of that rank who succeed the Apostles, thus
to visit the Churches under them, and by them planted and governed: So is it
for them (if need require) to come also (...); with a Rod: 1 Cor. 4.21. 2 Cor.
13.10.
(...), with authority and power severely to punish: at least if not thus, yet
always now as they then, (...), with inspection and care to oversee, (...),
how each in his place behaves himself; what every one does; how they are
busied and employed, whether or no, in these two duties here enjoined them:
And, if they performed; whether in due place and order: If so: whether with
this (...), or without it: whether they give themselves (as they ought) wholly
to prayer and the ministration of the Word?

This is indeed to visit, namely to come and see, how prayer is performed in
the House of prayer, whether or no it be thrust out of doors, or any way
intruded on; whether it dwell here (as it ought) in its own house, daily,
continually, and whether we with it?

This is indeed to visit: Not that I presume to teach the Apostles successors,
and our Church Governors, what they ought to do: but only that I would
admonish, and put you and my self in mind, what we ought to perform: what we
our selves are to expect in our charge from them.

Beloved, we are as Moses in the Gap, to stand before, and betwixt GOD and his
people; to offer up supplications for them. We the Salt of the earth, which
ought to season and relish others. The eyes and lights of their lives, to guide
and teach them the good and the right way to salvation: And this I am sure is
it; that they may daily and continually by our frequent exhortations and pious
examples, be stirred up to call upon God, that they may be saved. Romans 10.13.
Romans 10.13.


Let us (Beloved) endeavor 2 Timothy 1.6.
(...), to kindle this fire again; and by all means effect by the Words
ministration, that public prayer, Gods service may be again restored into
Gods House, the House of prayer. What else should be the end of this or any our
visitation? Yea, what else did that great Sheepherd and Bishop of our souls
Christ Jesus intend and drive at in his trienniall Visitation (truly I may well
call it so:) for as if that were the ground of ours, and all ours to be
directed by that; he also visited his Temple twice in four years: for whereas
he preached only three years and an half, he visited his Temple twice in that
space.

Once ( John 2. John 2. v. 13.14, 15, 16.
) at the entrance and beginning of his Office; and again three years expired,
and some few days before his Passion, he came again, (...), with the Rod and
power to purge and visit his Temple the second time, ( Matthew. 21. Mat. 21.12,
13, 14.
) In both (behold) the same end intended, namely, Prayer to be not only
restored, but also preferred in the House of prayer.

It is worth our observing; that that part of the Temple, thus then abused, was
but Atrium populi, The Porch of the people: that which was there sold or
bought, was all for the service and ministration of the Temple. Yet as though
all were not well, if prayer were not all in all, if it dwelt not alone, or
chief in its own house, and every part of it: he does that which He never else
did; He takes the cause into His own hand: even the Lamb of God, who came to
save, to serve, and suffer, yet here turns Lion, and as if this were his
second coming, comes even again and the second time, in wrath, fury, and
indignation, to cast out all intruding upon his Service ( Prayer) and to
restore it again unto his own House, as that which is to be not only of his
Israel, but the continual Sacrifice of all Nations. My House (says he, and
his only charge it is at both those His Visitations) shall be called the House
of prayer unto all Nations: Esaias 56.7.
But ye, etc.

This our blessed Saviors Visitation, was in Saint Hieromes judgment the
greatest miracle that ever he did on earth in his own person: not only, that
one and alone, in so mean and low estate, he casts out so many thousands (as
S. Hierome observes, S. Hier. lib. 3. Comment. in Math. c. 21. Tom. 6. f. 44.
) but also, which is more wonderful, that changing his tenor and course of
mercy and meek mildness, in which he then came to seek and save; He thus of
a Lamb became a Lion; of a mild and gentle Savior, a most severe and
terrible revenging Judge: and who never before so much as quenched the smoking
Flax, or broke the bruised Reed, who never before once struck, or moved hand,
yet here did it, and did it again; not with the hand alone, but (as it were)
with all his force, even with scourges and rods; to show us what we should do,
and how zealous we should be in this case. Nay, to teach us, how strictly (now)
he requires the performance; and how severely he will hereafter revenge the
neglect of this duty at his second coming to judgment. Let us therefore, etc.

FINIS.
THE FIFTH; OF THE GROUNDS AND REASONS OF Set-times of Fasting. Preached upon
Tuesday, in the Passion week, at CHELMESFORD, Anno Domini, 1630.
In these two Parallel places: MARK 2.20. LUKE 5.35. But the days will come,
when the Bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then shall they fast in
those Days.


THere is A time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to
dance, says the Eccles. 3.4.
Preacher. If ever a time in the Church for the Church to dance, it was at her
own Bridalls, when she was married to the greatest Heir that ever was, the
Heir of Heaven and Earth. When man's nature was espoused in CHRIST to GOD,
never to be dissundered: when Esaias 9.6.
to us a Child was borne, and to us a Son was given: when Malach. 4.2.
the Sun of righteousness arose after a long night of sorrow, with healing
on his wings: when the Angels sung for joy, Luke 2.14.
Glory to GOD on high, on Earth peace, good will toward men: When Great joy
was proclaimed, Universal joy, which should be to all people. I suppose it
thence (not only a precept, Luke 2.10.
but also a Salutation or Valediction, (call it which you please) which the
Apostle so often uses, but especially to the Philippians; Philip. 3.1. and 4.4.
(...): Rejoice or Farewell in the LORD: and again, Rejoice in the LORD
always: Which latter the Church choosing for her Epistle on the third Advent
Sunday, begins her Day and course of time from Advent Sunday, the Bridegroomes
coming, so going through every part of her SAVIOR'S Life; thus showing all
hers, that all their joy must be in Him, in His presence, in whose presence
there is fulness of joy for evermore.

And as there is the same reason of contraries; So, if the Churches joy be for
the Bridegroomes presence; then must her sorrow be for her Bridegroomes
absence; especially Cum auferetur ab ejs, When the Bridegroom shall be taken
away, then she must needs mourn, then must she needs fast; if not for her
own loss; yet for His sake, for His Command, who has commanded, that, When
the Bridegroom is taken away, that then she should fast in those Days.

To which words orderly to enter, we must note, that the Pharisees did upbrayd
our SAVIOR with many things; of which when nothing could rightly be fastened
on Himself, they begin to find fault with His Disciples. Like as many now a
days do with CHRIST'S Spouse the Church; whom when they can justly charge with
nothing, they must at the least quarrel with her followers, with her
Discipline, with her Attire, with her Orders: either for her eating (as the
Pharisees did with our SAVIOR but immediately before for eating with
Publican's and Sinners: Verse. 16. Mark Verse 30. Luke
) or for her not eating, her fasting a Wednesday, Friday, Ember, or Lenten
fast. For these men we must take up our SAVIORS answer; We have piped to
them, Matthew. 11.17.
and they have not danced, We have mourned to them, and they have not wept.
Neither will the Churches joy down with them, in her public feasts, nor her
sorrow in her solemn fasts. We may well take up the Proverb: They are no
ways content, either full, or fasting. Let such men take heed, lest already
they have pertaken too much of the Leaven of the Pharisees, who so little
partake with the Spouse either in her Joy or Sorrow. But observe, I pray you,
the Pharisees policy: For having been often by themselves apart convinced and
confounded altogether by our SAVIOR, they now deal more subtly: They draw
the Disciples of the Baptist into their party: For so it appears, Matthew.
9.15. Matthew. 9.15.
Like as many now a days do; who the better to color their own hypocrisy,
and to increase their faction, abuse the honest simplicity of well affected
men. For their sakes our SAVIOR frames an Answer, consisting of two Reasons.

1 The first drawn from the words of the Baptist, John 3.29. John 3.29.
He (says the Baptist) that has the Bride, is the Bridegroom: but the
friend of the Bridgroome: which stands, and hears Him, rejoices greatly
because of the Bridegromes voice: This my joy therefore is fulfilled. As if he
should thus argue: By your masters confession I am the Bridegroom: if
therefore the friend of the Bridegroom have such joy at the mere voice of the
Bridegroom; how shall they which are of His Chamber mourn, etc?

2 The second from a twofold comparison, of old bottles and new wine; of an old
garment and new cloth: showing them that as it was unfitting in their present
state of joy, for them then to mourn: So was it also for the nonage and
infancy of the Church, to burden them with those severer parts of Discipline,
Fasting and Penance, etc. No man (says our SAVIOR) puts new wine, Verse.
22. Mark Ver. 37. Luke
etc. No man puts a piece of new cloth on an old garment; else the new piece
that filled it up, takes away from the old, and the rent is made worse: (...),
the Schism is made worse. Witness our own unhappy times; wherein the Papists
and the Church of Rome on the one side; as also some over forward men of our
own, on the other side, having patched up a world of new inventions to the
ancient customs and Tenets of the first Church, have thus made (...), the rent
the greater, the Schism the worse: having on all hands causlesly rent the
seamelesse Garment of CHRIST, this Glorious Bridegroom.

This Church of England has not done so: as she pretended, so she intended,
and truly performed above all others a Reformation. Which is (as they define
it) a Restitution and returning of every thing to their former and first
estate. To the first estate (praised be GOD) she has reformed herself: and as
in all other things, so in this and all other Fasts she has followed the
footsteps of the first and best Christians: of CHRIST'S Apostles; nay of CHRIST
Himself, who has thus commanded, that, When the Bridegroom is taken away,
that then they should fast in those days: and

Thus much for the Context.

For the Text; These words contain two principal parts.

1 First, A Prophecy, The Division.
that the Bridegroom shall be taken away.

2 Secondly, A Precept, that when the Bridegroom is taken away, that then they
shall fast in those days.

Where farther observe in this latter part (the Precept) two things: the 1
First, (...), That they shall fast. 2 The Second, (...), When they must fast.
1. Then; and 2. In those days.


The former is Ratio, the Reason and ground of all our Fasts; Because the
Bridegroom is taken away.

The latter is Regula, the Rule and manner of our fast; Then, and in those
days.

We for the plainest capacity will observe these five Propositions. 5
Propositions.


is the Bridegroom of His Spouse, the Church:] (...), according to that of
John the 3.29. He that has the Bride, is the Bridegroom.

Bridegroom must be taken away.] (...).

taking away, They, that is, The Church must and shall fast.] (...).

Then they shall fast (at that time) When the Bridegroom was taken away.]
(...).

[Then, in Those very days.] (...).

first; That our SAVIOR is the Bridegroom of His Spouse the Church, no man
that knows himself to be a Christian, can be ignorant.

Our nature both Soul and Body: the common nature of all mankind was married
to CHRIST JESUS both GOD and man: that as before by the Creation, Heaven and
Earth were married in man, thence called by Lactantius and the ancients,
Societas Caeli and Terrae: now again there might be a nearer and a straiter
tie by the Redemption, GOD in CHRIST marrying Himself to man: That as in Adam
all dyed, So in CHRIST all should be made alive, (1 Cor. 15. 1 Cor. 15.22.
) That as (Romans 5. Romans 5.18.
) by the offense of one man judgment came upon all men to condemnation: even
so by the righteousness of one the free gift (might) come upon all men to
justification of life.

And as marriages though consummate on Earth, are said to be made in heaven:
Sure we are, this above all others was concluded and made in Heaven, even by
the freest good will of GOD the Father; Who so loved the World, that He gave
His only begotten Son; John 3.16.
that whosoever believes on Him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.
In this marriage above all others was that fulfilled most fully; that the
Husband should leave Father and Mother, and cleave unto his Wife; Genesis 2.24.
and they should be one flesh. For CHRIST the Bridegroom left his Father in
Heaven: for, being GOD, very GOD, He emptyed Himself, Phil. 2.7.
and took upon Him the form of a Servant. He left His Mother, in His first
miracle; Woman, John. 2.4.
what have I to do with thee. And afterward more fully in His and 19.26.
Passion and Ascension to 1 John. 2.1.
follow His Spouses cause in Heaven. And whereas in other marriages it may
seem but in a Ephesians. 5.32.
mystery, that man and wife are made one flesh; seeing that, notwithstanding
this Union, man and wife are still two persons: here in this marriage it was
far otherwise; for GOD and man, two natures made but one Person. He became
not only Ephesians. 5.30.
Bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh: but even, John 1.14.
The Word was made (very) flesh, and dwelt amongst us. He became not only
Goel, a Surety, Kinsman for us; but even Emmanuell; GOD with us.

And as in all marriages; ubi tu Caius, ego Caia: the Honor, Credit, Esteem,
Name, Interest, Privileges, Riches, and whatsoever else good is, is derived
from the Husband to the Wife: and on the contrary, the debts, duties, dangers,
and hazards to which the Wife was liable, are charged upon the Husband: So was
it here most truly in the highest kind. The debts, which the Church stood
charged with, were discharged by Christ: and the merits worth, and benefits of
Christ were imputed to His Church: He was made sin for us, which knew no
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of GOD in Him, 2 Cor. 5.21.
(2 Cor. 5.) He was made a Gal. 3.13, 14
curse for us, that on us might come the blessing of Abraham: that we might
be called the blessed of the Father. Esa. 53.5.
He bare our infirmities, and by His stripes we are healed. Thus as between
man and wife, so of Christ and His Church, the works are accounted the same.
His righteousness, peace, and justice are accounted the Churches: His works
and merits are deemed as done by us: And our sins, misdeeds, and demerits are
deemed as done by Him, are laid to His score; and this was the cause of His
Taking away.

And as there are Duties of marriage: Protection and direction from the Man to
the Wife: Obedience and Reverence from the Wife to the Husband: So, this
marriage for all these, is a pattern, and president to all married men and
women whatsoever. For Protection. Ephesians. 5.25.
Husbands love your Wives, even as Christ loved his Church, and gave himself
for it: even to death to save it from death.

For Direction: I will pray the Father, John 14.16.
and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever.
He shall teach you all things, etc. 26.


For Protection: he is a King in power to defend his Church.

For Direction: he is a Priest and Prophet in knowledge to instruct his Church.
For both, we have his promise, Behold, Mat. 28.21.
I am with you to the end of the world.

But that he may continue with us to the end; we must always to the end continue
with his Spouse: we must perform those duties that are commanded her.

The first is Obedience. Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy soul,
with all thy heart, with all thy might, (Matthew. 22.37. Mat. 22.37. John 14.15.
) If ye love me keep my Commandments. Ye are my friends, if ye do
whatsoever I command you, (John 15.14. John 15.14.10.
) If ye keep my Commandments, ye shall abide in my love, even as I have kept
my Fathers Commandments, and abide in his love. If ye do, (mark I pray) if
ye do; as long as ye do: if ye keep, etc. Otherwise, unless ye do so:
except ye still keep: if ye do or dare otherwise; ye are none of his friends,
none of his followers: none of the Bride-chamber, none of his Spouses, none of
his Sheep, that hear not his voice, that keep not his Commandments. And
This is one, one of Them, that when the Bridegroom is taken away, then ye
should fast in those days. But of this anon.

What our obedience is I question not: it may be, as people pretend it is,
inward: But this I am sure of, that if it be true obedience, we shall see some
signs of it in the outward man: some fruits (at least) in the outward
reverence.

This, if not at other times, yet then at least when we come into the professed
service of the Bridegroom: when we Enter into the House of prayer: when we
come into his presence to serve him. I could by infinite testimonies of
Scripture, Reason, and Nature, prove this duty, if either the time or the Text
would give me leave. But I keep my self to my Text: to the Metaphor of a
Spouse.

There is honor due from the Wife to the Husband, 1 Pet. 3.6.
not only in word, with Sara, to call him Lord: but to do it with reverence.
Let the Wife (says the Apostle) see that she reverence her Husband. Ephesians.
5.33.
And This is chiefly (he tells us) spoken of Christ and his Church. 32.
If we will have him to protect us as his Spouse, we must honor him as the
Bridegroom: and that with a twofold reverence. 1 Of bended knee. 2 Of bared
head.

1 It is the custom of men in these times; if they read in Scripture, that
Christ calls us Friends, or Brethren, or Guests, or Co-heires, they presently
carry themselves aloft. We may not; (nay, now it is come so far, it is argued)
we must not kneel. We disparage our selves too much to kneel: what kneel? Do
Guests use to kneel at the Table? Do Wives use to kneel to their Husbands?

Alas poor silly men, that understand not, how by such appellations, duties
are rather commanded than any relaxation granted. When Christ calls us
Friends, he enjoyneth us love; when Servants, fear; when Guests, confidence;
when Children, reverence; when Heirs, hope: for none of these would he have
himself neglected, or our duties not respected.

But where do we read (for now Scriptum est is altogether stood upon) where
do we find, that wives must kneel to their Husbands?

Metaphors (Beloved) are not to be urged beyond their compass: if not within
the compass of this Metaphor, is it therefore not due? I hope there is none
here, that dare deny this Reverence unto God: and yet if we do not deny it, why
do we not yield it? Why do we deny it in our lives and conversations?

But did you ever hear, that Wives did kneel to their Husbands? Yes (beloved)
we find so, we read so, of those that had Kings to their Husbands. Did not
Esther a Queen kneel to her Husband Ahasuerus? Esther 8.3.
Yet what was Ahasuerus to the Rev. 19.16.
King of Kings? What are we (in the eye of the World) to Esther so great a
Queen? Nay, what is Esther, or the greatest, but wretched Worms to CHRIST
JESUS? And do we think much to kneel? I am sure, if we be of the Spouses
followers, we will do what she is commanded: and she is commanded thus.

David in that very Psalm which he penned for the Churches Wedding, in the
Spouses phrase ( Psalm. 45.) thus bespeaks the Church: Hearken O daughter, and
consider, incline thine ear, Psalm. 45.11, 12
forget thine own people and thy Fathers House. So shall the King have
pleasure in thy beauty, for he is thy Lord God, and worship thou him. Nay,
has not GOD sworn it? As I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me,
and every tongue shall confess to God. Esaias 45.23. Romans 14.11.
Has he not given this very honor to the Bridegroom, for this very taking
away. Wherefore (says the Apostle) God has given Him a name above every name,
Phil. 2.10.
that at the name of JESUS every knee might bow, both of things in Heaven, and
things in Earth, and things under the earth. Sure I am the Spouse and Church of
Christ did so. Therefore she chose the 95. Psalm for her invitation: therefore
was the 6. Verse of that Psalm usually resounded. Psalm. 95.11. Passim in
Horolog. Eucholog. and caeteris Graecorum officiis; quae vide. Et apud Latinos
Cassiod. in conclus. Psalm. 141. ubi ex Augustino. Et in Psalm. 94. S. August.
hom. 10 De verbis Apostoli in principio, ubi Psalmi hujus meminit in Ecclesiis
usurpati. 1 Cor. 11.4, 5.
(...), O come let us worship, etc. Thus did she then do both in the East and
West: and so must we do, if we be of her followers, if we belong to her.

2 But there is another Reverence of the Head. The Apostle tells us, 1 Cor.
11. That the Woman dishonors her head, if she be uncovered: and the Man his
head if he be covered.

The head of the Man is CHRIST, a glorious head, and therefore to be glorified:
the head of the Woman is the Man, a weak head ( God knows) and therefore she
to be covered: the Woman the weaker vessel, and therefore covered: the Woman
first in the transgression, the cause of covering, and therefore covered: the
Woman has her hair by nature for a covering, and therefore covered. The Man
for contrary reasons in the Church must be uncovered, that is, without his
ordinary covering. This was the custom of Christ's Spouse, the Catholic Church
through the World: The custom of the Church, 1 Cor. 11.16.
which the Apostle tells us, no man may break. We have no such custom:
therefore we have a contrary, is a good argument.

It is the command of Christ, by his Apostle, as may be gathered out of the
same Chapter, Verse. the first. At least, one made by the Apostles; 1 Cor. 11.1.
not a temporary Law made for a time (as * some vainly gloss it. It was a
perpetual Law: The Geneva Notes on 1 Cor. 11.
so the Apostle groundeth it, upon GOD, upon CHRIST, upon Nature, upon Grace,
upon Reason, upon Religion, etc. all, I hope, no temporary things.

For such the Church held it: so she ever practiced it. Tertullian is a
witness for the West. Tert. Apol. cap. 30.
Illuc suspicientes (Christiani) manibus expansis, quia innocuis; capite nudo,
quia non erubescimus: denique sine monitore, quia de pectore oramus, etc. S.
Basil the Great is a witness for the East; S. Basil. ad Neocaesar. Epist. 63.
(...), etc.
who blaming the Clergy and People of Neocaesarea, puts them in mind of
their famous Bishop Gregory Thaumaturgus: He (says S. Basil) never covered his
head at prayer. Why so? Because he was (says he) a true Scholar of the
Apostle, who tells us, that every man praying or prophesying having his head
covered, 1 Cor. 11.4.7.
dishonors his head. And the man ought not to cover his head, insomuch as
he is the Image and glory of God. Surely, should he, nay I say more, should
any Turk or Infidel come into our Churches, and behold our devotions and our
reverence here, they would by our behavior take this place for a Theater; and
our exercises here (for so they call them) rather for a gazing-stock, then once
guess it any service of God, or that it were any Reverence becoming the
Spouse of the glorious Bridegroom. Certainly if there be a way to grieve the
Holy Spirit of God, Romans 8.26.
who makes our prayers; or the Bridegroom, 1 John 2.1.
who as our Advocate, presents our prayers: this is the means to make him
withdraw, to cause him be gone, to drive him away: to cause that he be taken
away. And thus we are come to the second Proposition or Observation;

That the Bridegroom must be taken away.

It was when the Bridegroom spoke it a Prophecy, and now is (as Irenaeus
defines every Prophecy) a History fulfilled: and fulfilled it was at this very
time: this very week, ((...), to use the words of my Text) these very days:
and therefore to speak something of it, at this time, were a word in due time.

But how shall I be able to enter this Sea of our Saviors Passion, and not be
swallowed up of tears? How shall I show you this dismal, doleful taking
away? this bleeding spectacle? At which Heaven shut its eyes, and withdrew its
light: at which the Sun covered his face, and the Moon veiled her self in
blood, at which the Earth trembled, and all the Creation and powers of Heaven
and Earth (man only excepted) wrapped themselves in black shady darkness,
mourning that man, for whom this Bridegroom became man, should have so deep,
so bloody a hand in this taking away.

How shall my frail tongue be able to tell you? how He was taken, betrayed,
bound, and scourged: how He was scoffed, reviled, mocked, and spit on: how He
was crowned with Thorns, beaten with Rods and Reeds, cruelly whipped,
despitefully arrayed: how He was pierced, torn, crucified, and tormented: how
He was despised, and rejected of men, A man of sorrows, Esaias 53.3.
and acquainted with grief. He was oppressed, and afflicted. verse. 7.
He was brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a Sheep before the
Shearer, so he opened not his mouth. He was taken from prison, and from
judgment; verse. 8.
and who shall declare his generation? (says the Prophet.) Who shall indeed
declare it? Nay, who can declare it? Since an Angel from Heaven at His Birth
and Wedding declared the joy; who but an Angel from Heaven can declare the
sorrow? We should wrong our Saviors Passion, and the Scriptures relation, if
any other than the voice of God or Heaven should relate it.

Therefore the Church, the Spouse ordains, that so we should hear it: See
the Church Service Epistle and Gospel for the week before Easter.
and hear it so over and over again, because it can never too much affect us.
You heard it ere while at large related in the History (truly an History) by
One that saw it: On Sunday you heard S. Matthew relate it at large: yesterday,
and to day S. Mark: and lest we should want the knowledge of this taking away,
or not express it enough in our mourning, the Church ordains, that on every
day of this Week we should hear the full History of this His taking away, by
the mouth of one of his four witnesses. Neither has the Church done any new
thing in this: S. August. Sermon 144. de tempore. Sicut enim passio ex omnibus
Evangelistis conscripta est, sic dies Isti septem vel octo durant spacium, ut
secundum omnes Evangelistas Resurrectio recitetur. Passio autem quia uno die
legitur, non solet legi nisi secundum Matthaeum. Volueram aliquando, ut per
singulos annos secundum omnes Evangelistas etiam Passio legeretur: factum est,
non audierunt homines, quod consueverunt, and perturbati sunt, etc. Apud
Latinos factum est ante annum D C C C. quod sanctus Augustinus loco citato,
sibi faciundum proposuit; scilicet ut per singulos annos, secundum omnes
Evangelistas Passio Domini legeretur. Liquet id non solum ex ordine Romano,
Amalario, Ruperto, Hug. de Sanct. Vict. caeterisque Ecclesiasticis
Scriptoribus; verum etiam e missalibus antiquissimis Latinis and nostratibus e.
g. Romano, Eboracensi and Sarisbutiensi.
S. Augustine is a witness for the Latin and Western Church, that she did it
in the Resurrection of CHRIST: and that himself thought it likewise fit, and
attempted it in the Passion; Vt per singulos annos secundum omnes Evangelistas
Passio legeretur.

And indeed he did but propound to himself the example of the Eastern and
Mother Church: of whom Chrysostom. Tom. de Diverse. Nov. Test. Hom. 63. Cur in
Pentechoste Acta Apostol. legerentur his verbis. (...). Apud Graecos Passionem
Christi ipsa^ Passionis die (quod loco citato S. Chrysostomus) duodecem
perlectis Evangelii lectionibus recitant, totum diem illis recitandis
insumentes: nisi quod meditationes nonnullae hinc inde sparfim sint adjectae,
elegantes admodum, divinaeque Vid. (...). Et Graecorum (...), quod, etc.
S. Chrysostom. testifies, saying, that at the time of Christ's suffering, that is,
this taking away of the Bridegroom, (...), We read (says he) in that day all
concerning the Cross.

S. Chrysostom. ubi supra. (...), etc.
This, he tells us, ((...)) was an ancient Order of the Church long before
his time, even from the beginning, for this very reason; that all Scripture
being written for our instruction, this History above all, related by all,
might sink deeper into us, stick faster, affect us nearer, wring us and sting
us more strongly to make us mourn and lament, fast and pray, and weep in our
Prayers, as the Bridegroom did in His for His Spouse: So likewise she for her
Bridegroom, (...).
Bloody tears, blood and water in abundance, both from heart and eyes, at this
very time, and for this very cause, because the Bridegroom was taken away.

And surely, this is the Precept, this is our Duty; this is his Command; and
therefore as that which concerns us most, is most now to be stood upon. That
the Church and all her Children, the Spouse and all her followers must mourn
because the Bridegroom is taken away from them: which is the Third Proposition:
and Ratio, and the Reason of all our Fasting.

That, They must (they shall) fast, Because the Bridegroom is taken away.

1 Fasting is a sign of mourning: 1 Because He is Taken away.
Our Text so explaineth it self. How can the Children of the Bride Chamber
mourn, so long, etc. but the days will come, when the Bridegroom shall be
taken away, then shall they fast; that is, (therefore) mourn. 1 King. 21.4.
Ahab showed it in his ill mourning for Naboths Vineyard. No bread would down
with him, he was so vexed.

David also makes it manifest in his bitter complaint: Psalm. 102.4.
My heart is withered (says he) and smitten like grass; so that I forget to
eat my bread. As also more particularly when he was in fear to have his
Child taken away, he lay upon the earth, 2 Samuel 12.16.
and fasted for his Child. For his Child! but one Child! and but for the
fear of his being taken away! But what says Elkanah to Hannah? the Husband to
the Wife? 1 Samuel 1.8.
Am not I better to thee then ten Sons? The better any thing, the greater the
loss: the greater the loss, the more just the cause of mourning. 1 Samuel 1.8.
The loss of the Husband, the taking away of him, what is it less then the
rending of the Soul from the body; the pulling of one member from another? It
cannot be without great sorrow.

2 But here is more: The loss of the Bridgroome; that is, 2 Taken away whilst
a Bridegroom.
whilst he was a Bridegroom, in the height of joy: If from the marriage
Chamber: it must needs be a degree beyond sorrow.

Our SAVIOR was the desire of all Nations. He tells His Disciples ( Luke
10.) Blessed are the eyes that see those things that ye see, etc. For I say
unto you, Luke 10.23, 24
many Prophets and Kings have desired, etc. For four thousand years this
Bridegroom was expected, as a Bridegroom out of his Chamber, and came not:
when He came, He continued but thirty four years or thereabout, upon Earth:
but three of these years (or little more) did He show Himself as a
Bridegroom. A short time (you will say) for so great Nuptials. All times
before without this joy; All times after abridged of this joy. Even in the day
of the Nuptials, the joy of the Nuptials was taken away by this taking away
of the Bridegroom. Then, they must needs mourn.

3 Taken away for them.
3 But if this taking away be for them, in their behalf, through their means;
then they have yet more cause to mourn.

You heard, that the Debts of the Wife are charged upon the Husband; What then,
if for the Wives debt, the Husband, nay the Bridegroom in the midst of joy,
even upon his marriage day; If for the Brides cause he be haled to prison and
to judgment? If for her heinous crimes He must answer? If all we have gone
astray, and the Lord has laid on Him the iniquity of us all. Then, Esa. 53.6.
good reason for us also to share and partake in this sorrow: good reason then
for the Bride to lay aside her attire, to go forth of her closet, to lay from
her the voice of eating and drinking: to forget to eat her bread, to forbid
the voice of joy and mirth; and to begin to mourn and lament, because the
Bridegroom for her sake is taken away.

4 But (yet further) what, 4 By them.
if as for the Spouses debt, so by the Spouses hand, he were thus taken away?
Was it not so, When Judas one of His own, betrayed Him? When Peter a chief
amongst his own, denied Him? When His Disciples all of them fled from Him?
When His followers on all hands forsook Him? Do thou think, that thou
could have stood in this trial? When the whole Church, the Bride forsook
Him, how would thou have defended the Bridegroom? Verily I say unto you,
All you shall be offended because of me this night. So far from defending
Him, that they were offended at Him. Matthew. 26.31.
As we all in Peter and the Apostles, received the name, power, and privileges
of the Spouse, so we all may confess, we did, or would have done no less
then with Peter denied Him, with His Disciples forsook Him, with His nearest
followers fled from Him. And therefore as Saint Peter the chief Apostle
coming to Himself, wept bitterly for his sin: So the whole Church,
represented (says Saint Cyprian) in him, must do the like with him: must
fast, and mourn, and lament, because even by us also, as well as by them, the
Bridegroom was taken away.

5 But there be more takings away then one: we were are all guilty of taking
Him away in Adam's sin: 5 By them often taken away.
it was our original. We had been again, had we then been, in the Church of
the Apostles, it had been our personal. Yet (then) CHRIST suffered but once.
Nevertheless the Apostle tells us, of some, that Crucify again the Son
of GOD, Heb. 6.6.
afresh, etc. and it is the usual gloss of the ancients and others, upon
those words, viz. That by the ill lives and the sins of those that are by
Baptism inserted into CHRIST'S death, and so justified, that by such Sins of
theirs after Baptism, Christ again is taken away and Crucified. If so, who
then especially in these evil days, is free of this sin? unless,
perchance, some men should again rake up that old condemned heresy of
Iovinian, viz. That no man can depart from Grace after Baptism. This (as he
could) he maintained from, 1 John 3.9. 1 Ioh. 3.9.
Whosoever is borne of GOD, does not commit sin: for his seed remains in him,
and he cannot sin, because he is borne of God, as also that other Parallel
place, 1 Ioh. 5.18. We know that whosoever is borne of GOD, 1 Ioh. 5.18.
sins not: but he that is begotten of GOD, keeps himself, and that wicked
one touches him not. Though from the context of the place, the scope and
intent of the Epistle, the History of the Church, especially out of Clemens
Alexandrius, and Epiphanius we might abundantly show this place by Iovinian and
his followers to be perverted: yet I choose rather to use the answer of Saint
Hierom; S. Hieronym. cont. Iovinian. l. 2. ad initium.
Surely (says Saint Hierom) a strong and weighty argument it is, if it were
not by and by overthrown by the Apostle in the same place, verse 21.

Little Children, keep your selves from Idols. A plain case, that if not
from Idolatry the greatest and grossest sin, then are we secure from no
sin. A plain case it is, in those very Churches to whom this Apostle wrote.
The Churches of Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira, Philadelphia, Sardis, etc.
proclaim unto us, that seeing the Candelsticks are removed, and the
Bridegroom taken away from them; that the Bridegroom was first taken away by
them. If a Church a Congregation, a number of faithful men is not; what one
(though for the present faithful or believing) can be, secure? Nay, if so many
Churches, a Congregation of Churches have thus fallen, what one Church, though
never so glorious for the present, can be secure? shall Rome? shall England?
Nothing less: We have all sinned again and again; and may justly fear that
as we have taken away the Bridegroom by our sins; He may at last be
altogether taken away for our sins. Let us all (in the name of GOD) prevent
it by this heavenly Antidote of Fasting and Prayer; that so taking away our
sins, which otherwise would take away the Bridegroom, He, the Bridegroom
may not again be taken away by them. Let us mourn for our sins, that we
mourn not for our selves; that we lament not His loss. Which GOD of His
mercy, etc.

But if any mourning may serve, why is Fasting rather prescribed, then any
other mourning? Doubtless, Reasons of Mourning by Fasting.
for many good Reasons: We will name a few.

1 Fasting is a holy revenge of all sin, in the first sin: but chiefly of
that first sin, which first and chiefly took away the Bridegroom. Genesis
2.17.3.3.6, 11. etc.
That first sin was in eating, Genesis 3. Good reason therefore, Eiccit ergo nos
de Paradiso cibus; reducat esuries, reducat jejunium. S. August. Sermon. 65. de
Temp. 2 Cor. 7.11.
when we mourn for the Bridegroomes taking away, to have a principal eye to
that sin, for the which principally the Bridegroom was taken away.

2 Fasting is an holy justicing of our selves ((...) the Apostle calls it)
for this taking away of the Bridegroom. For as the Bridegroom is taken away
by the deeds of the flesh: so for this, we punish the flesh, by Fasting.

3 Fasting is a vigilant preventing, lest the Bridegroom be taken away again.
Romans 7.23. Gal. 5.17.24.
For the flesh is that, which ever rebelleth against the spirit. Therefore They
that are CHRIST'S (says the Apostle) have crucified the flesh. 1 Cor. 9.27.
And (of himself he says) I keep under my body, and bring it into
subjection; lest that by any means having preached to others, I my self
should be a castaway, that is, lest the Bridegroom be taken away from me.

4 Again, Fasting is an holy experiment of selfe-denyall according as the
Bridegroom commands, that we should deny our selves, and take up his cross,
etc For, if we can deny our necessities of eating and drinking, we may well
deny our pleasures: if we can fast from our meat, we may well fast from our
sins; from wrong; from violence, from extortion, etc. Which is the Fast, that
God commands, Esa. 58. Esa. 58.3, 4 5.


5 Again, Fasting is a just Restitution to the Creatures, which having often
been abused by our intemperance, and made to groan (Romans 8. Romans 8.22.
) we thus make them a kind of satisfaction by our forbearance.

6 Again, Fasting is an humble Confession unto Almighty GOD, that as we have
offended the Bridegroom also, With whom He has given us all things, (Romans 8.
Romans 8.32.
) So we acknowledge our selves most unworthy of any of His blessings: most
worthy, with Him to have all things taken away.

7 Again, Fasting is an holy Watching over our selves. Watch and Pray, is in a
manner, Matthew. 26.41.
Fast and Pray. For as Watching is a containing from sleep; so is Fasting from
meat, both for the same end, to tame the body. Thence the ancient Vigills were
(I take it) changed to Evening Fasts. Sure I am: Monstrum libido sine gula, cum
duo haee tam unita atque concreta sint, ut si dis jungi omnino potuissent, ipsi
prius ventri pudenda non adhaererent. Specta corpus, and una regio est; denique
pro dispositione membrorum ordo vitiorum: prior venture, and statim caetera:
saginae substracta lascivia est per edacitatem, salacitas transit. Tert. lib.
de Iejun. cap. 1. ad init.
Subest inguen ventri (as one said) For as Semper juncta est Saturitati
lascivia; vicina sibi sunt venture and genitalia, and pro membrorum ordine ordo
vitiorum intelligitur. S. August. Sermon. 65. de Tempore.
the belly and the unclean parts are linked together, so are the sins of
either. Therefore the Apostle joyneth them ( Romans 13.) Rioting and
Drunkenness, Chambering and wantonness, Romans 13.13. Philo. Iud. l. de Victim.
S. Hieronym. Cont. Iovinian. li. 2. c. 6.
the latter for this cause termed (...). For as S. Hieron well; Saturitas
ventris Seminariu^ libidinis: A full belly, and a foul heart. Remove therefore
the cause of thy uncleanness, and thy uncleanness shall be no cause of the
Bridegroomes taking away.

8 Lastly, Fasting is, as a sign, so a principal cause of mourning. Is there
any man here, that after all this which has been said, cannot yet mourn for
the Bridegroom! Let him but fast; and I dare warrant him to mourn. Hunger
will bring the stoutest stomachs under: it will make them bend. It is the
Apostle; who was in watchings often, 2 Cor. 6.5. and 11.27. 1 Cor. 9.27. Vid.
Suidam in Lexic. verb. (...).
in fastings often, (...) (says he) I keep my body under. The word
signifies a buffetting about the face and eyes, as a man would buffet his
adversary on his knees. This he did by Fasting. No way so truly, so fully to
make us mourn, as by fasting. If thou can not mourn, betake thee to
fasting, and that will make thee mourn. If thou can mourn, yet
notwithstanding fast, and that will make thee mourn yet more. And indeed
Sorrow as it came from sin, so it is due only to sin.

Genesis 3.16, 17.
No sorrow before sin, Genesis 3. In sorrow shall thou conceive, to the Woman. In
sorrow shall thou eat thy bread, to the Man.

And no sorrow after sin. All tears (then) shall be wiped from their eyes.
Apoc. 7.17.21.14. Apoc. 14.13.
And from henceforth blessed are they that dye in the LORD.

No sorrow for them after Death: Only, their time is here for sorrow; and
their sorrow only for sin. We sin daily, and therefore We must sorrow daily
this Godly sorrow not to be repented of. 2 Cor. 7 9, 10.
This is the Valley of tears: Here we must mourn.

But though all this time be for mourning, yet in this there is an especial
time for mourning in an especial manner. Eccles. 3.4.


And this is that Time, Then, at that time, when the Bridegroom was taken away.

But here it is usually excepted by them who are no friends to set-fasts,
Object.
that this Text speaks of extraordinary fasts in cases of doubt and danger,
when the Bridegroom and his presence is likely to be with-drawne or
withheld from us.

But they are readily confuted:

1 By the context, Resp.
and scope of CHRIST'S answer, which if ad idem, must necessarily be meant of
Set-fasts. For these, we read of, that did here cavil at Christ and his
Disciples, did object the continual Set-fast of the Baptist, Mat. 9.14. Mark
2.18. Luke 5.33.
the Pharisees, and their disciples. Why (say they) do we and the Pharisees
fast often? but thy Disciples fast not? All the three Evangelists note this
speech concerning their often Set-fasts to have been the occasion of our
Saviors answer. But theirs were set and ordinary; the Baptist perpetually
abstaining (as did Daniel) from flesh and wine, and all desirable meats and
drinks: the other also fasting ordinarily Luke 18.12. De Phariseis Epiphanius,
(...). S. Epiphan. adv. haeres. lib. 1. haeres. 16. Vid. Joan. Drusium.
Praeterit. lib. 3. p. 107. in locum. Luke 18. Abra. Scultet. Exercit. Evang.
lib. 1. c. 25.
twice every week (as do the Vid. Ioh. Buxtorf. de Synagoga Iudaic. c. 25. p.
457
Jews at this day) on our Monday their second of the week, and on our
Thursday their fifth of the week. So that these men must either grant our
blessed Savior not to speak to purpose (which to do were no less than
blasphemy) or they must with us understand him, and these words concerning
ordinary set-fasts.

2 It is demonstrated, by the Article (...), which in the Greek, roveth not at
large, but points at exact specialties: either let them blot out this word, or
grant ours, and the Texts true meaning. Vid. D. Chamier. Panstrat. Cathol. Tom.
3. lib. 19. c. 7. Sect. 43, 44, 45, 46. ubi locum hunc excutit.


3 It is proved (as we see) by the plain Letter: which being the foundation of
all other expositions either must stand, where is no reason to the contrary, or
must be by reason refelled: which being not yet brought by any on the adverse
part, there can be no cause to depart from it.

4 And surely (in the fourth place) these words referring us plainly to such a
time and absence, Mat. 9.15. Mark 2.19. Luke 5.34.
as is opposite to that time of his presence, mentioned in the former Verses:
it must needs therefore follow, that as the one is primarily and properly
understood of his (then) bodily presence upon earth, as the time of their
rejoicing; so must the other also in like manner be underunderstood of His
(like) bodily absence by his Death, Passion, and Ascension; the cause and time
of our mourning, and therefore of all ordinary fast.

5 It is confirmed by the perpetual exposition of all ancient Christians.

6 Yea, by the Apostles and whole Churches practice. For whereas every week in
the course of its days has from thence a commemoration of the Great Day, and
our joy in Christ's Resurrection; we celebrating the Lords Day in joyful
praises and thanksgiving unto God therefore: why may we not as well, yea much
rather conclude, there should be in the same course of times the like day or
days of mourning for his Passion, that we may no less mourn and suffer with
him (the most proper duty of this our sorrowful and sinful life here) then,
(which is the hope of our after happiness in Heaven) joy and rejoice with him,
in the memory of his most glorious and blessed Resurrection.

7 But yet again (in the last place) even in their sense it is direct for us.
For if these words are to be applied to all such times, when the Bridegroom is
or may be removed and withdrawn for our sins; then is it also proper for
continual and ordinary fasts, not only for extraordinary. For reason wills that
as we sin continually every day of the week, so we should if it might be, fast
continually and mourn for our sins: which because we cannot daily do, every
day; fit it is we should every week set some days apart: and no days
fitter, than those, in which he was (even according to the Letter) taken away.

And truly there being always the same reason of every kind of his taking
away by our sins, of all our mourning for our sins: there being no opposition
betwixt them; but a subordination of the latter to the former; their
extraordinary fasts being grounded (though in a secondary respect) upon the
same reason, on which are our Ordinary; there can be therefore no color why
the Text should be true of one and not of the other: Why, denied of ordinary;
and affirmed only of extraordinary fasts: especially since our blessed Saviors
answer should in right reason answer to their objection; who (as we have
showed) spoke of set, ordinary, and weekly fasts.

And thus far we have (with the blessed Bridegroom in this Text) stepped out of
the way to satisfy our contending and discontented Brethren.

We will now return to the pursuit of our Text, and in it, to the fourth
Observation, or Proposition;

Then, ((...), at that time) they shall fast: when and at what time the
Bridegroom was taken away.

And more particularly, which is the fifth:

Then: (...). Then, in those very

That they should fast at that individual time, only, When he hung on the
Cross, as it is likely they did not, so it is plain our Savior meant not.
Therefore this word (...), Then, must be interpreted of the whole time, after
the taking away of his corporal presence. Tum, Tamdiu: Then, all that time,
and course of years till his second coming again.

Yet again, not as the Montanists urged these words for another Lent after
Pentechost, and the Ascension.

Where observe (I beseech you) the contrary humor of these latter days. Then
the contention was for two Lents, or more; but now, that there may be none at
all. Surely, the Montanists were foully in an error. For besides many other
reasons, the word here used will not suffer us to understand it of a voluntary
departure, such as was his Ascension; but of a violent taking away, such as was
his Passion, or such as is any other constrained departure, or driving away by
our sins: which being continually done by us, why should not our fast (as much
as may be) be also weekly and continued by us on those days?

But again, as the joy for the Bridegroom is dispersed through every part of
the year, according to the several considerations of His presence: so
likewise is our sorrow for the like reasons dispersed through every part of the
year. (...), Then. So long. For what is all time, but one year after another?
Therefore seeing we may not, we cannot fast always, all the year long, and
yet must fast; Then, so long; even through the whole year: every part of the
year must bear a part.

There be four parts of the year, Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter.

According to these four there be four solemn Fasts or Embers instituted as
for other reasons, so chiefly for this, that every part of the year we may
commemorate this taking away: and that (as Leo magnus. Ser. 8. de Iejun. decimi
men's. v. b. Siquidem jejunium vernum in Quadrigesima, aestivum in Pentecoste,
autumnale in mense septimo, hyemale autem in mense hoc decimo celebramus;
intelligentes divinis nihil vacuum esse praeceptis.
Leo) no part of the year might have a Vacuum, or Vacation from this holy
command.

And as Moses for the Law: Elias for the Prophets; and Our Savior for the
Gospel fasted, when they began and entered to each, a forty days fast: so we
begin the year and every part of the year with this godly sorrow, with the
Baptists repentance, with this longer fast, that we may prepare the way of the
Lord, make his paths straight.

It is the observation of Divines; That never any man in the Church attempted
any thing, but first fasting and prayer went before it. Therefore we begin the
year, and every part of the year with fasting: but especially the beginning
of the year, we begin that with a longer Fast, the Lenten Fast, the Fast of
forty days. Thus applying our Saviors precept, That we must fast, to his own
example, how we should fast. Good reason for this you will say.

But yet another reason: The Bridegroomes command it is, That as we must fast
Then at that time, When the Bridegroom was taken away: So, Then especially,
chiefly of all, and above all, at That time. Therefore whereas at other times,
either the Ninivites fast of three Days, Jonas 3. 1 Samuel 31.13.
or the Gileadites fast for seven days may serve: Then, when they fast for the
Bridegroom, they must fast with the Bridegroom, as he did, forty days. And
so much the rather (say the S. Bernard. 3. Sermon. Quad. Tanto devotius imitandum
nobis est Christi je junantis exemplum, quanto certius est propter nos eum je
junasse non propter scipsum. S. Ambros. Ser. 36. infer. 5. p. 1. Dom. v. h. Si
vis Christianus esse, debes quod Christus fecit facere. Ille qui peccatum non
habebat, Quadragesimam je junavit, tu non vis Quadragesimam je junare qui
peccas, etc.
Fathers) ought we Then to fast, by how much the surer we are He fasted (Then)
not for himself, but for us. Great reason therefore we should fast with him,
for our selves.

But as Then, at that time: so especially more particularly, (...). In those
very Days.

Saint Mark, and Saint Luke, both of them speak very fully. Here is not only
the Pronoune Demonstrative; Those Days: but also (in the Greek) the Article
prefixed, which notes particulars, even with an exact specialty. (...). Those
very selfsame Days.

These, I say again, are Those Days here spoken of: Those very selfsame
Days, every day. Therefore every Day of this week was a Fast, a solemn Fast,
all the six of them. And as Then, about this time, They did fast a longer fast,
because of this Then: So now at this Time They did fast a more vehement fast,
because of These Days. Before, a Daniels fast might serve, to eat no meats of
delight, nor flesh, no wine, as he names them, Dan. 10. Dan. 10.3. 2 Samuel 3.35.
But now a David's fast was exacted, tasting neither bread nor ought else till
the Sun went down. Nay they did join them both together. S. Epiph. 75.
Aerii. c. 3. v. h. (...) etc. Et cap. 6. ibid. de Apostolis loquutus, eorumque
hac de re constitutione. (...). Et in compend. fidei c. 22. v.h. (...). Vid.
etiam (...) Graecorum Rubric. post Dominic. Palmarum. Ibi leguntur verba haec.
(...).
Epiphanius shows as how. They did eat in These Days, nothing but bread,
water, and salt, a dry and drying Diet: (...) they called them. They did lie
upon the hard ground: They did continue watching with all supplication and
prayer. They did put on Sackcloth. They did by all means, abstaining from
their own lawful wives, bring their flesh and body under. Our tender, loose,
nice, delicate times tremble to hear of this Diet.

2. But yet there be of These (six days) two days, which are principally
marked with the Article (...). Those two days, wherein the Bridegroom was
taken away.

The first of these two was on the morrow, our wednesday, their fourth day;
because on that Day Mat. 26.2, 3.4, 14. etc.
Counsel was taken against Him; money was taken for Him; Plots were laid to
take Him. So upon that Day He began to be taken away. (...) (says Saint
Epiphanius) He was taken. Epiphan. Compend. fidei. cap. 22.
As good as taken away Then. Upon the Friday, as we all know, He was taken, and
taken away; And therefore, as for These two days sake, the rest of these days
were to be observed; so These two Days were principally observed above the
rest. So that whereas before ( Daniels fast observed) a David's fast did serve;
viz. to eat nothing at all till Sun went down: now on the Friday especially
(at Easter) They did fast the fast of Esther, Chap. 4.16. Neither to eat nor
drink De triduano jejunio little aperte S. Epiphanius compend. fidei ca. 22.
(nisi quod de quorunda^ in quatriduum prorogato jejunio ibidem refert.) verba
haec sunt. (...). Haec quippe specialis and privata observatio erat, quam sibi
nonnulli e devotione privata injunxerunt. Verum ut per triduum hoc jejunarent
communiter omnes quantum potuerant, sancitum ab Ecclesia. Quod non obscure
Graecorum (...), ubi supra: (...) () (...). Ab illo enim tempore novo jejunio
indicto Parasceven and Sabbatum sanctum integrum jejunii perstiterunt, usque ad
Galli cantum. Vid. Council. in Trullo. Can. 90. (seu ut alii) 89. and Anastas.
Nicaen. Quaest. 77. fol. 98. Tom. 1. Bibliothec. PP. Paris. ubi ex
constitutione Apostolica lib. 5. c. 17. Quem sane^ locum, and (...) Graecorum
laudat; ubi infra.
three days, night nor day; viz. all that time the Bridegroom remained thus
taken away.

And now (you see) this Fast here was at the height. Yet nevertheless here was
not all. For besides, as on the Sunday He arose, that Day therefore giving all
Christians the name and observation of a new and Christian Sabbath in
solemnizing a new Lords day, in memory of our joy for His Resurrection, and now
more glorious presence, every first day of the week through the whole year: so
in like manner, and from like beginning, every fourth day, that is, our
Wednesday, and every sixth day, that is, our Friday, were likewise by all Scil.
apud Graec. and Orientales vol ipsis Pontificiis testibus inviolata adhuc etiam
quartae feriae in jejuniis Manet observatio: Sic enim Turrianus. Qui enim isti
dies sunt quibus ablatus fuit? Nonne quarta feria and sexta? quarta enim factum
est principium auferendi eum, siquidem eo die facta est pactio a Judah cum
Iudaeis de prodendo Domino; sexta vere crucifixus est, quibus diebus per omnes
Ecclesias totius Orientis semper ab initio jejunatum est, and usque in
hodiernum diem jejunatur, sicut illis a sanctis Apostolis traditum est.
Turrian. Apol. pro Pontif. Epist. lib. 5. cap. 18. p. 594.

Adest Praeceptum generale Apostolici conventus, quantum ad praescriptionem
temporis jejunii, tam in Quadragesima quam in duabus feriis cujuscunque
Hebdomadae, quod usque in hodiernum diem tam mordicus tenent Orientales
Christiani, ut nec diem unum praetermittant, non dico viri robusti, sed etiam
puellae, adolescentes, senes and quotquot sunt firmae valetudinis. Martinus
Peresius de Traditionib. De lejun. part. 3. p. 264.


succeeding Generations observed with Fasting and mourning in Commemoration of
the Bridegroomes taking away.

Thence because This week gave the name and order of days to all other weeks
through the year, (the old order from the Creation in the Jewish Sabbath being
now first changed) as also because of the solemn fasting and prayer used
through this whole week; as lastly, because of that great work of our
Redemption perfected therein: and This command of our SAVIOR then principally
to be observed both in the changes of joy and sorrow: This week was called by
the Eastern and mother Church (...), Scilicet, Magna and Sancta Hebdomas ap.
Latin.
The great week. The Latins successively calling it by the same name.

Neither was this a late invention of upstart and new fangled Popery, (which we
may well call new, it being as it differs from ours, most truly a Novelty,
and a Religion of yesterday's birth:) But this is most Ancient from the first
beginning: not grounded only upon the Law of the Church, but upon the Command
of Christ Himself, thus commanding, That in those days, when the Bridegroom,
etc. That they so grounded this Fast, and so expounded this place: for the
East, the Eastern and Mother Church her self is a witness in her own most
ancient Ordinall or (...) of Sabba: Typicu^ hoc Graecorum and Orientalium ad
finem ejusdem ubi de Ratione jejuniorum apud Graecos and in Ecclesus receptorum
agit; inter caetera, (...) haec etiam habet. (...). Et mox de feria quarta and
sexta per annum identidem observandis. (...). Vid. Apostol. Constitut. Clem. l.
5. c. 17. and 19.
drawing it as from the Apostles, so by them from the command of Christ
Himself in this place.

Locus illustris est admodum S. Epiphanii Compend. fidei, cap. 22. verba haec
sunt. (...). Et mox Rationem jejuniorum in Ecclesia omnium pulcherrime
subjungit his verbis. (...). Et mox etiam subnectir. (...). Vide locum. Et in
Aerii Haeres. 75. cap. 6. his verbis. (...).
Epiphanius also within four hundred years after our blessed SAVIOR plainly
tells us, that all Christians through the whole world did observe These days
Fast, and grounded it upon this Command of our Savior in this very place.

For the Latin and Western Church; Tertullianus jam Montani parts agens
adversus Psychicos (Orthodoxos scil.) lib. de jejunio. cap. 2. v. h. Certe in
Evangelio illos dies jejuniis determinatos putant, in quibus ablatus est
sponsus: and hos esse jam solos legitimos jejuniorum Christianorum abolitis
legalibus and Propheticis vetustatibus. Vid. eundem and cap. 14.
Tertullian within two hundred years after the Bridegroom; as also S.
Augustine. Epist. 86. ad Casulan. Presbyter. prope ad finem Epistolae, verbis
his. Cur autem quarta and sexta feria maxim jejunet Ecclesia, illa Ratio reddi
videtur, quod considerato Evangelio ipsa quarta Sabbati, quam vulgo quartam
feriam vocant, consilium reperiuntur ad occidendum Dominum fecisse Iudaei, etc.
Vide locum.
S. Augustine in his 86. Epistle to Casulanus: Both of them showing, That these
Fasts are plainly grounded upon this Command of our Savior, and that all
Christians understood them so.

There is yet Quod dicunt quartae feriae jejunium ab Ecclesia Occidentali in
Sabbatum fuisse translatum, falsum esse patet, quod olim vel ipsi Romani
utriusque diei jejunium simul observarunt. Liquet hoc; tum ex Vrbici illius
argumento apud S. Aug. Ep. 86. tum ex testimonio S. Aug. ib. Christianus (ait)
qui, quarta and lexta feria and ipso Sabbato jejunare consuevit, quod
frequenter Romana plebs facit, etc. Et alibi, -- Ipsam quoque Romanam
Ecclesiam, ubi and hic hebdomadibus, in quibus quarta and sexta Sabbato and
jejunatur. Novimus ex multis auctoritatibus (ait Amalarius) quod Dies Sabbati,
sicut quarta Sabbati and sexta inclusa orat jejunio apud Romanos. Amalar.
Fortunat. Episc. Trever. de Eccles. Offic. l 4 c. 37. Et ab. 2. cap. 2.
Another day of mourning and fasting, namely the Saturday, or as in all Ages it
was always called amongst Christians the Sic passim in Ricualibus Syrorum,
Graecorum, Latinorum, etc.
Sabbath; A day though hardly ever received in this use by the Notius hoc, qua^
ut testimonijs probari debeat: quum constet cuivis vel leviter versato in
Orientaliu^ Christianorum libris, haud observatum ijs esse Sabbatum in
jejuniis, non levi dissidio hinc orto, aut quide^ aucto inter Graecos and
Latinos. De Aethiopibus idem testantur, Damian. a Goes. de mor. Aethiop. p.
458, 459. Et Nic. Godign. li. 1. c. 19. p. 123. De Moscovit. itid. vid.
Theolog. Muscovit. c. 10. p. 98. Et Joan. Fabr. Epist. ad Ferdin. Reg. p. 179.
Eastern Christians, nor for diverse hundred years Orientis and Occidentis
populos Christianos, in quibus Sabbato nemo jejunat (Et) Omnes Orientales and
multos etiam occidentales populos Sabbato sobrie modesteque prandentes (Et)
Ecclesiam per totum mundum () die Sabbati pene ubique prandentem 1. c. non
jejunantem) laudat contra Vrbicum. S. August. Ep. 86.
in the West, nor indeed by all Non. n. a Mediolanensibus: quod docet Responsio
S. Ambrosij ad B. Monicanm Augustini matrem. Quando, inquit, hic (Mediolani)
sum, non jejuno Sabbato, quando Romae sum, jejuno Sabbato. S. August. Ep. 86.
paulo ante finem.
Italy it self; yet anciently held in this use by the Christians of (...).
Socrat. li. 5. c. 22. f. 250. Vid. Joan. Cassian. Institut. l. 3. c. 10. and S.
August. Epist. 19. ad S. Hieronym. f. 16. and Ep. 86. supra. citat. Pro hac re
solebant omnes Romani omnia Sabbata jejunare, etc. Propterea dico (ait Amalar.)
praeteritum, quia nescio quomodo nunc agant. Vide Amalar. Fortunat. Episc.
Trever. (qui circa Annum. 800.) de Ecclesiast. Offic. li. 4. Romanos autem quum
nominant, Vrbem cum territorio and suburbicarijs intelligunt: ut manifestum sit
hinc Romanorum leges haud extra fines urbis tunc receptas fuisse.
old Rome, with some few others of the Sc. in Colonijs Romanorum. Quia and
Romana je junat (scil. in Sabbato) Ecclesia, and aliae no^nullae etia^si
paucae, sive illi proximae (Suburbicariae scil.) Sive longinquae, (Colonias ab
ijs in Africam aut in Hispania^ deductas intelligit) S. Aug. ibid. Ep. 86. De
Africanis nonnullis testatur ibid. ad fin. Epist. S. August. Quoniam (ait)
contingit maxim in Africa, ut una Ecclesia, vel unius regionis Ecclesiae alios
habeant Sabbato prandentes, alios jejunantes, etc. Sic juxta morem civitatis
suae (Carthaginis Africanae) in Sabbato je junatum ait ibid. Quod etiam in
Hispanijs factum fuisse docet S. Hieronym. Epist. 28. ad Lucinum, ad fin.
Epistolae.
West: And from them at the last generally Sc. post. an. 900. gradatim id
factu^, jejunio primu^ indicto Sabbatis Quadragesimalibus, sive Adventus illa
fuerint, seu magna Quadragesimae. Vid. Council. Agath. Can. 12. Tribur. Ca. 56.
Matiscon. Ca. 9. Aurelian. 4. Ca. 2. Postea invalescente majori Roman. sedis
auctoritate per Carolu^ magn. ejusque successores, ejusde^ ritibus passim in
Occidentem introductis tandem Sabbati jejunium apud Latinos ubique receptum
erat.
received in France, Germany, and other parts of the Latin Church, yea also by
this Island, and this our English Church: though not as a day wherein the
Bridegroom was taken away; yet wherein He thus remained both by His Souls
Descent to Hell, and Bodies rest and Sabbath in the grave. A Preparation Inde
Vigiliae in Sabbato in Parascecue^ and praeparationem Dominicae.
also for the LORDS day's following Joy in His return and Resurrection: added
(say Sic Vrbicus ille apud S. Augu. Ep. 86.
some) to the two former weekly fast days, That our Christian righteousness
might herein exceed that of the Pharisees two Days fast: perhaps Haud id
improbabile visum, tum aliunde id observanti, tum praesertim expendentilo. cum
illum Joan. Cassian. Collat. 21. cap. 25.
brought in at first for, or in place of those Sabbath Vigils, preparatory to
the LORDS Day's Service: or to Sic etiam Vrbicus ap. S. August. Ep. saepe
citata. 86
abolish the easilyer that superstitiously observed Jewish Sabbath, doubtless
Sequitur Sabbatum, quo die caro Christi in monumento requievit, sicut in primis
operibus mundi requievit Deus illo die ab omnibus operibus suis. Hinc exorta
est illa in regia vaste varietas, ut alij, sicut maxim populi Orientis propter
requiem significandam mallent relaxare jejunium; alij propter humilitatem
mortis Domini jejunare, sicut Romana and nonnullae Occidentis Ecclesiae, etc.
S. August. ubi supra. Quibus diebus (ait Amalar.) eadem jejunia celebrentur,
oportet memorari, Scil. quarta feria, sexta, and septima: Quarta, quia in ea
fecerunt Iudaei consiliu^, ut occiderent Christum: Sexta eum occiderunt:
septima Romanorum more, jejunio concluditur propter tristitiam Apostolorum de
morte Domini. Vide Amalar. Fortunat. Episc. Trever. de Ecclesiast. offic. lib.
2. c. 2. ubi citat etiam verba Innocentij 1. in Decretalibus. Eundem Innocent.
vide Epi. Decret. 1. cap. 4. Hunc. u. primum Sabbati jejunium instituisse
(circa Annu^ 400.) docet Joseph. Scaliger. li 7. de Emendat. Tempor.
no way unfit to recognize this The Bridegroomes taking away. Neither were
These days made and instituted only for Churchmen to meet; or hear a
Sermon: or only to fast. The Text will tell us. They shall. Saint Hierom S.
Hieronym. Tom. 6. in 4. cap. ad Galat. v. h. Iejunia and Congregationes
interdies propter eos, and a viris prudentibus constitutas, qui magis saeculo
vacant, quam Deo, nec possunt, imo nolunt toto vitae suae tempore in Ecclesia
congregari, and ante humanos actus, Deo orationum suarum offerre sacrificium.
Nam a nonnullis (ieste S. Augustino) in hebdomade quinquies jejunatur, quod
(ait ille) multi in vita sua faciunt, maxim in monasterijs constituti. S.
August. Ep. ad Casulan. 86. Hos innuit loco citato, S. Hieronymus, Deo
vacantes. de quibus vide veteres passim: Palladium praesertim and S.
Theodoretum.
will tell us, Iejunia and congregationes, etc. The fastings and prayers in the
week days (he means especially Synaxes. n. habitas olim tam in Parasceve
quam feria quarta locus S. Epiphanij, que^ supra laudavimus, satis manifest
ostendit. quin and S. Chrysostomus in 1 ad Tim. 1. Hom. 3. Graeci autem ubi
Dies (...) indixerunt suis, Pascha nuncuparunt; uti etiamnum in little officijs
videre est. S. Chrysostom. id satis evidenter etiam Hom. in eos qui Pascha
jejunant. Hom. 52. de Diversis N. Testam. verb. h. (...) (Scil. Dominica,
quarta Sabbati, and Parasceve:) (...) (Sc. in Sabbato, vel in Martyrum festis)
(...). De quotidiano. a. Sacrificio, S. Chrysostom. pluribus quidem in locis.
e.g. Hom. 3. in Ephesians. 1. and Hom. 17. in Heb. 6. etc.
Wednesday and Friday meetings) were appointed for them, which cannot, or
rather will not (says he) meet every day in the Church (he means Laymen)
there, before they go about their business, to offer up their prayers unto
God.

And indeed if Fast, then Pray: I dare say, it is here included; I am sure it
is here intended. We may see it most evidently by diverse other places of
Scripture, viz. 2 Sa. 12.22. Psalm. 35.13. Esth. 4.16. Judge. 20.26. Dan. 10.3.
etc. 2 Samuel 12.22. Psalm. 35.13. Esth. 4.16. Judge. 20.26. Dan. 10.3. etc.
They never go asunder, as by infinite testimonies may be declared. For
Fasting is the forerunner of Prayer, and Prayer is the companion of Fasting.
And indeed this is one principal and maine end of fasting, to quicken our
Efficax est oration praecedente jejunio, etc. S. Cypri. de jojun. and Tenta.
cap. 6. (...). etc. S. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 145.
Prayers, and to make them more lively. For as Prayer without fasting is weak,
and feeble; so Fasting without Prayer is to small effect. They therefore most
assuredly must go together.

It is confessed by all, that the Bridegroom, as Fasted, so Prayed likewise,
not for Himself, for His own; but for His Spouses sake, and in her behalf.
Infinite testimonies might be heaped up out of the Scriptures, as also out of
all Divines. You may see it plainly averred by our Savior Himself, Ioh. 11.
John 11.42.


But as He prayed at all times, to teach us, we should pray at all times,
continually: Luke 18.1.
So He prayed at the time of His taking away, (...) (says Saint Luke 22.44.
Luke 22.44.
) To teach us (say Divines) how we should pray at those times, and in those
days, when either the Bridegroom was taken away; and we to commemorate this
Taking away; or we in fear and danger, that He be taken away again.

Thence in the distress of the Church, when James was beheaded, Peter in
prison, the Church in persecution, and in danger again to loose the
Bridegroom: yea rather at such time, when These days came about again,
wherein the Bridegroom was taken away, the Children of the Bride-chamber by
their fasting to mourn for Him (for so it then was E textu liquet tempus
Parasceves seu Passionis fuisse, quod Apostoli assidua and constanti
supplicatione tunc transigebant. Vt hinc probabiliter admodum constaret,
memoriam Passionis Dominicae Quadragesimali jejunio, illo praesertim triduano
solenniter anno vertente ab Apostolicis observata^ fuisse. Ideoque haec lectio
a Syris antiquissimis reijcitur in Sabbatii primum jejunii, seu Initium
Quadragesimae; ut eo doceant Quadragesimale jejunium eum in finem fuisse
institutum, ut peccata nostra in sponso sublato lugeamus. Vid. Widmonstadij
Syriacum Testam. ad 12. caput. Act. and in calce Testamenti Sir.
Good Friday and Easter Even) Then (says Saint Luke again, Acts 12.5.
(...) was made by the whole Church. Public Prayer you hear of: But what this
(...) was, let us ask the Graecians and Mother Church, who best knew the use,
force and application of this word; and they will tell us.

And indeed I speak it not (GOD knows) to flatter the Church of England, but
as it is indeed; (...) in the use and acception of the Eastern Christians in
all their Passim in Rubricis Horolog. Eucholog etc. in quibus nonnunquam
(mendose) (...) reperitur. Verum in Liturgia sub nomine S. Petri. p. 13. and
(...), illi subjuncta, reperitur. Verum (...) (quod suspicor) in Rubricis
Graecorum, menda est Typographica: Cum ista (...) (ut recte Meursius in
Glossario) ipsa sit illa (...) (de quibus Apostolus. 1. Tim. 2.1.) Continuatio.
Books and Rubrickes, is nothing but That Prayer which in after times, and
other use was called The Letanie. This was (as it seems) the first name of
the Letanie.

So you see here is Fasting enjoined upon the Wednesday and Friday: (...): And
if Fasting, then Prayer also: And as public Prayer [(for so it is) you see
what Prayer,] (...) Act. 12.5. (...). Luke 22.44. (The Letanie) a larger, a
more earnest, and instant Prayer.

The Application
And now (Beloved) having gone through the five Propositions; and Their, (that
is, The Children of the Bridechamber's) practice: I have brought you home to
our own Mother Church: which (I hope) you all now plainly see, practizeth
nothing but what she ought to do: nay, what indeed she is bound to observe, and
therefore we the more bound to observe her.

Now give me (I beseech you) leave briefly to use a word or two of Exhortation
and Application.

1 Duty, Thankfulness.
The first is, (as we have all great cause) of Thankfulness unto Almighty
GOD, for having vouchsafed us (a favor beyond all other Christian Churches,
even the Reformed Churches themselves) viz. to be borne, bred, and brought up
in that Church, which by the confession of all most truly is a pattern and
president to all Reformed Churches whatsoever. Witness her adversaries on both
hands; on the right hand and on the left; who though never so studiously
opposing her, though never so strictly examining her, could never yet touch her
in the least kind either for her Doctrine or Discipline. Witness their
quarrelsome books; Luke 21.31.
witness her abundant Answers. John 14.13.
I may say as our SAVIOR of S. Peter's trial; Satan (in her adversaries) did
desire to sift her: and yet (as our SAVIOR said of Himself) he nor his could
never find or have any thing in her: Witness the unpartiall judgment of all,
though strangers unto her; who have so far admired her, so justly extolled
her, so gravely commended her to and above all others.

I might name many testimonies in this kind: I name but one for all; Alexander
Alesius a Scottish Doctor; who so far approved the Reformation of this Church
of England, and the Service-Booke thereof (then as I may say but begun and
unperfect) that he translated it into Latin; and commended it as a Pattern to
all Christian Churches. The Book is still to be seen, printed in Lipsich in
Germany Anno 1551. And indeed (as I said at first) Reformation being as the
Civilian defines it, a Restitution of any thing to his pristin, first, and
best estate; we may well pronounce this Church a most true Reformed Church, who
has so truly done this, so fully performed it. In all her Doctrine, in all her
Discipline, she has by following the steps of the Bridegroom manifested her
self to be the very Spouse of Christ: GOD grant us as truly by following her,
to show our selves to be the children of the Bridechamber.

2. Obedience general.
The second Exhortation is for Obedience to this Spouse of CHRIST: For we can
never be thankful to the Bridegroom, unless we be obedient to the Bride:
we shall never be of His Chamber, unless we follow His Church. The Church
(beloved) is that which defends our King, the State, our Country: The Bride,
the Church, is that which keeps the Bridegroom with us; the cause of all our
joy. It should be therefore dearer unto us, then our own lives; as dear as
our own souls.

Beloved, give me leave (which I intended more fully) to give you some short
rules of peace and Obedience. You have heard reason and evidence alleged for
much of this Churches practice, even now: she may be as fully (nay, she has
been more fully) cleared in all others. It is your part to judge the best of
her, who is indeed your Mother: and seeing you have already seen reason for
some, it is your duty to think there is as good reason for all others, though
you see it not. Be not therefore forward to judge of those things, which you
have not knowledge for. Remember you cannot attain or understand the reason of
many things: and some things the most knowing of us, knows not at all. Every
man has his measure, in which we must contain our selves. We learn to know,
and know to do and practice: and if we have so much knowledge to know our
duty, what care we for any more. Curiosity it is, not Christianity, that
carries us farther. Nevertheless, if any be curiously desirous to be
satisfied in the Churches practice, in any thing she either does or teaches;
it is my counsel, that they repair to those that are learned, judicious,
obedient, and moderate minded men. Let them avoid Schismatickes; and baulke
them that are malecontent and factious. And as if the Spaniard, French, or any
other potent neighbor nation should (which God of his mercy forbid) invade
this land, it were the part of every good Patriot to oppose them, and defend
this country: So, much more is it the part of every good Christian to oppose
them that oppose the Church: and first of all, our duty to frame arguments, and
to labor to defend that Church and truth, which under God is the maine defense
of us all. Otherwise let us fear, that if we live not with the Spouse, we
indeed forsake the Bridegroom; If we deny our obedience to the one, the other
also for our disobedience be most deservedly taken away.

The third is of particular Obedience to this text; to the Bridegroom: And
indeed, 3. Obedience particular.
if we obey not the Bridegroom, as good never obey the Spouse: if not Him,
none of Hers we.

My text tells us, The days will come, etc. But you have heard, and seen,
and know it as well as I can tell you, that The Days are come, and now are,
and weekly come again: And will the Days never come for us to do our Duty?
to show our obedience? It is a part of humanity, to weep with them that weep,
Romans 12.15.
to mourn with them that mourn: If we cannot mourn, you have heard what
will make us mourn, Fasting. And indeed He that left all for us, cannot we
leave a little for Him? When He was taken away for us, cannot we take (for a
time) somewhat of our allowance from our belly, for Him? for His in alms? for
our selves, our own sins? If there were no other reason, we ought even to
sorrow with and for Him, who sorrowed so much for us: We of all ought to
regard His sorrow. You know whose lamentable complaint it is, Lament. 1.12.
Have ye no regard, all ye, etc. No regard doubtless, if we regard not to
shed a tear, to let fall a drop, to send forth a sigh for Him. And what regard
we should have of this His sorrow, we may see and learn by His blessed Mother,
that ever blessed Virgin. It is Simeons prophecy to her; Luke 2.35.
Yea a sword (says he) shall pierce through thine own soul also. The sword of
sorrow, so they expound it: No less weapon then a sword; and this not to
pierce into, but to pierce through: and that not to pierce through the body only
or the flesh; but through, and through; Luke 23.27.
and that through thine own soul. And good reason for it: For if women, and
those strangers wept so sore, as we read, Luke 23. 27. for his taking only,
before he came to the Cross, what sorrow do we think becomes the Mother,
or the Spouse of Christ, when they see Him taken away, lifted up, hanging, and
bleeding on the Cross? If the Centurion, and the Soldiers that crucified Him,
and all the people that reviled Him, begin to return and lament, Luke 23.47,
48.
and to smite their breasts, as we read, Luke 23. How shall our hearts smite us,
that they smite us not, that they smite us no more, that they smit us not
before? Nay, if the Thief on the Cross forgetting his own shame, and pain,
and sorrow, begin to lament for the Bridegroom; if he begin to rebuke his
fellow for not sorrowing; what shall we do! how shall we sorrow!

Me thinks I hear that blessed Thief speaking to every one of us, Luke
23.40, 41.
as sometimes he spoke to his fellow; Do not thou fear God, seeing thou art
in the same condemnation? And we indeed, justly; for we (if we fast, or
mourn, or sorrow, nay should we die the death, and ever mourn in endless
sorrow, yet we) receive the due reward of our sins: of our own deeds, (for
we have sinned all, all kind of sins.) But This man (He) has done nothing
amiss. If any thing amiss, this is it, this is that, that He has done so
much for us, who have so little grace, as scarce to do any thing for Him. Do
not thou (whosoever thou art) do not thou fear God? as if he should say, If
not pity, common pity for His so great unspeakable sorrow, pain, and
punishment, in being thus cruelly, thus wrongfully taken away; yet, let love to
his person, love of His person, who thus for thy sake became a Bridegroom: Let
that move thee.

If not Love, His Love, or thy love; yet let His Bounty, who thus willingly,
thus readily gave Himself, even by death (for thy sake) to be taken away: Let
that move thee.

If not His Bounty; yet let thy Duty; His Command, who has so strictly
commanded; who has so precisely enjoined thee to mourn, and to fast this
time, and in these days: Let that move thee.

If not thy Duty to his Command, if not that; yet let Remorse for thy sins;
let sorrow for thy heinous and bloody crimes, which so wrongfully, so
despightfully did, and still do, yet continually, take him away: Let that move
thee.

If not Remorse, sorrow for thy sin; What shall I say? If not that; then
nothing. Yes, then let Fear; dreadful Fear I say of that never ending
punishment due to the Crucifiers, and all remorselesse sinners, that worse than
the Crucifiers cannot mourn with them for Him: Let that move thee.

And indeed when all cannot, this shall move them, that cannot now be moved.
(...) They shall (the time will come) will they, nill they; whether they will,
or no; They shall fast. They that will not now, then shall. They that will not
own it (here) for their duty, then shall own it for their punishment.
Iejunabunt: They shall fast. It is our SAVIORS sentence, Luke 6. Luke 5.25.
Woe unto you that are full; for ye shall hunger: woe unto you that laugh now;
for ye shall weep: Ye shall mourn; ye shall hunger. They that will not Now,
then shall: that will not at this time, in this Now, in these Days, The Days
are coming, and will come ere they are aware; then, no remedy, They shall
fast, and hunger, and mourn, and weep, Then, and in Those days. On the
contrary, Blessing and peace to them, which on the right hand with that good
Thief mourn here; which Fast and Pray now in These days; which make it their
duty: which mind His Command. Luke 6.21.
Blessed (says the Bridegroom) are ye that hunger now; for ye shall be
filled. Blessed are ye that weep now; for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye that
fast and mourn now with Him: for ye shall be comforted with Him, by Him. God
of His mercy grant us all grace so to mourn and fast here, that we may be
filled with comfort hereafter, and blessed for ever.

FINIS.
THE SIXTH; OF THE MANNER AND QVALITY OF CHURCH-FASTS. A SERMON or MEDITATION
in LENT. Anno Dom. 1633.
DANIEL 10.2, 3. 2 In those days I Daniel was mourning three full weeks.

3 I ate no pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor wine in my mouth, neither
did I anoint my self at all till three whole weeks were fulfilled.


WHen I think of this Time, me thinks this Text is fittest for this Time: so
much the rather also, because this time is the time of this Text. For what, if
Those Days here be these days now? So truly they are: For the Three full
weeks in the second verse began the third, and ended the twenty fourth day of
the first month: as the following words show, verse. 4. Now the first month
amongst the Jews answered to this present month of March; fell in with this
very time: So that to speak of these words at this time, is I hope a word in
due time.

2 But bare time alone is but the empty measure of our actions which fill it
up; and therefore an idle circumstance without some life from them. The Action
therefore is here to be considered, and that is Fasting: In those days I
Daniel was mourning; that is, as the words that follow show, Fasting: And so it
is now with us, a time no less of Fasting. As Daniel began this month then,
so have we now; with fasting and mourning for our sins.

3 But yet again this Fast here was a lasting fast; 1 Samuel 7.6. Esth. 4.16. 1 Chronicles. 10.12.
not only as the Fast of the Israelites in Mizpah, for a Day; or as Esthers,
for three days only; or as the Gileadites Fast for Saul, for a week: But for
a longer time, even three full weeks. And such is ours now, no less like to
hold, if we hold it as we should, even for twice three full weeks. For so much
have we more need of the longer fast, by how much we now under greater grace
are, in respect of holy Daniel, far greater sinners. We may not well be less
then twice his time, and that is our full Lent. I (says he) Daniel was
mourning three full weeks.

4. But yet moreover a fourth thing here is, even Daniels very Fast: a Fast
from flesh and wine, and all desirable meats and drinks. Though he now in
bliss cannot any longer fast with us, yet we, that we may attain that
bliss, must now even fast with him: We also to fast Daniels fast; as at that
time of the year when he fasted, so his very fast; I ate no pleasant bread,
nor came flesh, etc.

5 But yet again, a fifth thing here is: As Daniel fasted at this time, this
our very fast: so likewise for the same cause, for the same end with us: with
like reference to mourn for Christ's death, as do we. For if we look but
three verses forward before my Text, we shall see the time and manner of His
death presented in a vision to Daniels eyes. This, as it should from ours, drew
tears from his, and that he might mourn for this enough, he makes himself
mourn by Fasting.

Thus with the fitness of the time, and Text, The Division.
we have the Nature and Parts of it.

First, For the general Nature of it, it is Exemplary, I Daniel.

Then secondly, Here Is the Action, wherein Fasting: even such a fast, which is
attended with many necessary and most considerable observations.

The first is, The End of it, in this word Mourning: His fasting was for
mourning; I was mourning.



I ate no pleasant, etc

For three full weeks. And again, Till three whole weeks were fulfilled.

In all which, we have a view of his many most excellent virtues shining in
this his Fasting.

First, besides his Temperance, his obedient willingness, promptness, and
readiness to this holy Duty, in his voluntary undertaking it of his own
choice: intimated in these words; I Daniel.

Secondly, His strict and patient Constancy, in that he so continued it
without interruption, implied in these; I was mourning three full weeks.

Thirdly, His lowly Humility, in humbling himself, in making himself to
mourn; I Daniel was mourning.

Fourthly, His Hope and steadfast Faith, in choosing this time of all others, In
which 1 JESUS CHRIST our true Passover was to be offered up, and to abolish
that other as Daniel now did in his fasting: And 2 when by his thus mourning
he suffered with our Savior, before he suffered: And 3 by his spirit of
Prophecy foretold that Christian Fast, which at this time was to succeed in
all Christian Churches. In those days I Daniel was mourning three full weeks.

Lastly, we have The effect and issue of all; the virtue and efficacy of this
Fast; set down in the context of the whole history related after this Fast
premised; namely, that having thus humbled himself, God (as his manner is to
do with such) did exalt him, and deliver his; even his people also; (as it
were) for his sake. So Chrysologus, Dum Daniel sedulus Deo supplicaret, Petr.
Chrysolog. Sermon. 21.
impetravit non solum praescientiam futurorum, sed and captivae diu gentis suae
meruit libertatem. Daniel (says he) whilst he diligently prayed (for he as
fasted, so even prayed also at this time: for he kneeled down upon his knees
three times a day, and prayed and gave thanks, as aforetime, Cha. 6.10. Chap.
6.10.
) And whilst (says he) he thus prayed and fasted, S. Basil. Hom. de abdicat.
rerum. Vid. Tertullian. de jejunio adv. Psych. cap. 9. S. Chrysostom. de
incomprehens. Dei natura. f. 358. 359. Vid. quae ibid. Tom. 1. f. 566. 567. and
de Fato and provident. f. 839. Vide Isid. Pelus. l. 1. Ep. 69. S. Aug. de temp.
Ser. 64. in Dom. 2. Quadr. Notant co^muniter Pattes, Danielem postquam 70.
annorum numerum jam peractum cognoverat, quo populi Iudaici captivitas
praedefinita fuisset a Ieremia (c. 29. v. 10. and 25 v. 12.) in animum
induxisse suum tum primum pro iis supplicare. Neque id tamen fecisse eum (quod
S. Chrysostom.) (...), sed cum jejuniis multis, in sacco and cinere. Vid. c. 9. v.
2, 3. In quem locum egregia sunt S. Patris verba, multumque prae caeteris
observanda; (...), etc. Audisti (inquit) quemadmodum haec quoque captivitas
praedicta fuerit, and Propheta non ausus fuerit preces and supplicationes
admovere Deo ante praefinitum tempus: (...), etc. Ne frustra temereque orans
audiret, quod Ieremias (cap. 7. v. 16.) Ne rogaveris pro populo hoc, neque
postulaveris pro illis: Quoniam non audiam te. (...), etc. Verum (pergit ille)
ubi vidit vaticinium esse completum, simulque tempus vacare, ad reditum (...),
etc. Vide S. Chrysostom. adv. Iudaeos lib. 3. fo. 477. Tom. 1.
he obtained not only the gift of Prophecy, to foretell things to come, but
also the liberty of his long captived nation. By his thus fasting (says Saint
Basil) he is made King of the Chaldees, the overthrower of Idols: he kills the
dragon, he stills and commands the Lions: Nay (which is most of all) (...): He
is made (says he) the foreteller of Gods incarnation, and the revealer of the
most hidden mysteries.

And indeed, as they that have found the virtue and good of some excellent
Receipt or Medicine, are desirous to derive the knowledge thereof to others,
that they also may benefit themselves thereby: So Daniel having in himself
experimented the most admirable virtue of this most heavenly Physic, propounds
it in his own example to all succeeding ages. In those days I Daniel was, etc.

The General Nature of the Text. It is I. An example.
WHere first of the Nature of the Text in general: It is an Example.

1. The Apostle tells us most truly, that All Scripture given us by God is
profitable for instruction, 2 Timothy 3.16. 2 Timothy 3.16.
but yet those most of all which are (as I may say) enlivened by Example. For
whereas Precepts only lead, Examples draw men and compel them: those may
move and persuade, but these do constrain and enforce: The reason is, because
they are not only as Precepts Verbum audibile, but Visibile; as so many
visible Sermons preaching all to the Eye, the most lively and spiritual Sense:
not only teaching as do Precepts, what we should do; but also persuading
us, that what another has done, is most feasible, most possible to be done by
us: Longum iter per praecepta; breve per exempla. The Apostle notes, Heb.
10.24. Heb. 10.24.
that they are (...), of a most provoking nature. This Daniel well knew, and
therefore being to teach this holy duty from the Spirit of God, he teaches it
by Example.

2. 2. His own Example.
And because those are the best that are the nearest; as also because he ill
teaches another, that practices not himself: therefore howsoever he might
have brought the Example of Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, as Chap. 1.16. yet he
is sparing of all others, he only propounds his own; to let us know, that the
best teaching is by our own lives and examples; that we should not be, as too
many are, sounding Cymbals in the ears of others; but as the Baptist, burning
and shining lights in the eyes and fight of others: In all things showing our
selves, (as the Apostle to Titus) paternes of good works: Tit. 2.7.
seeing according to our Savior, he only that does and teaches these things
shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven. Matthew. 5.19.


3. But Examples are, 3. As of the Chiefest.
as are the Persons from whom they come: if they be mean, they are then but
meanly respected; 1. Amongst men.
if they be of authority and power whose they are, then are they also of power
and might. Every Example is a light, but those of great men in place of
Eminence are like a Candle on a Candlestick, set up that all may see; or
rather like the Sun and Stars in the Firmament, even the Lights of the
world, Mat. 5. They are Inter coelos coelum, Matthew. 5.14.
as Fulgentius speaks of Theodorus the Senator; Fulgent. Ep. 6. de Convers. ad
Theodor. p. 548.
And well may they be so resembled: for as the Heavens, so they by their
influence move all inferior bodies. Men are like sheep, and Great men are (as
S. Augustine calls the Apostle) Arietes, the Rams of the flock; whom,
wheresoever they go, all the rest will follow. This is another reason, Daniel
thus propounds his Example, as supposing it most availeable to persuade and
lead others. For he was of the blood royal of the Kings of Judah, Chap. 1. v.
6. At this time in the court of the greatest Monarch of the earth, Dan. 1.3, 6.
King Nebuchodonazor; advanced by him to be Ruler over the whole Province, and
chief of the Governors over all the Wisemen of Babylon, Dan. 2.48.
Chap. 2.48. after by Belshazzar his Son, made the third Ruler in the
Kingdom, Dan. 5.29.
Chap. 5.29. even yet farther prospering in the reign of Darius and Cyrus the
Persian. Dan. 6.28.
Under four of the greatest Monarchs that ever were, above the greatest, even
the chief of the three Presidents, over an hundred and twenty Princes, Dan.
6.2, 3.
Chap. 6. v. 2.3.

If Daniel therefore in the midst of the highest honor can find in his heart
thus to humble himself: If he can in the view of all earthly provocations and
temptations thus temper and contain himself: If in the height of all worldly
pleasures he can thus contemn, scorn, and trample on them, mourning in the
midst of pleasures, fasting from all delights, conquering and taming his
desires, that they might not conquer him: then what great matter is it for us
to bate our selves a little pleasure, some small delight, some petty
recreation? to deny our selves in some few trifles, that with Daniel we may the
better follow CHRIST? Quis non parvam despiciat cellam, quando Senator domum
despicit marmoratam? Quis non terrena contemnens, Fulgent. ubi supra. p. 550.
etc. Who (says Fulgentius) will not now despise a cottage, when a Senator
leaves an Ivory palace? When Daniel leaves so much, who will not leave a
little? and where all is nothing, who will not leave this all with Daniel to
labor for Heaven, by an holy mourning; I Daniel was mourning, etc.

But Daniels Example is yet greater, 2 In great favor with God.
by how much he that was so high in the eyes of the world, is yet higher and
greater in GODS favor: to whom GOD gave knowledge and skill in all learning
and wisdom; even understanding in visions and dreams, Chap. 1.17. Dan. 1.17.
even wiser he ten times, then all the Astrologians and Magicians, verse 20.
20.
in whom (says Nebuchadnezzar) was the spirit of the holy Gods, Dan.
4.18.5.11, 12, 14.
Chap. 4.18. and 5.11. who conversed with Angels, even with GOD Himself, made
of His most secret Counsel, the fullest, clearest, and plainest Prophet that
ever was.

And here I may not pass by a Hierony. lib. 2. Apolog. advers. Ruffin. cap. 9.
and Theodor. in praefat. ad Dan.
Doubt, which of old troubled Saint Hierome, Ruffinus, and many others of late
also, namely what should move the Jews to reckon the Book of Daniel amongst
the Hagiographa, or holy Writers, and yet to account him no Prophet. Certainly
though Vid. Petr. Cunaeum de Rep. Hebraeor. l. 3. c. 7. ubi rationem perpera^
assignat.

Rabbi Maimon More Nebochim part. 2. cap. 45.


some guess at others, yet the true reason is plain out of Rabbi Maimon; who
tells us, that the Jews making ten degrees of Prophecy place Daniel in the
second, with the rest of the Hagiographa: because (says he) he is no Prophet
in an ordinary manner, and therefore ranked by our Nation, amongst those, who
awake, and in the vigor of their senses spoke by the Spirit of GOD; which is
the second degree of Prophecy, and indeed as he reckons it, of all that are
inspired to speak, the highest. So that the Jews no otherwise denied Daniel
to be a Prophet, then our blessed SAVIOR the Baptist, Luke 7.26, 28.
Luke. 7.26. whom calling a Prophet, verse 28. he styles more then a Prophet:
and likely, our SAVIOR in this speech had respect to this distinction amongst
the Jews. Howsoever Saint Hieroms testimony is true, Vid. S. Hieron. and
Theod. locis citatis.
that no Prophet spoke so plainly, so evidently of Christ, as Daniel does: not
only showing, as do the rest, that He must come, but also designing the very
time when He was to come; laying down the order of the succeeding Kings, and
their times, with the manifest foregoing signs. To him, as to the blessed
Virgin, the same Messenger is sent, the very same Angel Gabriel. Dan. 8.16.
Luke 1.26.
For this cause as GODS chiefest favorite under the Law he is styled A man
highly or greatly beloved, Chap. 9.23. Dan. 9.23.10.11, 19.
and 10.11.19. The highest style mortality can receive; as we may see by the
blessed Virgin, whose title it is, Luke 1.28. Luke 1.28.
His Wisdom proverbially extolled; Thou art wiser then Daniel, Ezech. 28.3.
Ezech. 28.3.
His Prayers, as most powerful with GOD, preferred, Ezech. 14.14.

Nevertheless as though he were not safe in the midst of all these honors,
and 14.14, 20.
unless he were humble, he (as the blessed Apostle) humbles himself by
fasting: to teach us also, that if it were so needful for him, and that chief
Apostle, to keep their body under, to bring it into subjection, 1 Cor. 9.27.
lest falling through pride they might come to destruction: how much then is it
more needful for us, vile wretched sinners as we are, how needful for us to
do (if possible) far more, at least the same, to make our selves mourn! As
also to instruct us, that if we will attain to Daniels height, we must follow
his steps: if we will be as he was, we must do as he did: if we will aim at
his happiness, we must imitate his humility: if have our prayers as his
accepted, we must sharpen them by fasting: we must propound his example to our
selves, as he does here by the Spirit of GOD unto us, even above any under the
Law, the greatest and best example of the best of the sons of men. I Daniel.

But the tree is known by his fruits (says our Blessed Savior) and a man by
his Actions: II. His Action.
for they are they that must praise him in the gates, Pro. 31.31. Prove. 31.31.
His Action therefore comes next to be considered: and that is mourning. By
which what is meant is easy to see by that which follows; I ate no pleasant
bread, etc. I The end of it.
His mourning was fasting to make him mourn; it being the use of holy
Scripture to style this duty by this name, because it tends to this end. And
indeed it is worth our observing, that there being two words in each of the
three learned languages to signify the two parts of Repentance; (...).
Resipiscentia. Poenitentia.
one of them in each signifies grief and mourning, to teach us, that as they
are a sign of, and a way to perfect our repentance; so fasting is a way to
begin our mourning. For this cause as sorrow and mourning is ofttimes called
repentance. Act. Acts. 26.20.
26.20. So fasting is usually called mourning, as 1 Samuel 16. Matthew. 5.4. and
9.15. as also in this place, 1 Samuel 16.1. Mat. 5.4. and. 9.15.
because it is both a means to, and a sign of mourning.

1 A sign of mourning: as Hannah wept, and did not eat, 1 Samuel 1.7, 8.
1 Samuel 1.7. David for his child, 2 Samuel 12.16. 2 Samuel 12.16.
Ahab for Naboths Vineyard, 1 King. 21.4. 1 Kings 21.4.
So a sign of mourning it is, where grief is caused already.

2 And a means also to make us mourn: as in the Israelites and Ninivites
Fast; in Samuels, David's, Iehosaphats, Esthers, and Nehemiah's. So it is a
means and cause to help and further sorrow, where it is not, or is but yet
newly begun. Both, I take it, are the aims of this fasting here.

1 A sign of mourning. For these days were days of captivity and thraldom:
Daniel and his fellows in a strange land, under a foreign Prince; their own
country wasted and made desolate, That famous City, the figure of Heaven,
burnt and destroyed: that glorious Temple, the wonder of Nations, the joy of
the earth, the type of our blessed Saviors body, as our Saviors body at this
time, buried and laid in the dust. No wonder then if Daniel and his fellows
mourned, if they hanged up their harpes, and cast down their heads; for How
should they sing the Lords song in a strange land? Psalm. 137.4.
Whilst they were captives, their honors were but golden fetters, their
pleasures but as passengers delights, which though they look on, yet they care
not for. In those days I Daniel was mourning.

2 A means of mourning. For these days put us in mind of a farther mourning;
Daniel in the Visions of the foregoing Chapter beheld not only another worse
and longer captivity, but the miserable destruction, 2 The time of it.
the final desolation, the hopeles dispersion and rejection of his whole
Nation; this could not less grieve him, then it did Moses or Saint Paul; Exodus
32. Romans 9.
it could not but make him wish himself accursed for them; blotted out, that
they might be written in.

2 But again, to behold this in the cause, in the blood of the slain Messiah,
as the words of the Vision show, Chap. 9.26. Dan. 9.26. Matthew. 27.25.
to see the blood of JESUS laid on them and on their children for ever; to see
them defiled with that blood, that must only cleanse them: To behold his and
our SAVIOR on the Cross bleeding by them, for whom He dyed; to view the
numberless number and infinite mass of the sins of all mankind, and his
own sins amongst them, to help to crucify, to whip and scourge him, this was
the Vision of these days: and seeing this, he sorrowed, lamented, mourned, and
wept for it.

3 But that is not all: it is not enough for him or us only to sigh and lightly
sorrow for him: he must also by sorrow dye and suffer with him. Who so wretched
to stand by and behold another, a just and innocent man to suffer death for
him, and not shed tears for his blood? yet this Daniel saw; not only another,
but the only just and holy of men that ever was, yea even the Son of GOD
bleeding at this very time, within the compass of these days: A most sad,
heavy, and doleful spectacle. This as he now saw, so he now lamented; and
because he could not mourn for it enough, (for who alas can?) he both
teaches us, and makes himself mourn by fasting.

Surely any sorrow of the countenance (says the Preacher) makes the heart
far better. Eccles. 7.3. S. Chrysostom. in c. 5. Mat. v. 4. Hom. 15.
For (as Saint Chrysostom rightly) they that sorrow but for their wives, their
children, their friends, etc. shall find that whilst they sorrow, they are not
affected with the world; their hearts run not after covetousness; they
hanker not after money; they care not for honor; they pass not for pleasure:
no lustful provocations stir them; no envy provokes them; no injuries can
move them: so far are they from drunkenness, gluttony, and these excessive
vices, that they care not to eat or drink: even all that is in the World, 2
John 2.26.
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life have no
power upon them: because they give themselves wholly to sorrow.

And if it be thus in any sorrow; if worldly sorrow be such a bridle to sin;
how much more profitable is godly sorrow, which is not only an acceptable
Sacrifice before GOD for sin past, but also a most available medicine and
remedy against sin to come? For this voluntary sorrow is in stead of all
burnt offering and sacrifice: even Psalm. 51.17. Psalm. 51.17.
The Sacrifices of God; such is a contrite and humble spirit, when preventing
GOD we rend it and break it by sorrow: even an holy selfe-revenge, (...) (so
the Apostle calls it, 2 Cor. 7.10. 2 Cor. 7.10.
) Dolor appretiatus (as the Schoolmen) recounting what we have done, in our
sins; and valuing what we have deserved, in our punishment. On the one side
how many, how great, how heinous our sins are; how base the motives, how
grievous the circumstances: how dangerous to others, how displeasing to GOD,
how deadly to our selves.

And if we cannot value them and their punishments as we should, let us cast up
our eyes with Daniel to CHRIST'S Cross; and there behold the handwriting of the
Law and our sins against us; that most deserved, yet most unsufferable curse
and punishment due unto them; GODS fierce rigor, wrath, and severity, even
executed in His own Son upon them.

Let us mourning in our Prayers, and humbling our selves make this the
meditation of these days, and if ever any sorrow work repentance (as sorrow
must do it, 2 Cor. 7.10.) this will; this will make us also, even us, as it
did Daniel at this time, mourn for our sins. In those days I Daniel was
mourning, etc.

And so having done with the Action, and End of it; we come to the manner and
nature of this Fast. I ate no pleasant bread, neither came any, etc.

3 The manner of this Fast.
The very fast we have now in hand.

Objection.
There be two maine exceptions of our factious brethren against this Lenten, and
other fasts of the Church: The one, That they are Set; the other, That being
set and certain, they are superstitiously (say they) placed in the choice of
some meats and drinks.

Respons.
Concerning the former, as we have spoken heretofore in another place, so we
both have, and shall if GOD enable, farther entreat upon this present occasion
of Daniels fast: The latter being the more immediate scope of the Text, does
now more earnestly make us hasten to it.

Where we have two things to be considered, the one plainly employed; the other
fully expressed; both necessary to be stood upon.

The first is, That Daniel eating no pleasant bread, nor flesh, or wine, did
notwithstanding for natures necessity eat something else.

The second, That his thus abstaining from flesh and wine, with all other
desirable meats, was, notwithstanding his eating other things, a most true,
religious, and perfect fast.

For the first. I ate no pleasant bread, I. Proposition.
implies that something else was eaten; and so Daniels fast, no other than
ours, humane. By humane, I mean, as the Apostle takes the word, (...), 1 Cor.
10.13. 1 Cor. 10.13.
Such as man's nature may bear. For truly to eat nothing at all, night nor day
for forty days, as did our blessed Savior with Moses and Elias, and some
others also (if those Quidam ap. S. Aug. ep. 86. ad Casulan. Nam ad ipsum
quadragenarium numerum pervenisse quendam a fratribus fide dignissimis nobis
asseveratum est. Similiter Simeon Slylites, quem post 40 dierum inediam
jacentem nec spirantem, nec loqui, nec se movere valentem invenit Bas. sus.
Vid. Theodoret. in vit. Simeonis histor. S. Patr. c. 26. Cyra and Marana (ait
Idem) Mosis aemulatae jejuniu^, ter tanto tempore inediam sustinuere. Verum id
quo fecerunt modo sequentia ostendant. Quadraginta enim (ait) diebus exigui
cibi fuere participes. Ter quoque divini Danielis a cibo abstinentiam sunt
aemulatae, tres dierum hebdomadas conficientes, and cibum corpori
suppeditantes. Vid. Theod. hist. Patr. c. 29. Pythag. etiam metu inimicoru^
specu le abscondentem, and per 40. dies (...) defecisse refert Dicaearchus ap.
Diog. Laert. vit. Pythagor. p. 592. Macarii Alexandrini celeberrimum exemplum
ap. Palladium Histor. Lausiac. f. 42. huc etiam refer.
Histories be true) was a miraculous fast, and more than humane. For though as
to eat, so also to fast be proper to man with other creatures, bearing like
flesh with us: yet to fast so long (if nature be sound) is only from GOD
above. GOD, Angels, and Spirits, as they cannot eat, so they cannot fast.
Bodily living Creatures they only can: Neither do they all, but such as are
of flesh and blood, like us. For trees and plants, though they take in
nourishment from the earth, yet are they not truly said either to eat or fast.
Food as it is from earthly and corruptible substance, so it is to sustain our
earthly and corruptible body; which having the doom of death from Adams sin,
began then to die, and would so daily, were it not, as old houses are, upheld
by continual food.

Palladius Lausiac. hist. Gr. a Meurs. in vit. Serap f. 105 106. (...). S.
Basil. Orat. 1. de jejun. f. 327.
Surely (as Serapion once wittily to the Athenians) our belly is of the three
(...): The severest Creditour, still exacting his debt: it else suffers us
not to live: It daily like the Horsleach, cries, Give, give. Yet nevertheless
to give it what it asks, were to give it death in stead of life, because the
concupiscence thereof ends in, and tends to death. GOD has not nearer joined
the belly and those unclean parts, than sin has joined with it
uncleanness: therefore to fill the one is but to feed the other; and to pamper
the body, is but to enliven and strengthen the body of sin. He that throws
on the fire too much fuel, makes the fire flame out, and sets the whole house
on fire. Wisdom therefore wills, that the earthly body be still, as earth,
kept under; that whilst we feed the flesh, we nourish not the lusts thereof;
and providing for the weakness of the worse, we take not away the strength of
the better part. Therefore howsoever Nature require of us to eat, yet (as the
Apostle has it) we must eat to Gods glory; 1 Cor. 10.31.
and when we fast with Daniel for our souls profit, we must, that we may fast
aright, observe these five Cautions. The Scholemen lay them down in a verse;
Greg. Altisiod. sum Aurea. l. 3. Tract. 7. ca. 5. Quaest. 5.
and so will I give them you.

Five cautions in our Fast.
1 Praepropere, 2 laute, 3 nimis, 4 ardenter, 5 studiose.

over hastily: Therefore Daniel though he ate, he did fast from eating till
the evening: For this was always the custom of the Church of GOD. So did the
Jews the people of GOD of old Judge. 20.26.21.2 1 Samuel 14.24. 2 Samuel 1.12.
. And so no doubt did Daniel now.

So after them did the first and best Vide Act. 10.30. Hanc enim jejunandi
rationem ab Hebraeis and veteri Ecclesia, una cum Fide ipsa, accepeperunt primi
illi and vetustissimi Christiani: Vnde passim apud Patres, Prandere pro non
jejunare. Vid. Tertullian. de jejunio. S. Ambros. Hieronymo S. August.
praesertim in Ep. 86. de jejun. Priscor. Io. Cassian. Col. 21. c. 23. Hinc dies
Prandiorum S. Paulino Ep. 25. Dies illi, in quibus non jejunatur. Rogo vos
fratres charissimi (suos alloquitur Caesarius Arelatenses Hom. 2. in
Quadrages.) ut in isto legitimo ac sacratissimo tempore, exceptis Dominicis
diebus, nullus prandere praesumat; nisi, etc. Inde rite jejunantes vespere
comedere, nec ante vesperam comedere feruntur. Statuerat (scil. Marcianus)
vespere comedere quotidie, etc. ait Theodor. Hist. (...). vit. Marciani. Nescio
(ait de se Avitus ad Marcian.) me unquam cibum sumpsisse ante resperam. Ibid.
Idem de Eremitis and Religiosis in genere. S. Chrysostom. Hom. 55. in c. 18. S. Mat.
(...). Hunc jejunandi legitimum modum poenitentibus in jungit, Circa An. 630.
Council. Triburiens. c. 5. Vid. etiam. Turonic. 2. Can. 18.
Christians even for eight hundred years after our Saviors time and upwards;
they all in their fasts abstaining from their dinners.

And thus it is still from that ancient Christian use, with all other De
Aethiopibus and Abassynis idem docent Godign. de Abassynor. Rebus lib. 1 c. 19.
p. 123. and li. 1. c. 35. p. 218. and Damian. a Goer. p. 458. and de Muscovitis
Theolog. Muscovit. c. 10. p. 98. and Lasicius Polonus ibid. cap. 10. p. 103.
Vid. ibid. Ioh. Fabrum Ep. page 179. Narration. ad D. Chytraeum page 241. Et
Alexan. Guagnin. page 265. 266.
Christians of the world; even with the Idem observant in jejuniis Turcae, vid.
Alcoran. c. 2.
Turks themselves also, and all Mahumetans: Neither (as I take it) is it
otherwise with us; For the evening fasts before the Feasts are no rule of these
Fasts now; they being of old appointed then to abstain from their supper, that
the body being the lighter, might the better attend, and watch in their
succeeding Vigils.

The second Rule is Laute; Though then to drinks. To content our selves with
such that might nourish, though they did not cherish. Such was Daniels fare,
Dan. 1.16.
Chap. 1.16. as also in this place. But of this more fully hereafter.

The third is Nimis: Though to eat, yet to too much. For thus even meat that
should preserve the body, and make it able to serve the soul, does, whilst
too much is taken in, destroy both body and soul; as too much water to a ship,
drowning that which it would else sustain. It is our SAVIORS Caveat, as in
our eating at all other times, Luke 21.34.
so much more in our fasting now, That we be not overcome with surfeiting and
drunkenness. 1 Timothy 5.23.
And Timothy, though for his many and often infirmities he must use wine, yet
by the Apostles prescript, it must be but a little.

Ardenter: Though to eat, yet not too earnestly, not too greedily. For the end
of our fasting being to subdue our desires, the end is not obtained, when we
give such heed to our unruly appetites. Socrates hist. lib. 4. c. 23. Gr.
(...), etc. Vid. Clem. Alexand. Paedag. l. 2. c. 1. f. 102. B. Prove. 23.2.
Pior's example in Socrates is worthy our imitation to make our eating not
(...), but (...): And that precept of Solomon to be observed at our own, which
he gives of great men's tables: When thou sit with a great man, put thy
knife to thy throat; that is, eat not too greedily.

Studiose: Yet not to be curious and exquisite in our diet; not to send far
and nigh, over sea and land, to please our palate, and content our taste; nor
to have our meat when we fast, cook't with a thousand varieties. Let us
remember, that all this care perishes with the belly, and does but through the
belly help to fill up the draught.

That Hebrew Proverb is true, (...) Michael. Neand. Testam. vet. Heb. p. 343.
Et Joan. Drus. lib. 1. Apophtheg. p. 11.
He that multiplieth flesh, does but multiply worms: And therefore Eucherius
Lugdun. Epist. Paraenet. f. 382.
Eucherius Caveat is good. Poscit studia majora pars melior; The greater care
would be bestowed upon the better part. Daniel did so, and so must we, if we
fast aright. And though in our eating it is our duty to provide that the body
may live, yet in our fasting it must be our care, that the Body of sin may
die, and whilst nature is conserved by the one, the corruption of nature must
be slain, or at least suppressed, by the other.

And so we come to the second thing in these words: (I ate no pleasant bread,
neither came flesh or wine in my mouth; II. Proposition.
nor did I anoint my self at all, etc.) Namely, That Daniels thus abstaining
from flesh and wine, was a true and perfect Fast.

I cannot stand upon every word apart, neither indeed need I: The use of
anointing our bodies being now ceased, I may forbear to trouble you therewith.
The other words being the proper and immediate subject of the fast, are only
now to be insisted on.

And first, What is meant by this term of Pleasant bread, since Expositors
vary in it. Epiphanius reads it, as if he ate (...). Vid. S. Epiphan. de vit.
Prophet. in vit. Daniel. ex MS. codice Augustano.
no bread at all. He lived (says Dorotheus) only of the Iejuniis se and
abstinentia ab omni delicato cibo imbecillem reddidit, terrae fructibus
vescens. Dorotheus de vit. Prophet. cap. de Daniele. S. Chrysostom. Tom. 1.
Homiliar. ad pop. Antioch. Adversus Iudaeos 2. S. Hieronymus in locum.
fruits of the earth: of which also bread is the chief. Saint Chrysostom by
pleasant bread understands unleavened: and thinks that Daniel used leavened.
Saint Hierome understands it of all delicate and pleasant meats; as do also
Tremellius, thus reading it; Cibum rerum desyderabilium non comederam. And not
amiss, seeing under the name of bread, all kind of sustenance is comprised.
Howsoever Theodoret well observes, that Bread being the staff of man's life,
might not be omitted, although in their fasting they used a coarser kind.
This no way Quod reprehendit Clemens Alex. (...). Vid. Clem. Alex. Paedag. l. 2
c. 1. f. 103. c.
effeminated for pleasure or delight, (as Clemens speaks) was ofttimes made of
De Iuliano Saba Theodoretus. Cibus erat ci panis ordeaceus, isque furfuraceus.
Obsenium. a. falis. Vid. eundem in hist. S. PP. in vit. Iuliani. Nam in quinis
istis diebus jejunii (ut Cassianus loquitur) Panis tantum, uti caeteris
plerisque S. Patribus, ita Iuliano cibus quotidianus erat: aliis insuper Die
Dominico and Sabbato (qui refectionis erant) pro arbitrio ab iis adjectis
additisque, modo quod dicturi mox sumus, Canonicis (uti nuncuparunt) cibariis
contenti, a carnibus and sanguine se abstinerent. De optimo (uti and vulgari)
cibi quotidiani modo ap. Joan. Cassian. Coll. 2. c 19. sic Abbas Moses: super
hac re(inquit)inter majores nostros frequenter novimus habitum fuisse
tractatum. Nam discutientes continentias diversorum, qui vel solis leguminibus,
vel oleribus tantum, vel pomis vitam jugiter exigebant, praeposudre cunctis
illis refectionem solius panis, cujus aequissimum modum in duobus Paximaciis
statuerunt, quos parvulos panes vix librae unius pondus habere certissimum est.
De Moyse Aethiope: (...). Pallad. de eod. p. 59. Hanc in duobus paximaciis,
Canonicam mensuram appellat Io. Cassian. Collat. 2. c. 26. Quam ne
transgrederentur aut excederent sui, cavebat sedulo Publius: Aiunt autem eum
(ait Theodorus) quoque accedentem ad trutinam, Panis mensuram diligenter
perpendisse, and si quando invenisset plus quam esset definitum, aegre tulisle
and eos qui hoc faciebant Helluones appellasse. Vid. Theod. in vit. Publii.
Barley not sierced, or sifted from the Bran. Similem enim Diaetam in jejuniis
observant hodierni Caloieri. Nobis (ait Bellon. eorundem apparatum describens)
praeterea apposuit olivas nigras conditas, quas Dermatias appellant, atrum
Pane^ biscoctum, atque vinum. Biscocto pane utuntur Caloieri, ne saepius
Clibanum calefacere cogantur. Vid. P. Bellon. observat. l. 1. c. 48. ubi
veteris situs ignarus, Biscocti Panis haud veram ariolatus est causam.
Black therefore, and so not pleasant to the Eye. (...) appellant Socrat. hist.
Eccles. l. 4. cap. 23. Grae. fol. 235. Et Palladius Lausiac. hist. ubi supra.
and page 142.
Dry also, even hard, even Biscoct bread, ( (...) vocat Palladius Hist.
Lausiac. fol. 72. in vit. Pauli (...). Itidem (...) f. 165. Joan. Cassianus
saepissime Paximacia.
Paximacia they called them) and therefore not pleasant to the taste: which as
the Christians of Greece at this day, so the Hebrews and first Christians of
old, eating only with Sal Essenis seu Essaeis, cum aridis illis eorum panibus
in usu olim. (...), etc. Philo de vita contempl. f. 692. B. Similiter
Christianis illis per Eremum se exercentibus, uti and aliis fere ubique
jejunantibus, praesertim sex illis diebus magnae septimanae. Vid. S. Epipha adv
Haeres. lib. 3. tom. 1. haeres. 75. Aeriorum c. 6. Et Theodoret. Hist. S. PP.
ubi supra. Inde ab aridorum and salis usu perpetuo Xerophagiorum nomen.
Notandum autem eos aqua abstinuisse omnino, qui herbis, seu humidioribus
quibusvis ejusmodi vescebantur. De Marosa B. Theodoretus. Toto autem (ait) hoc
tempore, aquam potare non passus est: non illa comedens, quae iis exhibentur,
qui ad non bibendum se exercent; solent enim illi uti cibis humidioribus: sed
iis utens cibis, quibus alii (scil.) Xerophagiis illis Paximaciorum and salis,
etc. Vid. B. Theodor. Histor. S. Patrum, in vit. Eusebii. De Panis and salis
usu cum aqua, in jejuniis tum vulgo observatis Quadragesimalibus, tum
Poenitentiae nomine impositis, Vide Council. Triburiens. cap. 8. and cap. 55.
water and salt, they gave therefore the name of Xerophagia thereunto.

Howsoever, they did all abstain from flesh and wine, the perpetual rule of
their fast: not at all, as did the Cibos ejusmodi aversabantur Tacianus,
Encratitae, Manichaeus, Iovinianus and Priscillianus. Vid. S. Epiph. Haeres.
47. and 56. Theod. Divin. Dogm. lib and Haeretic. fabular. l. 1. S. Aug.
Haeres. 46. and cont. Faust. Manich. l. 6 c. 6. Gennad. Massiliens. De Dogm.
Eccles. c. 67. Hinc ne quis jejunantiu^ cum Haereticis abstineret a cibis
istis, tanquam immundis, Conciliis cautum est, ut aliquando eisdem uterentur.
Vid. Council. Gangrens. Can. 2. and Council. Braccarens. 1. c. 14. and Can.
Apost. 52. Cessent lavacra, vina, vel carnes, non quod creaturam Dei judicemus
esse damnandam, sed qui toto anno nobis viximus, saltem vel paucos dies vivamus
Domino. S. Aug. ser. 65. de temp. Servi Dei in eo quod a carnibus, and vino
abstinent, non tanquam res immundas effugiunt, sed mundioris vitae instituta
sectantur. S. Aug. de fid. ad Petr. Diacon. c. 3. ad fin. s. 51. L. M: tom. 3.
and ibid. c. 42. Firmissime tene, and nullatenus dubites omnem creaturam Dei
bonam esse, and nihil rejiciendum, quod cum gratiarum action percipitur: Et
Dei servos, qui a carnibus and vino abstinent, non tanquam immunda quae a Deo
facta sunt, respucre, sed a fortiori cibo and potu pro sola castigatione
corporis abstinere. Similiter Gennadius Massil. l. de Eccl Dogm. c. 66. (qui
etiam habetur inter D. Augustini opera) Bonum est cibum cum gratiarum action
sumere, and quicquid Deus praecepit edendum. Abstinere autem ab aliquibus, non
quasi malis, sed quasi non necessariis, non est malum. Moderari vero eorum usum
pro necessitate and tempore, proprie Christianorum est.
Manichees, Encratites, and other Heretics execrating and forbidding their
use, as unlawful: whom the Apostle condemns, 1 Timothy 4.3. or as the
Pythagoreans and Bramans, of old and at this day, for some other reason: But
only abstaining for a time, that thereby forbearing their pleasures, and
humbling themselves, they might both express and increase their godly sorrow
for sin, and their repentance not to be repented of.

(...). Josephus lib. 10. Antiquit. cap. 10.
Josephus reports, that Daniel did abstain from all things that had life: and
indeed true it is; this is the meaning of this place. Whether that be true also
(which Josephus reports) that he did so always; as Chap. 1.16. seems to be
implied, I will not affirm. That he now did so in this fast, there is no
question to be made, it having been the constant practice of all former and
latter times. They thought they had good Reason for it.

Reasons of Fasting thus.
First, That they might by this means show mercy to the inferior creature: I
may call it (I hope without offense) our fellow creature, and so under that
precept of our SAVIOR, Matthew. 18.33. Our fellow creature I call it, because of
that near similitude and likeness they have with us: for the two extremes of
living creatures being propounded, Man on the one side, and Plants on the
other, plain it is, the bruit Beasts hold a middle place: coming nearest to
us, not only in life, but also in sense and motion, having fleshly bodies, as
have we. There is one flesh of men, (says the Apostle) another flesh of
beasts, another of fishes, and another of birds, 1 Cor. 15.39. 1 Cor. 15.39.
So they are as we, flesh all. They live upon the same earth, Humani generis
universitatem scriptura sub carnis nomine designat. S. Hilarious in Psalm. 64.
f. 411.

Man especially after sin and the Fall called Flesh, Vid. Genesis 6. v.
3.12.13.17.19. Et 7.21. Job 34.15. Psalm. 56.5. Et 65.2. and Esai. 40.5, 6.
Ecclus. 28.5. Vide Mat. 24.22. Luke 3.6. Romans 3.20. Gal. 2.16.


breathe the same common air: and for the most part these we feed on, live
nearest to us, are (as it were) of our care and family, and in a manner
converse with us, being otherwise in all necessity of life, most helpefull and
serviceable to us. Even (...). S. Basil. Hom. 9 in Hexamer. fo. 117. Vide
ejusdem Hom. 8. ubi plurima de Animalium solertia virtutibusque. Bruta ratione
uti, multi voluere. Vid. Ethnic. Plutarch. de placit. Philosoph. Item lib. Quod
Bruta ratione utantur. Item utra animalia sint prudentiora terrestriane, an
aquatica. Et apud Porphyr. lib. 2. (...). Aristoteles improprie virtutum
appellationem brutis tribui docens. lib. 6. Ethic. cap. ult. Et lib. 7 cap. 6.
(...) appellat. Et lib. 8. hist. Animal. ad initium, (...) appellat. Plato and
Philoponus (...) nominant. Vid. Francisc. Vallesium de sacr. Philosoph. cap.
55. p. 316. etc. Francisc. Patritium Pampsych, lib. 5. f. 58. Et Jacob. de Lago
Annotat. in eundem: qui Brutis (...) tribuit. Vide etiam Joan. Bodin. Comment.
in Oppian. p. 53. etc. Et Laurent. Vallam Lib. de Anim. Vid etiam Philostrat.
de vit Apollon. l. 3. c. 3. f. 115. Clementi Alexand. idem tribuit Turnerus de
linguis. p. 247. Vid. Coelium Rhodigin. Antiqu. Lect. l. 29. c. 14 f 1358.
some special learned men, and those Christians too, go farther yet. These
have (say they) if not a weaker use of reason, yet (...), something most like
unto it. Howsoever, we may safely say: they are, as capable of sense, so of
mercy also. For the good man (says Solomon) is merciful to his beast. And fit
they thought it at this time, when we beg mercy of GOD above us, that we
should now at least show mercy to the creature below and beneath us.

A second was, that being exercised, hereby mercy to one another. There is, as
in other virtues and vices, a progress also in Mercy, and in the opposite,
Cruelty. Notat Cle. Alex. Pythagoram suam in (...) ma^suetudinem a lege
didicisse; Quae (ait ille) (...).

Hinc illud Deu. 14. v. 21. Et Exodus 23. v. 10. etc. 24. v. 26. Non coques
haedum in lacte matris suae. Et, Ne alligetur os bovi trituranti. (...) (ait
ille) (...), etc. Vid. Clem. Alexandr. Strom lib. 2. p. 292. 293.


This experience shows. For as by the killing of beasts, Cain at first (say
the Fathers) and others since grow more hardened, to let out the blood of their
brethren: So by the pity and mercy showed to beasts, and such like creatures,
men both learn and practice the better, mercy and pity one to another.

Sabbath, Egregius locus e^ S. Basilij Hom. 1. De Iejun. ubi ejus commoda
recenset v. h.

(...).


making a kind of compensation to the Creatures. For they living with us are
for the most part instruments of our actions; and dying for us and our use, are
as often subject matter of our excess. And therefore just it is, that as they
having sense more then other, are most truly said to mourn when we sin, Romans
8. So when we mourn for our sins, just it were, they should be, as dispensed
with, so spared altogether from our mourning.

Creature: There is another, and the maine reason drawn from our selves; and
that is more proper for the text; namely, our humiliation; our denying our
selves, and our own pleasures: Our making our selves to mourn. Meats of
flesh are meats of pleasure; are delicate, Vtantur igitur, qui utuntur carne,
tantum oleribus non ad distentionem, nec ad arvina^ corporis, quam epulae
carnis facere consueverant, etc. S. Ambros. l. de Noah and Arca c. 25.
pleasant meats. (...): So the Text calls them. They are as most similar, and
near our nature, so the most nourishing. Such are not fit for this time: nay
most unfit. Now we are, or should be (as holy Daniel here) mourning: that is,
humbling our selves and making our selves to mourn.

Another reason is, that these kind of meats cibus parabilis, not easily got
together: Much labor, trouble, toil, and time, spent in providing, preparing,
dressing, and cooking them: Many men's care, and study about them: All which,
were not these, might otherwise be spent upon better duties.

Nor is such kind of meat, Vilis: fit for Vile and miserable Sinners; such as
we (now especially) confess our selves truly to be: Of the meanest and worst:
Such indeed good enough for us. That other would beseem our betters; even the
best of men that ever were. Besides, Quod ventri subtrahis, tribuc esurienti.
Exaequet omnia justus Dei timor: Duas inter se contrarias affectiones, tuam
videl. Satietatem and fratris famem modesta continentia te^pera atque moderare
S. Greg. Nyssem Hom. 1. de paup. Amand. f. 971.
they are more costly and chargeable in themselves, more money must be spent
upon them: some of which might serve to feed more, and more hungry bellies
then are our own; and might (so expended) comfort the poor, whose mean diet
is a continual fast. Surely, Alms, and works of mercy are necessary
attendants to our Fast, being to it as the Oil is to the Lamp.

And therefore it is no less part of Daniels counsel to Nebuchadnezzar (Chap.
4.24. Sed jejunia nostra ut plena sint and suffarta; misericordiae pinguedine
saginentur demus esurientibus prandiu^ nostrum, nec putes jejunia sola
sufficere ad sananda vulnera peccatoru^: in medicamento Elcemosynae recreentur.
Iejunium ergo tuum te castiget, sed laetificet alterum, etc. Sic jejuna, ut in
alio manducante prandisse te gaudeas. Hilarem enim datorem diligit Deus. Nam
manducante paupere de bonis tuis prandet Christus, qui se in paupere esurire
testatur. S. Augu. Ser. 65. de Tempore.

Invenimus. n. in quodam libello ab Apostolis dictum; Beatus est, qui jejunat
pro eo, ut alat pauperem. S. Cyril. Alexand. in Levit. lib. 10. f. 731.
Praecipimus vobis quartis and sextis ferijs jejunare; and quae ex jejunijs
vobis redundant, egentibus largiri. Clem. Romans Constit. Apost. lib. 5. c. 19.


) to break off his sins by righteousness, and his iniquities by showing
mercy to the poor, yea this is the fast that God has chosen, Esa. 58. to
loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens: to deal thy bread to
the hungry: to cover the naked, and not to hide thy self from thine own
flesh. If thou be less sensible of their (the Poores) need and hunger, etc.
punish thy self (thus) by fasting, and this will make thee more sensible of
their wants; more willing to relieve them. Again, if thou be less able to
relieve them, spare from thy diet; cut off a dish from thy fare; refrain from
thy more dainty and costly cates, and this will make thee more able to give.
Thy (thus) fasting, will augment thine Alms; thine Alms again will give life
and strength to thy Fasting: and both will together make thy Prayers most
powerful, most grateful and gracious in the sight of thy heavenly Father: yea
of CHRIST thy head; who thus by thine alms, through thy fasting is fed and
fostered in His poor members.

I know there are other respects and reasons in Policy, namely to abstain from
these for this increase of Cattle, a more plentiful breed of the Creature.

As also for the increase of ships, for the defense

Together with the training up of Mariners and

For the better supply of food.

For the increase of Trade; the enriching of our

For the employment of many poor abroad at

And lastly (which is not the least) for the inuring our bodies to that food (I
mean fish) which GOD has abundantly spread about our Land; even at our own
doors, as He did Manna about the Israelites Tents. I may say it is ingratitude
to GOD, dishonor and shame to our Nation, whilst many starve at home, to
suffer other Nations to carry our food from us.

I might (I say) add these and many more like: but these reasons being (most
what) Political inducements, rather then moral and Theological arguments, I
therefore forbear to urge: it is enough to name them.

Only let me say thus much, the more reasons we have, the more are we bound to
this fast: If we have Reason both from Policy and nature as Men; from Religion
and Grace as Christian men, then are we the stronglyer tied. A threefold cord
is not easily broken: And where all laws bind, there must needs be the
stronger tie.

Yet I will add one reason more; The custom of the Church thus to Fast.
even the Apostles, 1 Cor. 11.16. Habemus talem consuetudinem. Thus to fast
has been the perpetual Custom of the Church, in all ages.

1 Before the flood, there can be no question: It being the most received
opinion of the best Divines, Vid. Genesis 1.29. Genesis 9.2, 3, 4. Genesis 9.20.21.
that they ate no flesh before the Grant, (...), v. S. Chrysostom. in locu^. S.
Hieronym. adv. Iovinian. li. 1. c. 10. Et adv. Eundem lib. 2. c. 10.

S. Basil. De Iejun. Hom. 1. Tertullian. de Iejun. c. 4. Theodor. in Genes. Qu.
55. Isidor. Hispalens. De offic. Eccles. lib. 1. c. ult. Scil. 46. Ex illo Romans
14. v. 21. Bonum nec comedere carnem, nec vinum bibere. Abstinentiam illam
veterum Patrum ante Diluvium infert, a Christo jam restitutam, and retractam
(ut ille loquitur) jam sub Gratia Christianis. Hujus a carnibus abstinentiae
sub veteri mundo Patrum, and Ethnici aliqualem habuere in suis notitiam.
Dicaearchus. n. (referente D. Hieronymo lib. 2. adv. Iovinian. c. 9.) in libris
Antiquitatum, and Descriptione Graeciae refert, sub Saturno, id est, in aureo
saeculo cum omnia humus funderet, nullum comedisse carnes, sed universos
vixisse frugibus and pomis, quae sponte terea gignebat. Huc refer, quae habet
Suidas in voce Herodotus, e Iuliani Apostatae Epistola quadam; qua testis est;
Orbem tunc peragrantes, nec piscivoras, nec carnivoras ullibi reperisse gentes,
Aethiopas vero placentam (...), rejicientes.


Genesis 9. verse 2. and 3. As also that they drank no wine till Noah's
drunkenness, unwittingly overtaken with the strange pleasantness of the vine
he had newly planted, Genesis 9.20, 21.

2 After the flood, and under the Law amongst the Hebrews in the Church of GOD
this abstinence was always in use. Some, and those the strictest, as the De
Essenorum perpetua a carnibus and vino abstinentia. Vid. S. Hieronym. adv.
Iovinian. lib. 2. c. 9. Qui Iosephum hanc in rem laudat. lib. 18. Antiquitat.
Et lib. 2. Hist. Captiv. Iudaic. Et contr. Apionem. Et Porphyr. (...) lib. 4.
Qui similiter Iosephi a Hieronymo laudatos libros, and verba allegat. (...)
(illis de quibus Philo) (...), etc. Vid. Philon. lib. De vit contemplat. f.
696. D. E. 697. D. Vid. Eundem ibid. f. 691. G.
Essai, or Esseni in latter time, and (as Josephus, etc. think) Daniel now,
wholly absteyning from these all their life long; as did the rest of the Jews
also at such time as they fasted: Iudaei jejunantes, a Carne and vino se
continent. ut Joan. Baptist. Gramay Calend. Iudaic. mense Temur. f. 187. Et
Joan. Buxtorf. de Synagog. Iudaeor. Cap. 25. ubi de Eorum jejunijs. A primo
(ait) Iulij (quo templum a Babylonijs incensum) ad diem decimum carnibus non
vescuntur ullis, vinum non bibunt ullum, lavare se aut balneum introire non
audent, etc. Idem faciunt Iudaei perpetuo, in luctu. Vid. Notas in Sanhedrim
Cap. 6. v. 16. Joan. Coch. p. 51.
Observed by them even unto this day: as truly from them was practiced amongst
the stricter Ethnici etiam (uti semper Dei simia est malus ille and impurus
spiritus) a Dei populo hanc eandem a Carne and vino abstinentiam admiserunt.
Sic Aegyptij Sacerdotes test. S. Hieronym. adv. Iovin. lib. 2. c. 9. Et Porphy.
(...), lib. 4. p. 360. and 365. Persarum magi. S. Hieronym. Ibid. Et Porphyr.
(...), lib. eod. 4. p. 399. etc. Vterque ex eodem Eubulo, Mithrae Historiae
Scriptore, qui quidem Hieronymo Eubulus, Porphyrio Symbulus dr. Similiter
(ijsdem auctoribus) Cretenses, and apud eos potissimum Iovis Prophetae: Indi,
and apud eos Brachmanes: Etiam Syri, Lacedaemonij, Cyprij, Phoenices,
Athenienses, etc. quorum instituta (hac in re) urgent S. Hieronym. lib. 2. adv.
Iovinian. c. 9. and Porphyrius Ibid. lib. 4. fere per totum. Vid. Clement.
Alexandrin. Strom. 7. f. 515, 516.
Heathen and Gentiles of old.

3 After CHRIST'S coming amongst Christians there is no doubt to be made:
Abstinete hijs diebus vino and carne, etc. V. Clemen. Roman. Constit. li. 5. c.
17. Atque id (...). Can. Apo. 50. (...), etc. S. Cyrill. Hieros. Catech. 4. f.
93. Ideo S. Ignatius jejunij leges indicans. (...). V. Epist. ad Hieron. Diac.
Vid. Cyril. Alexand. contr. Julian. lib. 7. p. 167. etc. Et S. Epiphan. (...)
cap. 23. Eusebium Hist. lib. 5. c. 1. and alibi. Pallad. in Prooemio Lausiac.
Hist. a Meursio. Quin idem passim testantur, S. Cyprianus, Ambrosius,
Augustinus, Hieronymus, Hilarious, Tertullianus, Origines, and veteres omnes.
Huc refer Council. Gerundens. Can. 3. Vid. etiam (Circa Annum Dom. 630.) Council.
Triburiens. ca. 5. and 56. and 58. Et Council. Toletan. 4. c. 10. and 8. cap. 9.
etc. Solennis hic abstinendi mos, Graecis, Armenis, etc. Orientalibus: unde
Quadragesimale tempus illis (...), uti Latinis, Curnisprivium dicitur.
many Councills, Fathers, Histories, are abundant witnesses in this kind: some
wholly absteining from flesh and wine and all desirable meats all their life
time: As did anciently (more generally) all their De sui temporis Eremitis,
quorum and histo. scripserit, sic Theodor. Orat. De Caritat. (...), etc. Et mox
de ijsdem loquutus, (...). Eorum qui velit Exempla passim legate apud
Theodoretum, Palladium, Euagrium, aliosque.
(...), and many others of the Simile institutum cum Eremi illis cultoribus,
Montanisque (uti Chrysostom. nonnunquam eos in Atho monte (...)) observarunt
alij nonnulli in saeculo degentes: Quos inter S. Basilius, qui ad Iulianum
(...) rescribens. Epist. 208, and 209. (...) (inquit) (...). Notentur verba,
quibus ad haec explicanda nullus credo, extat apud veteres omnes locus uberior.
Hujusmodi a. abstinentes voluit Ancyrana Synodus, quo a Manichaeis alijsque
Haereticis dignoscerentur, vel aliquando carnes degustare ((...).) Loquitur a.
de Clericis. (...) (ait) (...), etc. V. Can. 13. Council. Ancyran. Huc refer
Council. Bracarens. prim. ( circa Ann. Dom. 563). Can. 14.
Clergy: herein imitating the stricter Esseni, Quin de eisdem intelligendus est
Tertullianus lib. de Cultu foeminarum. cap. 9. Quidam (inquit) ipsam Dei
Creaturam sibi interdicunt, abstinentes vino, and animalibus exulantes, quorum
fructus nulli periculo aut sollicitudini adjacent, sed humilitatem animae suae
in victus quoque castigatione Deo immolant. Animalibus exulare eleganter,
suomore dicit, quia perpetuo abijs abstinebant, non quod illicita arbitrari
sint aut (ut ipse se exponit) eorum fructus periculo adjacent, sed in
Humilitatis and (...) testimonium. Pulchre and fusius haec explicat Palladius
Lausiac. Hist. Prooemio; quod cum in Herveti deficiat editione, Meursiana
Graeca supplevit: Quam vide.
All others doing the like in every of their fasts: as even to this day they
continue (not to speak of the Western Christians) among the De Graecis
hodiernis a Carne abstinentibus Vid. Graecor. Typicum: Et Ritualia passim in
Horolog. Triod. etc. Et praeter P. Bellonium aliosque infra citatos, Martinum
Crusium Turco-Graec. lib. 3. f. 273. De Muscovitis vid. Joan. Fabrum. De
Religione Moscovit. ad Regem Ferdinand. p. 179. Theol. Mosc. and p. 182.
Anonym. in Epistola de Russorum Religione ad D. Chytraeum. p. 241. Et Lazicij
Apolog. cap. 10. p. 103. Theol. Mosc. Et Alexand. Guagnin. p. 265. De
Aethiopibus, and Abassynis Vid. Damian. a Goes. p. 458. etc. Et Nicol. Godign.
de Abassyn. lib. 1. cap. 19. page 123.
Graecians, Georgians, Armenians, Russians, Aethiopians, and other Christians
through the whole world.

Surely in all their fasts they thus used to abstein from flesh, etc. Whether 1
only as a means of their greater humiliation, Humble Confession, and
Repentance; to bridle and repress the body of sin. Or 2 as a means the better
to Inde (...) se je junijs, etc. dicebant veteres. Clem. Alexandrin. Paedag. l.
2. c. 2. (...) (ait) (...). Marinus etiam in Proclo, (...) memorat, page 177.
purge and prepare themselves to Prayer and the like works of Piety and
Devotion. Or 3 the more to exercise those Christian virtues, viz. Puniendae
simul gulae, and exercendae continentiae causa; ut illa damnaretur, ista
erudiretur, Tertul. de Iejun. c. 5.
Temperance, Sobriety, Chastity, Abstinence, and mercy also unto others. 4
whether they judged such kind of meats, etc. though lawful, yet (...), etc.
Clem. Alexandr. Paedag. lib. 2. f. 107. B. Nobilis inprimis est locus ille S.
Cyrilli Alexandr. adv. Iulianum. lib. 7. f. 169 Rejectancus quidem (ait) apud
ipsos nullus cibus fuit: abstinuerunt a. a nonnullis, ut dixi, mentis ad
deteriora propensionem remorantes, and carnis lasciviam compescentes, ita ut
and mentis oculum magis subtilem haberent, quo fide contemplari certius
possent, quid inculpati habeat, and a sacris legibus non abludat.
less agreeable to nature, more offensive to the brain; less suitable to a
civil and religious life. Or 5 whether they did it also in reference to the
Incarnation of our Blessed Lord, The Word made flesh; now slain, and crucified
for us and our sins. Whether for these, or any other, most certainly thus they
always fasted; as not willing when they mourned for their sins, any flesh
should mourn or suffer but their own.

But here we must needs both move and solve a Doubt, which may perchance
trouble some: namely; If fasting we must abstain from flesh and living
Creatures; why must we not abstain from Fishes also, that has both life and
flesh? 1 Cor. 15.36.

To which I answer. That the Church is in this an indulgent Mother: for seeing
that the multitude of mankind could not by other means be sufficiently
provided for: as also because of many more tender weak and sick amongst them,
she first did permit the use of fish to some, which since perchance (as
matters of favor usually do) has grown more common. This is plain by
sundry examples of old, as also by the modern practice of the Graeci and
Orientales omnes ubi jejunant, a Piscibus abstinent, iis praesertim, qui
sanguinem habent: neque hos cuivis nisi infirmanti aut aegrotanti permittunt in
Monasteriis Caloieri, (...) and olim Palladio appellati. Vid. eund. in vit.
Macarii Alexand. Edit. Gr. Io. Meurs. p. 40. Hiis etiam similiter indulgebant
(...), scil. intestina, pedes, etc. aliasque extimas animantium parts: unde
forsan de Armenis Septemcastrens. Append. f. 58. quod in diebus Veneris
comedunt carnes: cum tamen in festis horum vel omnium and reliquis est facta
potestas. De Tabennesiotis in Thebaide Aegypti Porcos nutrientibus, carnesque
eorum Blemmydum genti vicinae vendentibus: (...) (ait Palladius.) Et mox,
(...). Vid. Pallad. Lausiac. hist. Gr. Meurs. p. 92. De Piscibus autem,
eorumque solum in festis usu: sic alibi in vit. Candidae. (...) (inquit) (...).
Egregius prae caeteris locus est, quem vide ap. Pallad. hist. p. 142. Quod
(...) meminit, eo innuit nomine Pisces omnes, queis sanguis inest: a quibus
jejunantes Graeci in solidum abstinent. Isti Caloieri (ait P. Bellonius)
Quadragesimarum suarum tempore piscibus sanguine praeditis non vescuntur:
itaque herbis, alioque hujusmodi modico apparatu uti necesse est, etc. Et mox,
Ea (inquit) vivendi ratio non modo apud Caloieros locum obtinet, aut apud
Sacerdotes, aliosve sacris initiatos in Graecanica Ecclesia; sed etiam apud
plebem, quae mortis etiam poena^ proposita, Quadragesimae ipsorum tempore
Piscibus sanguine praeditis, aut alia re pingui vesci nolit. Vid. P. Bellon.
Observat. l. 1. c. 48. Et l. 2. c. 8. p. 197. Consule Anastasium Caesarea,
scil. Palestinae Episcopum, ad fin. Typic. Graecor. f. (...). qui de hiis agit
pluribus, and ad Apostolicum illud. Act. 15.20. refert. Vid. etiam circa Ann.
Dom. 630. Council. Triburiens. c. 58.
Grecians, De Ruthenis seu Moscovitis: qui cum jejunia persolvunt, nihil quod
unquam visum sit vita fungi, neque Pisces ipsos ederunt. Vid. Joan. Fabrum De
Religion. Moscovit. ad Ferdinand. Reg. Romanor. p. 179. Theol. Moscovit.
Russians, and other De Aethiopibus and Abassynis. Vid. quae Nicolaus Godignus
De Abassyn. Rebus l. 1. c. 19. p. 123. De Armenis. Vid. Append. de Christianis
in fin. Septemcastrensis a Bibliandr. f. 58. Tom. 3.
Eastern Christians, who at this day in their Fasts abstain from all flesh of
fish: permitting it only to those that are weak and sick. Thus much Saint
Gregory told our English Austin above a thousand years since, that the eating
of fish is permitted to a Christian of indulgence; Caeterum Piscium esus ita
Christiano relinquitur, ut hoc ei infirmitatis solacium, non luxuriae pariat
incendium. Vid. Decretal. Part. 1. Distinct. 4. Cap. Denique.
Vt hoc ei infirmitatis solacium, non luxuriae pariat incendium.

And indeed there is a maine difference betwixt other beasts and them: For
fishes are by nature more wild, and (as Naturalists observe) untameable:
(...), etc. Plutarch. Symposiac. lib. 8. Probl. 8. Non offerebantur pisces in
sacrificiu^, quia cum in aquis vivant, magis sunt alieni ab homine quam alia
animalia, quae vivunt in aere. Antoninus Sum. Theol. Part. 1. Tit. 14. c. 5.
sect. 2.
They live (as Plutarch rightly) in another world and element, no whit
conversant with us, but most of all estranged from us: their bodies whilst
they live, are most of all in blood, life, and spirits unlike us: more
undocible, and altogether unserviceable to us in any other use. As for their
flesh, it has little blood and spirits, and therefore less warm'th and heat:
It is more dissimilar, and differing from our nature, and therefore without the
Art of Cookery less nourishing and pleasing to us. In a word, of all flesh it
is least dainty and delicate, being waterish and flaccid, and therefore
unpleasant in taste, less apt or able for nourishment: so that in our vulgar
English we doubt not to call it, no flesh; contradistinguishing it thereunto,
Hinc jejunantibus olim Piscium esus permissus: sic circa Ann. Dom. 671. Council.
Toletan. 4. In quibus diebus (scil. Calend. Ianuar. jejunio itidem propter
Gentium in iis superstitiones plurimas) etiam praeter Piscem and olus, sicut
and in illis quadraginta diebus caeteris carnibus abstinetur, and a quibusdam
etiam nec vinum bibitur. Vid. Council. Toletan. 4. c. 2. Simili ratione and
avium esus olim Orientalibus nonnullis in jejuniis frequentatus: ut ex Epiphan.
constat. (...). c. 23. quod scilicet earum, cum piscibus par fere habita, and
aequalis ratio: Graecos tamen, qui nunc sunt, praesertim Caloires, ab avibus
omnibus, sicuti and piscibus abstinere, adeo testatur Bellonius, ut earum
nomina apud eosdem propemodum ignota nunc dierum, aut indistincta habeantur.
as Cibus minime desyderabilis: no pleasant meat: and therefore (not so fully)
within the verge of my Text: I ate no pleasant bread.

And thus I hope you see this is no novell, or new practice brought in and left
here by the Church of Rome: if we have any thing from them, it is the
mitigation and allaying of it. So that now we have done with the second
Proposition: viz. That as the Baptist (by our Saviors account) is said to have
come neither eating nor drinking, though he did both: So Daniel's thus
abstaining from flesh and wine, etc. though he did eat other meats for
necessity of nature, is in the Holy Ghosts esteem reputed a true, perfect, and
religious fast: And this also may satisfy the conceit of our late Novelists.
There is as Iejunium natura, A Fast of nature, not to eat at all; So, Iejunium
Ecclesiae, A Fast of the Church, not to eat such or such meats. This was
Daniels fast: and such is ours now: we may be no less bold upon it, then was
he: seeing we have the same Spirit of Truth to witness it to us, who does
approve it in him. I Daniel was mourning, etc. I ate no pleasant bread.

And so from the manner, 4 The continuance of this Fast.
we come to the last thing; The lasting Continuance and Duration of this Fast,
verse. 2. (for three full weeks) and verse. 3. (till three whole weeks were
fulfilled) namely, S. Chrysostom. Tom. 1. Hom. 26. advers. Iudaeos 2.
from the third (as S. Chrysostom notes) of the first month to the four and
twentieth.

It is thus continued at this time, and twice thus repeated; to note out a
twofold mystery.

1. The establishing the Christian fast at this time.

2. (And by it) The abolishing the Jewish Passover.

1. He thus continued his fast to show the abolishing the Jewish Passover. For
three full weeks in the first month ( Exodus 12.) plainly take in the Jews
great Feast: This began from the tenth (inclusively) to the foureteenth; and
thence was farther continued to the one and twentieth. Daniels fast (now) began
before on the third, and ended after on the four and twentieth. By these three
full weeks thus fasted, showing; that the Hebrews Passover (as Daniels
seventy weeks) did but lead to, and end in, the death of the slain Messiah.
He the true Passover, because not slain for Himself, but for us, Dan. 9.26.
and for our sins. He the true Paschall Lamb, which (as Isaac's Ram, Genesis
22.13.) should deliver us, Genesis 22.13.
and that by his own death: whose blood sprinkled on the door posts of their
hearts by faith, should deliver not the Jews only, but all mankind: nor our
bodies alone, but Soul and Body, from the Egyptian both darkness, Plagues,
and thraldom of Hell, Sin, and Satan.

2. But this, the abolishing of the Jewish Passover is not all; For this he
might well have done before. For, Reason would, that if they feasted and joyed
for their deliverance out of Egypt, Psalm. 137.1.
they should now (as they did Psalm. 137.) fast for their thraldom in Babylon.
And Gods command would, that if as the Law commanded, they were only bound to
observe the feast in their own land; then not now in a strange land. Thus the
Jews driven out of Canaan, and now dispersed amongst us, are invited with us
to a solemn Fast; which because they will not observe, they have lost the joy
of their feast CHRIST, and (as they now keep it) Iudaei post verum illum agnum
Paschalem in Ara Crucis ab iis immolatum, Terra Canaanitide, Temploque
deturbati, Agno isto typico in Festivitate Paschatis a Mose praecepto, nusquam
per orbem utuntur: Quin ejus in loco operosissima prolixaque admodum, etsi
inani, tamen ineptiarum plenissima pompa a nuperis Rabbinis conficta, per duas
integras noctes. Ritum celebrationis hujus Iudaicae, in qua tamen Agnum ipsum
praetermittunt. Vid. ap. Joan. Buxdorf. Synagog. Iudaic. c. 13. p. 326. 327,
etc. p. 335. 336.
The Lamb, the substance of their Passover.

This then is not all. Two things therefore here in Daniels fast. 1 That, at
this time; 2 That, so long at this time; are especially to be observed.

vision: and therefore howsoever he did it before, yet now it is specially
recorded; now it is only mentioned; Chap. 9 3.
now it is twice repeated, to show he did it only for this cause, (and we to
do the like) for the death of the slain Messiah. Thus he plainly foretells,
and by his example prescribes this our Christian Fast.

Secondly, as he did it at the time of the feast: continues this fast much
longer than this Feast: he began it the third, that is, full eight days
before the feast; and ended it (if then he did) the four and twentieth, that
is, full three days after. Thereby (no doubt) to take in the very day of His
death; of this most bloody crucifying the Prince, the Messiah: plainly teaching
all, who mean to have no hand in His death, to show thus much by their sorrow
for His death.

Therefore (which is observable) it is not only twice repeated; but with a
great Emphasis: ((...)) three full weeks: and till three ((...)) whole weeks
were fulfilled; to show, that as his fast took in so much more time above the
feast; so it was chiefly intended for a further end: viz. to take in the very
time of his death, who being the true Passover, was therefore the true end and
complement of that feast.

And this I take to be one Reason amongst many others, of the Primitive and
first instituting and so long continuing this Lenten Fast. For as Daniel,
because of the Moons so great variation, on which the feast depended, (that
falling sometime higher, sometime lower) did therefore lengthen his Fast, the
better to take in the very day of His Cross and suffering: so was, and it is
much more necessary for us Christians (not now any longer keeping the
foureteenth day of the first month, Hoc constat satis e sola Paschatis
observandi ratione, scil. inter vicesimum secundum mensis Martii and Aprilis
25. inclusi. Hoc enim dierum circulo Orientales Christiani Diei Paschatis
observationem definierunt, ut apprime necessarium sit praeparatorium illud
jejunium Quadragesimale anterius in Anni Caput excurrere. Vid. Graecor. (...).
ad initium Evangelist. Graec.
with the Jews) to keep our fast as long, nay now much longer for the same
reason.

And now we see even this, that Daniels fast thus dipped in the blood of Jesus,
is that which makes it so gracious, so lovely, so acceptable, as we see it is:
that he fasted now at this time when he foresaw CHRIST should suffer: when the
Messiah was to be slain; Chap. 9.26.
but (...) not for Himself. No indeed, it was for Daniel; and all like him, of
us, who can find in our hearts to mourn for Him, whilst He suffers for us?

And sure, what great matter is this? Is it much, if we weep whilst he
bleedes? if we shed some few tears for Him, who shed so much blood for us? So
much Blood, not to speak of Tears; In the Cradle: In the Garden: On the
Cross: By whipping: by scourging: by crucifying: by nailing: by piercing: From
His hands: From His feet: From His head: From His side: From His whole body, of
which no part was whole, but so broken, till even His heart blood issued, and
powered it self out like water. And all this so willingly; so readily; of His
own accord; For us. I lay down my life, says He. What good nature can here
hold in, and not shed tears for Him? Surely Daniel cannot. The sight melts him
to water; turns him to tears, his feast to fasting: he resolves now on
nothing (all this time) but mourning.

And truly, what should he, or we do else? What wife would not mourn for her
Bridegroom? He is the Bridegroom. What friend or brother would not mourn for
his friend? I have said (says He, and special grace it is) you are my
friends. What Disciple, servant, or follower, would not mourn for his Lord and
Master? Ye are (says he) my Disciples.

Who will not shed at least a tear for every one of these? Yet He, being all
these in the highest kind, is yet far more then these: For He is our
Father; And what child will not mourn for his Father? He is both Abraham's
GOD, and our Father. Before Abraham was (says He) I am. Yea (says Daniel) He
is our Prince: even the Prince, the Messiah, Chap. 9.25, 26. And what subject
would not lament to see his Prince butchered and slain before his eyes?

And truly for Him, so Good, so Great; yet suffering so shamefully, so
painefully, so innocently, so undeservedly! though great cause to mourn for
Him, with Him; Our Prince; The Messiah: Yet far greater cause, (if greater
may be) here and now, to mourn (in thus fasting) for our selves: Our own
sins. For in His being thus cut off, we may read our very sentence, our own
doom, and death: All ours; yea in much more fearful case, had not He been
ours: All, like to light most heavily on every one of us, had not He been
slain for us. In His death we may see the hideous, horrid foulness of our
sins, which were able thus to fetch GOD from Heaven, and to crucify Him here
on earth.

If GOD so severely chastise His most beloved Son, what shall be done to His
unworthy servants? In His blood, as with most capital red letters, not only
Gods most infinite loving mercy is recorded, thus even to give His Son for us;
but also His most severely revenging justice, whilst he thus gave him to
death, a bitter, cruel, and cursed death. If GOD so strictly punish His most
obedient Son, only made sin for us; how shall he torment all Rebellious
sinners?

There is no Christian but abhorres the memory of Judas, Pilate, the Jews and
Pharisees, that crucified the Lord of Glory. For this the Jews are hateful
not only to Christians, but even to the Turks, and Mahumetans at this day.
The ancient Christians using to salute one another with a Sic and Die Paschae,
quo co^munis and quasi publica jejunij religio est, merito deponimus osculum,
quod cum omnibus faciamus. Tertul. De Orat. cap. ult.
kiss of Peace, at their daily Prayers, did on Good Friday, the day of His
Passion omit it, as detesting then the Hypocrisy and treachery of Judas, no
way willing, though but in this to communicate with that wicked Traitor. Inde
mos iste hodiernus apud Aethiopas and Abassynos Christianos: quo, Mirum
servantes silentium, nec inter se salutant, dum sibi mutuo occurrunt in via;
sed mutoru^ instar, demissis oculis praetereunt. Nec vendunt, nec emunt, nec
pecuniam tangunt. Id faciunt in odium Iudae proditoris, qui Christum pacis
osculo fraudulenter salutatum, argenteis triginta vendidit. Tantaque adversus
illum ira incendu^tur, ut nemo fere sit, qui composita^ ex scrutis Iudae
imagine^ non raptet per viam: quod pueris praecipue ludi magis, quam odij causa
frequentissimum. Nullus n. puer domo egreditur, qui fune alligatum ad cingulum
simulachrum Iudae non ferat, etc. Vid. Nic. Godign. de Abassyn. Rebus. lib. 1.
cap. 22. p. 139.
And some Christians there are at this day, who (at that time) will neither buy
nor sell, nor touch any money, for the very same reason. Yea they revile
Pilate, abhor the Jews, they curse Judas: their very boys and children
hanging his picture at each of their girdles, and running in multitudes about
the streets, do thus in the picture despitefully dragge him at their heels,
damning the cursed memory of that most abhorred Traitor. But the truth is,
Christian religion bids us not to hate the men, but their sins; not their
persons, but their most heinous vices. And good reason: for not they so much as
their sins, their vices were they that betrayed and crucified the Lord of
light. The hypocrisy and covetousness of Judas: The obstinacy and
stubbornness of the Jews: The disobedience and blasphemy of the Pharisees:
The cruelty and ambition of Pilate, and the rest, were they that cut off and
slew that great Prince, the Messiah.

If therefore we abhor those most cruel murderers, that slew our SAVIOR, we
must then hate these vices: and if we hate them truly and aright, we will
detest and hate them alike, wheresoever, in whomsoever we find them; even
though we find them in our own selves: hate them here so much the more, by
how much we love our selves, whom they will destroy: At least no way spare, but
punish them: and if others for them, as indifferent Judges, do the same in our
own houses; prevent it in our own homes, our own consciences: with Job,
abhor our own selves; and with Daniel by fasting and afflicting our souls,
make our selves mourn for these and all other sins.

And surely, if Daniels fasts be thus dipped in our Blessed SAVIORS blood, then
are his Prayers no less: For those were but to sharpen these; to make him (and
us) as more sensible of our wants, so more hungry and thirsty after the
righteousness of GOD; more unwearyed and earnestly importunate in his
Devotions. The Body in want of its ordinary food, as it less clogs or hinders
the Divine Soul in her ascent to Heaven; so does the sense of such want in the
body make the Souls desire and longing more earnest; whilst by the
apprehension of her want in the one, she reflects upon her nakedness in the
other. The true reason, why fasting is both so necessary for, and so helpful
to all true and earnest Prayer. Surely Daniel even ordinarily (says the Text)
kneeled down, Chap. 6. ver. 10.
and prayed three times a day; that is, Psalm. 55.17.
with holy David, at Evening, Morning, and Noone day: Now, no doubt as his
Fasts, so his Prayers were doubled: yet both Fasts, Prayers, and Alms, and all
he now does, all are referred to CHRIST'S death and merits. We (says he) do
not present our supplications before thee for our own righteousness, Chap.
9.18.
but for thy great mercies, Verse 17.
Chap. 9.18. And again, Now therefore oh our God, hear the prayers of thy
servant, and cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary, etc. (...)

For the LORDS sake. Who this (...) is, is plain by David: by Daniel himself:
even by the Jews and Hebrews own witness: No other He, then the Son of man
(Dan. 7.13.) To whom was given Dominion, and Glory, and a Kingdom, Chapter
7.13.
that all people, and nations, and languages should serve Him: 14.
His Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, which shall not pass away, and His
Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.

Thus we see who this LORD, Chap. 9.26.
and what manner of Prince, the Messiah is: Who not slain for Himself, but
for all others: All others that pray to GOD, must (as Daniel) desire to be
heard for His sake only.

Though never so strict of life, never so holy, so just: yet (Daniel) claims
no right by any his own or others merit: No Mediator but one: only his
petition it is, to be heard For the Lords sake.

Thus whilst he mournes for CHRIST'S death, and his own sins, he unloades
them all on CHRIST'S shoulders: and whilst he beholds Our most Blessed
SAVIORS Cross, he lays more firm hold on His death and all-deserving merits.

And should not we do the same, who profess the same? Surely the Primitive
Fathers (whose Sons we are or ought to be) as they did now double their
devotions, and more earnestly by their Fasts intend their Prayers; so did they
(as Daniel) perform them all in His Name.

When they Prayed, the conclusion of all was, Through JESUS CHRIST our LORD:
even, as Daniel here, For the LORDS sake.

When they offered their spiritual Sacrifices of Prayers, Praises, or Alms,
they were offered all, not only in His House, the Church; but more peculiarly
at His Altar, His Table, as in remembrance of His Death and blood, giving them
and us all true life and virtue. Their Prayers were as referred to His Death
and Merits only; so all, at those very times, the times of His very Suffering.
Thrice each day as Daniel did: At nine a clock (their third) the entrance of
His Suffering: At twelve a clock (their sixth) the height of His Suffering: At
three of the clock (their ninth) the depth and consummation of His Suffering:
As it were at every corner of His Cross; at every dimension of height, depth,
or length: As Daniel did three times a Day: Two of them (being at least the
ordinary hours of Prayer for all nations, our ninth, and third) as indeed the
beginning and end of His most bloody Passion: to show, that Daniel and they
did, and we all must, place the confidence of our Prayers, Alms, and Fasts;
yea even all our best actions (if any good at all) in CHRIST only. For through
Him, Ephesians. 2.18.
we (and they) both have an access by one Spirit unto the Father. To Him
therefore with the Father, and the Holy Ghost; Let us at these, and at all
times give all honor, glory and praise, world without end.

FINIS.
Perlegi has Conciones, in quibus nihil reperio sanae fidei aut bonis moribus
contrarium, quo minus cum utilitate publica imprimantur.

Tho. Weeks R. P. Episc. Land. Cap. Domest.

Errata.
SER. 1. Page 9. lin. 19. food. read foot. p. 10. l. 20. if not only. r. if
not the only. p. 20. l. 4. Neubrigentius. r. Neubrigensis. p. 20. l. 10.
commanded spirits. r. damned spirits. SER. 2. page 44. Bethelohin. r.
Beth-elohim. p. 47. l. ult. Father of him. r. Father by him. p. 48. and Church;
r. and Churches. p. 59. Father of him. r. Father by him. p. 60. Psalm. 4. r.
Psalm. 40. SER. 3. page 71. (...), etc. r. (...), etc. p. 86. filled by
meditation. r. fitted by meditation. SER. 4. page 107. (...). p. 109. succeeded
them. r. succeed them. p. 123. (...) r. (...) p ibid. (...) r. (...) p. 124.
everlasting prayers of. r. everlasting praises of. p. 129. employing. r.
implying. p. 134. in marg. Bubuli. r. Bubulci. SER. 5. page 170. l. 19. dele.
under. SER. 6. p. 213. in marg. (...) r. (...) p ibid. in marg. (...) r. (...)
p. 215. in marg. (...). r. (...). p. 226. Fishes also, that has. r. Fishes
also, that have.


