THE WITCHES OF NORTHAMPTONSHIRE. Witches.
Agnes Brown. Ioane Vaughan. Arthur Bill. Hellen Ienkenson Mary Barber.
Who were all executed at Northampton the 22. of July last. 1612.



LONDON, Printed by Tho: Purfoot, for Arthur Johnson. 1612.

THE ARRAIGNment, Conviction and execution of certain Witches at Northampton,
the 22. of July last past.
Amongst the rest of sins wherewith the perfection of God is most of all
displeased in the corruption of man, There is none (I suppose) more distasteful
or detestable to his Purity, then this damnable and Deuillish sin of
Witchcraft; For that it seems to make an eternal separation, and an
irreconciliable divorce betwixt the pure Mercies of God, and the tainted souls
of such miserable people: Who for the most part, as they are of the meanest,
and the basest sort both in birth and breeding, so are they the most incapable
of any instruction to the contrary, and of all good means to reclaim them.

But as there are many, that remain yet in doubt whether there be any Witches,
or no, or any such spirits, who offer their service unto them, or rather who by
fained service do tyrannize over them: So to answer their doubts, would ask
a greater labor, and perhaps more art, and better experience then I intend, or
happily can show. Only this, that if neither those confutations that are
already learnedly set forth, Nor ancient records of the Witches called Druides,
in old time confinde into the Isle of Man, nor the ordinary reports of the
strange mischiefs done by the Witches of Norway might seem sufficient proofs
of this matter: Yet me thinks that the common experience, which our learned
and Reverend Judges of the Land, find daily in their yearly Circuites by the
conuictions of suth offenders, and the plain and manifest Evidences brought in
against them, who being in this this kind dangerously infected, have from time
to time stood forth upon their Arraignement, and as their ^ues have been held
to be the most detestable, so their deaths have been observed to prove the
most desperate, might put it out of question, that some such there be abroad in
the world, who by the damnable practice of Witchcraft have sold themselves to
the Devils seruies. In regard whereof I may conclude, that either it must be
granted that there are Witches both in name, and nature, or else the
Oppositors, that being (I suppose) more precise then wise, standing rather upon
the singularity of their own opinions, then the certainty of Reason or
Judgment, must needs do palpable wrong and open Injury to the discretions, or
consciences of our learned Judges, and the power and virtue of our Laws, in
the excecution of Justice, making that hated, and unheard off Tyranny, which is
done by the lawful power and virtue both of the Sovereign, and Subordinate
authority.

Some do maintain (but how wisely let the wiser judge) that all Witchcraft
spoken of either by holy writers, or testified by other writers to have been
among the heathen or in later days, has been and is no more but either mere
Cousinage, or Collusion, so that in the opinion of those men, the Devil has
never done, nor can do any thing by Witches. It may be, some will say, what
hurt can grow from this opinion? The hurt that may ensue and grow thereof, none
can tell that has not first seen somewhat by experience. We all see that one
kernel of Wheat being sown, a whole ear grows up, and sometimes brings
forth an hundredth kernils in it. If an error be planted, who can tell what
increase it* may yield in time? The ground does not bring forth the corn with
such increase as the heart of Man does errors. If we draw in one link of a
Chain, anether follows, and is by and by in sight, which draws we know
not how many after it, until we see the last. There is no Error that goes
alone, or that is not linked unto another. That holy Writ therefore (which
makes the Man of God perfect and perfectly instructed unto every good work)
must judge and decide the controversy in this case. Let us then stick unto
the same for testimony and proof.

What a Witch is, and the Antiquity of Witchcraft.
TO know things aright and perfectly, is to know the causes thereof. A
Definition does consist of those causes which give the whole Essence, and
contain the perfect nature of the thing defined: where that is therefore found
out, there appears the very clear light. If it be perfect, it is much the
greater, though it be not fully perfect, yet it gives some good light.

For which respect though I dare not say, I can give a perfect Definition in
this matter, which is hard to do even in known things, because the Essential
form is hard to be found, yet I do give a Definition, which may at the least
give notice, and make known what manner of Persons they be, of whom I am to
speak. A Witch is one that works by the Devil, or by same Deuillish or
Curious Art, either hurting or healing, revealing things secret, or foretelling
things to come, which the Devil has devised to entangle, and snare men's
souls withal, unto damnation. The Coniurer, the Enchaunter, the Sorcerer, the
Deuiner, and whatsoever other sort there is, are indeed compassed within this
circle. The Devil does (no doubt) after diverse sorts, and diverse forms deal
in these: But no man is able to show an Essential difference in each of them
from the rest. I hold it no wisdom, or labor well spent to travel much
therein; One Artificer has devised them all* They are all to one end and
purpose, howsoever they much differ in outward Rules for practice of them, that
is little or nothing besides mere delusion. Every Man will confess that the
father of lies is not to be trusted. Every man knows that all his doings are
hidden under coulorable shewss. Shall we then seek for stedfastnes in his
ways? Shall we be so foolish as to imagine that things are effected by the
virtue of words, gestures, figures, or such like? All those are doubtless but
to deceive, and draw men forward, and so plung them more deeply into sins,
and errors.

Touching the Antiquity of Witchcraft, we must needs confess that it has
been of very ancient time, because the Scriptures do testify so much, for in
the time of Moses it was very rife in Egypt, Neither was it then newly sprung
up, being common, and grown unto such ripenes among the Nations, that the
Lord reckoning up diverse kinds, says that the Gentiles did commit such
abominations, for which he would cast them out before the Children of Israel.
How long it was before that time cannot for certainty be discussed: Saving that
(as is said) it was not young in those days when Moses wrote. If we
mainetaine that it was before the flood, there is great reason to justify the
Assertion. We know that the Devil was exceeding crafty from the beginning,
always laboring to seduce, and deceive after the worst manner. If he failed of
his desire, it was because Men had not procured Gods displeasure to come upon
them, to deliver them over unto strange delusions, but God complains, that
men had wonderfully corrupted their ways, long before the Flood: God being
then provoked by the wickedness of the world, what should make us doubt but
that through his Just judgment the Devil had power given him and was let
loose, that he might seduce, and lead the profane Nations into the depth and
gulf of all abominable sins? Thus much concerning the certainety of
Witches, and the Antiquity of Witchcraft, This that follows shall in some sort
show their Diuil^ish practices.

The Arraignement and Execution of Agnes Brown, and Ioane Vaughan or Varnham
his daughter, who were both executed at Northampton the 22. of July last.
THis Agnes Brown led her life at Gilsborough in the county of Northampton, of
poor parentage and poorer education, one that as she was borne to no good,
was for want of grace never in the way to receive any, ever noted to be of an
ill nature and wicked (...) position, spightfull and malicious, and many years
before she died both hated, and feared among her neighbors: Being long
suspected in the Town where she dwelt of that crime, which afterward proved
true. This Agnes Brown had a daughter whose name was Ioane Vaughan or Varnham
a maid (or at least unmarried) as gracious as the mother, and both of them as
far from grace as Heaven from hell.

This Ioane was so well brought up under her mothers elbow* that she hanged
with her for company under her mothers nose. But to the purpose. This Ioane one
day happening into the company of one Mistress Belcher, a virtuous and godly
Gentlewoman of the same town of Gilsborough. This Ioane Vaughan, whether of
purpose to give occasion of anger to the said Mistress Belcher, or but to
continue her vilde, and ordinary custom of behavior, committed something
either in speech, or gesture, so unfitting, and unseeming the nature of
woman-hood, that it displeased the most that were there present: But especially
it touched the modesty of this Gentlewoman, who was so much moved with her
bold, and impudent demeanor, that she could not contain her self, but
suddenly raze up and struck her, howbeit hurt her not, but forced her to
avoid the company: which this Chicken of her Dammes hatching, taking
disdainefully and being also enraged (as they that in this kind having power
to harm, have never patience to bear) at her going out told the Gentlewoman
that she would remember this injury, and revenge it: To whom Mistress Belcher
answered, that she neither seared her nor her mother: but bad her do her
worst.

This trull holding her self much disgraced, hies home in all have to her
mother, and tells her the wrong, which she suggested Mistress Belcher had done
unto her: Now was the fire, and the tow met, all was enflamed: Nothing but rage
and destruction: Had they had an hundred Spirits at command, the worst, and the
most hurtful had been called to this counsel, and employed about this
business. Howbeit upon advise (if such a sin may take or give advise) they
stayed three or four days before they practiced any thing, to avoid
suspicion, whether the mother advised the daughter, or the daughter the mother
I know not, but I am sure the devil never gives advise to any man or woman in
any act to be wary.

The matter thus sleeping (but rage and revenge do never rest) within a while
was awaked, which Mistress Belcher to her intolerable pain too soon felt: For
being alone in her house, she was suddenly taken with such a griping, and
gnawing in her body, that she cried out, and could scarce be held by such as
came unto her, And being carried to her bed her face was many times so
disfigured by being drawn awrie that it bred both fear, and astonishment to
all the beholders, and ever as she had breath, she cried, Here comes Ioane
Uaughan, away with Ioane Uaughan.

This Gentlewoman being a long time thus strangely handled, to the great
griese of her friends, it happened that her brother one Master Auery, hearing
of his Sisters sickness and extremity came to see her, and being a sorrowful
beholder, of that which before he had heard, was much moved in his mind at
his Sisters pitiful condition, and the rather for that as he knew not the
nature of her disease, so he was utterly ignorant of any direct way to
minister cure or help to the same. He often heard her cry out against Ioane
Vaughan alias Varnham, and her mother, and heard by report of the neighbors
that which before had happened betwixt his Sister, and the said Ioane: In so
much as having confirmed his suspicion that it was nothing else but Witchcraft
that thus tormented his Sister, following Rage rather then Reason, ran
suddenly toward the house of the said Agnes Brown with purpose to draw both
the mother and the daughter to his Sister for her to draw bl^ud on: But still
as he came near the house, he was suddenly stopped, and could not enter,
whether it was an astonishment thorough his fear, or that the Spirits had that
power to stay him I cannot judge, but he reported at his coming back that
he was forcibly stayed, and could not for his life go any further forward,
and they ^eport in the Country that he is a Gentleman of a stout courage: He
tried twice or thrice after to go to the house, but in the same place where
he was stayed at first, he was still stayed: Belike the devil stood there
Centinell, kept his station well.

Upon this Master Auery being sorry and much ag ieued that he could not help
his Sister in this tormenting distress, and finding also that no physic
could do her any good or easement, took a sorrowful leave and heavily
departed home to his own house.

The Impe of this Damme, and both Impes of the Devil, being glad that they
were both out of his reach, showed presently that they had longer arms then
he, for he felt within a short time after his coming home that he was not out
of their reach, being by the deuillish practices of these two hel-hounds
suddenly and grievously tormented in the like kind and with the like fits of his
sister, which continued until these two witches either by the procurement of
Master Auery and his friends (or for some other Diuillish practice they had
committed in the country) were appr^hended, and brought to Northampton Jail
by Sir William Saunders or Co^esbrooke knight.

To which place the Brother and the Sister were brought (...) del^ous to
scratch the Whiches. Which Art whether it be but superstitiously (...) by some,
or that expertence has ^ound any power for help in this kind of Action by
others, I list not to enqu^e, only this I understand that many have attempted
the practicing thereof, how successively I know not. But this Gentleman and his
Sister being brought to the g^ole where theoe Witches were detained, having
once gotten sight of them, in their fits the Witches being held, by scratching
they drew blood of them, and were suddenly deliueted of their pain. Howbeit
they were no sooner out of fight, but they fell again into their old traunces,
and were more violently tormented then before: for when Mischief is once a
foot, she grows in short time so heaost^ong, that she is hardly curbed.

Not long after Master Auery and his Sister having been both in Northampton
and having drawn blood of the Witches, Ryding both homewards in one Coach,
there appeared to their view a man and a woman ryding both upon a black horse,
M. Auery having spyed them a far off, and noting many strange gestures from
them, suddenly spoke to them that were by, and (as it were Prophetically)
cried but in these words* That either they or their Horses should presently
miscarcy, And imediately the hor^s fell down dead. Whereupon Master Auery
rose up praising y^ grace and mercies of God, that he had so powerfully
delivered them, and had not suffered the foul spirits to work the uttermost
of their mischief upon men made after his image, but had turned their fury
against Beasts. Upon this, they both hyed them home, still praising God for
their escape, and were never troubled after.

I had almost forgotten to tell you before, that M. Auery was by the Judges
themselves in y^ Castle yard of Northampton, seen in the midst of his fits,
and that he strangely continued in them until this Ioane Vaughan was brought
unto him.

But now to draw near unto their ends, this Agnes Brown and her daughter
Ioane Vaughan, or Varneham being brought to their Arraignement, were there
indighted for that they had bewitched the bodies of Master Auery and his
sister Mistress Belcher in manner and form aforesaid, Together with the body of
a young Child to the death (the true relation whereof came not to my hands) To
all which they pleaded not guilty, and putting themselves upon the couutrey
were found guilty. And when they were asked what they could say for themselves,
why y^ sentence of death should not be pronounced against them, they stood
stiffely upon their Innocence. Whereupon Judgment being given, they were
carried back unto the Jail, where they were never heard to pray, or to call
upon God, but with bitter curses and execrations spent that little time they
had to live, until the day of their Execution, when never asking pardon for
their offenses either of God, or the world, in this their dangerous, and
desperate resolution, dyed.

It was credthly reported that some fort-night before their apprehension, this
Agnes Brown, one Ratherine Gardener, and one Ioane Lucas, all birds of a
winge, and all abiding in the Town of Gilsborough did ride one night to a
place (not above a mile off) called Rauenstrop, all upon a Sowes back, to see
one mother Rhoades, an old Witch that dwelt there, but before they came to her
house the old Witch died, and in her last cast cried out, that there were three
of her old friends coming to see her, but they came too late, Howbeit she
would meet with them in another place within a month after. And thus much
concerning Agnes Brown, and her daughter Ioane Varnham.

The Arraignement, Conviction and Execution of one Arthur Bill of Raundes in
the County of Northampton.
THis Arthur Bill, a wretched poor Man, both in state and mind, remained in a
town called Raunds in the County aforesaid, begotten and borne of parents that
were both Witches, and he (like a gracious Child) would not degenerate, nor
suffer himself to stray from his fathers wicked Counsels, but carefully trod
the steps that he had diuillishly taught him.

This Arthur Bill was accused that he should bewitch the body of one Martha
Aspine alias Ieames, the daughter of one Edward Aspine of the same town, to
death. But this matter remaining doubtful that it could not be clearly tried
upon him, he being strongly suspected before, by bewitching of Diverse kinds
of cattle, to be guilty of that crime, And being also publicly known to be
of an evil life and reputation, together with his father and mother. The
Justices and other officers (thereby purposing to try the said Arthur by an
experiment that (many think) never fails) caused them all to be bound, and
their Thumbes and great Toes to be tied acrosse, and so threw the father,
mother and son, and none of them sunk, but all floated upon the water.

And hereby the way, it is a special thing worthy general noting and
observation, that there are two signs or tokens which are tokens as more
certain, then others, to detect and find out Witches by. The one is the mark
where the Spirits suck, and the trying of the insensiblenesse thereof. The
other is their fleeting on the water. Concerning which though I dare affirm
nothing for certainty, there being (for ought I know) neither evident proof
in nature, nor revelation from heaven to assure us thereof: yet me thinks I
may say the like of this, as is held of the bleeding of a slain body in
presence of the mutherer. For as in a secret murder, if the dead Carkase be
at any time either seen or handled by the murderer, it does streitway gush
out of blood, as if the blood should by issuing forth in such strange manner
cry unto heaven for revenge of the murderer, God having as may seem
appointed, that secret supernatural sign for trial of that secret unnatural
crime, that the blood left in the body should thus appear, and as it were
challenge the murderer, for that blood which he before had felloniously
stolen from the body: so it may be, that God has appointed (for a
supernatural sign of the monstrous impiety of Witches) that the Element of
water should refuse to receive them in her bosom, that have shaken from them
the sacred water of Baptism, and wilfully refused the benefit thereof by
making that breach and fall from God in participating thus vildly with the
Spirits of Beliall: By whom and in the exercise of which sin, their hearts
are so hardened, that not so much as their eyes are able to shead tears,
threaten or torture them as you please: God not permitting them as may be
thought to dissemble their obstinacy in so horrible a crime; No not the women,
though that sex be ready to shead ^eares upon every light occasion: But to
return to our matter.

These three, the Father, Mother and Son, being thus seen floating upon the
water, the suspicion that was before not well grounded, was now confirmed:
Whereupon the said Arthur Bill being the principal or (I think) the only
Actor in this Tragedy, was apprehended and sent to Northampton jail the nine
and twentieth day of May last by Si^ Gilbert Pickering of Tichmas^ alias
Tichmase in the same County Knight, and presently after his commitment ^earing
that his old father would relent, and so happily confess that which might be
prejudicial unto him, sent for his mother to come unto him, to whom bewraying
his mind, they both joined together, and bewitched a round ball into the
Throat of his Father, where it continued a great while, his Father not being
able to speak a word. Howbeit the ball was afterward had out, and his Father
proved the principal witness against him.

His Mother for fear of hanging, (not any hatred, or detestation she bare
unto the sin) many times fainted, and would often pitifully complain unto
her Spirit, that the power of the Law would be stronger then the power of her
art, and that she saw no other likelihood, but that she should be hanged as
her Son was like to be: To whom her Spirit answered, giving this sorry
comfort, that she should not be hanged, but to prevent that, she should cut
her own throat: She hearing this sentence, and holding it definitive, in
great agony, and horror of mind and conscience fell a rauing, crying out that
the irreuocable Judgment of her death was given and that she was damned
perpetually, cu^sing and banning the time wherein she was borne, and the hour
wherein she was conceived.

Her Neighbors often hearing her bitter execrations bad her call upon God, and
to be sorry for the sins which she had committed, But she could in no case
endure to hear it: And having thus for 3. or 4. days tormented herself in
this Agony, at last she made good the Devils word, and to prevent the Justice
of the Law, and to save the hangman a labor, cut her own throat.

Her Son being all this while in prison, and hearing of his Mothers death,
and that his Father was become a witness against him, was much perplered in
his mind, that his Mother was dead, in whom he most trusted, and his Father
living, whom he most feared, Howbeit he stiffly stood still in the denial of
every thing, pleading nothing but his innoceney, Notwithstanding that he had
before at unawares confessed, that he had certain Spirits at command, which
being employed, would do any mischief to any man, woman or child that he
would appointe.

It said is that he had three Spirits to whom he gave three special names,
the Devil himself sure was godfather to them all, The first he called
Grissill, The other was named Ball, and the last Jack, but in what at shapes
they appeered unto him I cannot learn. For Devils can appear both in a bodily
shape, and use speech and conference with men. Dur Savior says, That a Spirit
has neither flesh nor bones: A Spirit has a substance, but yet such as is
invisible, whereupon it must needs be granted, that Devils in their own
nature have no bodily shape nor visible form, it is moreover against the*
Truth and against Piety to believe, that Devils can create, or make bodies or
change one body into another, for those things are proper to God.

It follows therefore that whenever they appear in a visible form, it is
no more but an apparition and counterfeit show of a body, unless a body be at
any time lent them. And when they make one body to bear the likeness of
another, it is but a color. Some man will say, what reason is there to show
they can do so much, being of an essence invisible? We may not stay here
within the limits of our own reason, which is not able to comprehend, what way
Devils should be able to work such operations. We may not (I say) measure
their power, and subtilties in working for our own capacity and understanding:
But we must look what the Cannon of Scripture does testify in this behalf.
We have manifest proof that the Devil can take a bodily shape. For when
Aaron had cast down his staff, and it was turned into a Serpent, The
enchaunters of Egypt cast down their staves, and they became Serpents, which
was indeed but in show, and appearance, which the Devil made, For he deluded
the Senses both in hiding the form of the Staves, which indeed were not any
way changed: As also in making a show of such bodies, as were not. This was
done openly, otherwise it might be thought to be a mere illusion. For we see
that men in extreme ^ickenes, think they hear a voice, and see a shape,
which none other in presence either hears or sees, some are so melancholy
that they imagine they hear and see that which they do not: For Satan does
so delude the fantasy, that the party supposes that his very outward senses
do perceive the matter: But here was no such thing. All that were with Pharao
did think ther^ were very Serpents in deed, Saning that Moses and Aaron did
know it the iugling of the Devil.

But to return to this Arthur Bill: He (miserable man) lying in prison from
the 29 day of May to the 22 of July following, many resorted to him, willing
him to leave off all color and dissimulation, and not to suffer his Conscience
to double with his Tongue, But to clear his heart and his thoughts before the
Maies^ic of him, to whom no secrets are hid, That the world might be witness
of his confession and contrition to pray with him and for him, For although he
had wandered and gone astray, he might by his true contrition and their hearty
prayers be brought unto the fold again.

But his Conscience being feared, and his heart steeld, could receive no
impression, but stood like an Image of Adamant, more easy to be broken in
pieces, then be peirced. In this obduracie of mind and Spirit he continued
until the ^ssises where being Arraigned for several crimes committed, but
especially for the Murder of the said Martha Aspine, contrary to the peace of
our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown, and dygnity, he pleaded to them all
not guilty, and putting himself upon the Country, was by them found guilty.

Upon the verdict whereof, his countenance changed, and he cried out, that he
had now found the Law to have a Power above Justice, for that it had condemned
an Innocent.

It seems to me that these vilde Spirits, which these Witches have at
command, and by their employment are suffered to have power to hurt the bodies
of others, have a greater Power over them that set them a work, For they do
not only feed upon them participating with the blood of humane flesh for the
redemption whereof Christ shed his own precious blood, But it appears that
they have also power even over their Souls, leading them into wandering
by-waies, and such erroneous Laberinths, that in the wilful obstinacy and
perverse sufferance of their own minds to stray in this dangerous desert of
obduracie, they are lost for ever.

But to conclude with this Arthur Bill, that se ill concluded with the world,
He being brought to the place of Execution, and standing upon that fatal
stage for offenders, pleaded still his innocence, that Authority was turned to
Tyranny, and Justice into extreme Injury, to the great wonder, and disdain of
all the lookers on.

Thus with a dissembling Tongue and a corrupted Conscience, he ended his
course in this world, with little hope or respect (as it seemd) of the world to
come.

The Arraignement, and Execution of Hellen Ienkenson.*
THis Helen Ienkenson dwelling at a Town called Thrapston in the County of
Northampton, was noted a long time to be of an evil life and much suspected of
this crime before her apprehension, for bewitching of Cattle and other
mischiefs, which before time she had done.

This Helen was apprehended for bewitching of a Child to death, and committed
to Northampton Jail the 11 of May last by Sir Thomas Brook of Okeiy Knight. A
little before whose apprehension, one Mistress Moulsho of the same Town (after
she was so strongly suspected) getting her by a wyle into a place convenient
would needs have her searched, to see if they could find that insencible mark
which commonly all Witches have in some privy place or other of their bodies.
And this Mist^is Moulsho was one of the chief that did search her, and found
at the last that which they sought for to their great amazement: at that time
this Mistress Moulsho had a Bucke of clothes to be washed out. The next morning
the Maid, when she came to hang them forth to dry, spyed the Clothes, but
especially Mistress Moulshoes Smock to be all bespotted with the pictures of
Toades, Snakes, and other ougly Creatures, which making her aghast, she went
presently and told her Mistress, who looking on them, smild, saying nothing else
but this; Here are fine Hobgoblins indeed: And being a Gentlwoman of a stout
courage, went immediately to the house of the said Helen Ienkenson, and with an
angry countenance told her of this matter, threatening her that if her Linen
were not shortly cleared from those foul spots, she would scratch out both her
eyes: and so not staying for any answer went home, and found her linen as
white as it was at first. This Helen being brought to the bar, and being
indicted of the murder of the Child, pleaded thereunto not guilty, but the
verdict being given up against her, she cried out, woe is me, I now cast
away, But (like the rest) did stoutly deny the accusations, and said that she
was to die an Innocent, I think as Innocent as the rest: And at the place of
Execution made no other confession but this, That she was guiltless, and never
showed sign of Contrition for what was past, nor any sorrow at all, more then
did accompany the fear of death. Thus ended this woman her miserable life,
after she had lived many years poor, wretched, scorned, and forsaken of the
world.

The Arraignement and Execution of Mary Barber.
THis Mary Barber of Stan^^^^ in the said County of N^rthampton was one in whom
the licentiousness of her passions grew to be the Master of her Reason, and
did so conquer in her strength and power of all virtue, that she fe^l in the
Apostasy of goodness, and became diuerted, and abused unto most ^^de actions,
clothing her desperate soul, in the most ugly habiliments, that either
Malice, Envy, or Cruelty could produce from the ^^ndnesse of her degenerate,
and deuillish desires. As she was of mean Parents, so was she monstrous and
hideous, both in her life, and (...). Her education and barbarous nature never
promising to the world any thing, but what was rude, violent and without any
hope of p^^portion, more then only in the square of ^^^iousnesse. For out of
the (...) and blindness of her seduced senses, she gave (...) to all the
passionate and earthly f^^^ies of the flesh and followed all the (...)
vanities, and C^^meras of her polluted and unreasonable d^^ghts, forsaking the
Society of Grace, and growing enamored upon all the evil that (...) or (...)
(...) minister to her ^icious desires: (...)

As appeared by her bewitching a man to death, and doing much other hurt and
harm to diverse sorts of cattle in the Country. For which she was committed to
Northampton jail the 6 day of May last by Sir Thomas T^^ham, and the same and
many other matters being plainly and evidently manifest and proved against
her by good evidence, she had the sentence of death, worthily pronounced
against her. In the time of her imprisonment she was not noted to have any
remembrance or feeling of the haynousnesse of her offenses or any remorcefull
tongue of the dissolute and deuillish course of her life.

The prison which makes men be fellows and chambermates with thieves, and
murderers (the common guests of such despised Innes and should cause the
im^^^oned party like a Christian Arithmetician ^o number and cast up the
account of his whole life, never put her in mind of the hateful
transgressions she had committed, or to consider the f^^th and leprosy of her
soul, or entreat heavens mercy for the re^ea^e thereof. Prison put her not in
mind of her grave, nor the grates and locks put her in remembrance of hell,
which deprived her of the joy of liberty, which she saw others possess: The
iangling of irons did not put her in mind of the chains where with she should
be bound in eternal torments, unless heavens mercy unloosed them, nor of the
how^ing terrors and gnashing of teeth, which in hell every soul shall receive
for the particular offenses committed in this life, without unfeigned and hearty
con^r^^ion. She never remembered or thought she must ^ie, or trembled for fear
of what should come to her after death. But as her life was always known to be
deuillish, so her death was at last found to be desperate. For she (and the
rest before named) being brought from the common jail of Northampton to
Northampton Castle, where the Assizes are usually held, were severally
arraigned and indicted for the offenses they had formerly committed, but to the
inditements they pleaded not guilty: Putting therefore their causes to the
trial of the Country, they were found guilty and deserved death by the verdit
of a credible Jury returned. So without any confession or contrition, like
birds of a feather, they all held and hanged together for company, at Abington
gallows hard by Northampton, the two and twintith day of July last past:
Leaving behind them in prison many others tainted with the same corruption,
who without much mercy and repentance are like to follow them in the same tract
of Precedencie.

FINIS.

