An Apologicall Epistle: Directed to the right honorable Lords, and others of
her Majesty's privy Counsel. Serving as well for a Praeface to a Book
entitled, A Resolution of Religion: as also, containing the Authors most
lawful Defense to all estates, for publishing the same.

The Argument of that Work is set down in the page following.

Printed at Antwerp with license, the five and twenty day of March, 1601. Stilo
novo.

The Argument of the book entitled, A Resolution of Religion, promised, and
defended in this Epistle.
THe Resolution of Religion being divided into two parts, entreats in the
first, of the absolute Necessity of a Divine worship, against all Atheists,
Epicures, Doubters, or Deniers thereof: proouing as well the most infallible
certainty and preeminences of this supernatural Reverence, as the manifold
gross absurdities of that unnatural and profane People. Secondly, it
demonstrateth against Jews, Pagans, Mahumetanes, and all external Enemies of
Christ, that only the Religion which he taught is true, and all others,
blasphemous, and overwhelmed with manifest and intolerable errors. In the
second part it shows by above an hundred unanswerable Arguments, against all
Heretics, and internal Adversaries, that among so many professions of Christ,
only Catholic Roman Religion is true, and delivered by him, and all others,
especially the Protestancie of England, not only by all those Reasons, but by
their own grounds and proceedings, false and damnable.

IHS MAR



To the right honorable Lords and others of her Majesty's privy Counsel.
RIght Honorable and renowned Regents: If the first created Ruler in earth, had
not broken the Rule of his Creator and supreme Ruler in Heaven, unruliness
had not entered, Superiors had not found so many disorders to reform;
Inferiors had wanted so grievous causes of complaint. For when by that
infinite, and inerrable power of God, Genesis c. ^. eccle. ^ 39. Marc 7. Ge^ 2
Genesis 3. Eccles. Iraen. li. 3. Haer. Chrysostom hom. 1^ in Genesis Basil. in psalm 48.
Gregor. Nazian. 4. de pasch. Hilar. hom^ de Job. Ambro^ lib 6. exam. c. 7.^
Gregor. in c. 10. Luc. Ang. lib. 14^ ciuit c 26. lib. d^ quaest. vet. and
nou^testam. q. 19.
all creatures were framed in perfection; man, as he was made according to his
similitude, and to be his Viceroy over this inferior world, so he was
constituted far more perfect than the rest; replenished with all kinds both of
spiritual and corporal favors, and had an especial Charter of privileged
ability (had he not wilfully lost it) to be enfranchized from all defects of
soul or body, defended from the first by the armor of original Justice, and
exempted from the second by refuge and sanctuary to the tree of life. In that
happy condition and estate, no infirmity had been bewailed, no error in the
understanding, no froward affection in the will, no King, Senate, Council, or
Ruler had been entroubled with rules of Reformation; no subject had
complained, no man had been injured; For, where no offense, either against
God, or man, no disobedience of the inferior appetite to Reason, or of Reason
against her Ruler had reigned, nothing could be amiss, to be complained of by
the one, or corrected by the other.

SECT. I. The frailetie and pronenesse of man to sin, after the fall of Adam.
But after our protoparent made forfeiture of that tenure, and broke conditions
with God, our Writ of Privilege was revoked, and City of refuge taken away,
and humane nature left to it self, naked, and disabled among so many enemies,
and allurements of iniquity, came to that impotent and poor degree wherein we
are; insomuch, that Philosophers, and such as were only conversant in natural
affairs, proving by pitiful experience, the still continuing and uncured
scarres of that combat, ignorance, error, concupiscence, sin, sickness,
death and other afflictions which they found in themselves, and unacquainted
what they had lost in their first ancestor, Aug. lib. 4. contr. ^ulian. Cicero
lib. ^. Reipubl. Clem. Alex. lib. 3. ^trom. Plutarch. ^b. nature. amor. ^a rent.
and l. in^ust. animal. Plin. ^rooem. li. 7. hist. ^actant. firm. l. o^fic. c.
3. and 4.
deplored the state of man so much, that they affirmed Nature only in the
production of him, behaved her self like a stepmother, and not as a natural
mother; such were the complaints of Cicero, Homer, Empedocles, Heraclitus,
Plinius, and others: and it was the primordiall stumbling block to the
blockish and beastly Epicures, (as Lactantius witnesses) to deny the
providence of God, and all religion of man unto him. And although this
complaint was unjust, and proceeded of ignorance, yet the wound which was then
inflicted, has so festered in the whole posterity of Adam, 1. Cor. 15.
that until this corruptible has put on incorruption, and this mortal,
immortality, and death, (whose companions they are) is swallowed up in
victory, in the triumph of our glorious resurrection, there is no hope of
cure. And touching sin and iniquity, which as it was the most deadly and
deepest sore, so most to be bewailed: the transgression of the first
law-breaker was so venomous a seed, to bring forth wickedness, and
disobedience in the race of man, that never any lawmakers, magistrate, or
superior, Job 9. Romans 3. Romans 2. Psalm. 50 Romans 5.2. Reg. 12. Job 7. Philip.
Bergom hist. fol. 7. Iosep l. antiq. Polidor Virgil. de inue^ l. 2. c. 1.
Diodor. l. 6. Virgil l. 4. ^ ne^d. Plin. l. 7. Stowe, Grafton Fab. Foxetom
spiritual or temporal, either by example in themselves, as a president to
subjects, or any law, ordinance, reward, or preferment for virtue, penalty and
punishment for vice, or any other engine or instrument could root it out; no
Bohemas among the Bohemians, no Tuball among the Spaniardes, no Belus among the
Assyrians, no Ceres or Rhadamanthus, no Draco or Solon among the Athenians,
Mercurius among the Egyptians, no Minos, Lycurgus, Charandes, Phoroneus,
Romulus, Pithagoras, or Apollo among the Cretensians, Lacedaemonians, Tyrians,
Grecians, Romans, Italians, Arcadians, no Mulmutius Dunwallo, Alfrede, Edward,
or any other politic or virtuous king, ruler, or lawmakers in England, or any
other Nation could weed it up: Genes. 3. and 4, 7* 12, 19. Job ^ Exodus Leuitic
Number. Deuteronomy.
neither any spiritual law promulged and delivered, either by Adam the first,
which knew best the difference of the estates of innocence and sin, having
proved both, and preached it first to the primitive world, or Not to those
that were drowned in the deluge, or Abraham, Lot, Job, Moses to the Cananites,
^53. Job 19. ^^b 2. and 4. Act. Hebr. 9. and 11. Timoth. 2.
Sodomites posterity of Esau, or others. And Christ Jesus the son of God,
wisdom of his Father, and God himself, the most prudent lawmakers, perfect
exemplar, and president without all sin, and exception, although he became
our Priest, sacrifice, and redeemer, and offered so rigorous a ransom, that
the least drop of his immaculate and invaluable blood, or the meanest of his so
many infinitely meritorious operations, had been both able and worthy, to
have washed away and cleansed, not only the malice and venom of sin, but
the whole poison and infection of all other infirmities and defects, yet it
pleased that divine wisdom to leave them as a perpetual penitential memorial
of our former demerite, Corinth. 1. ^atth. 20. ^ar. 10. ^phes. 1. and 4.
to continue in this state of pilgrimage; and as they were contracted in our
first fall from innocence in Paradise, so perfectly to be removed in our last
resurrection to endless glory and happiness: so that all times and places more
or less have been infected with infirmities, all sexes and ages, men, women,
and children (except some one or few excepted by a special writing of divine
exemption) little or much, originally and actually have been defiled. ^m. 5.
psalm. 50. ^eg. 12. ^p 4. ^4. ^ab. in Genesis Thom Aqui. ^. q 61 magis. ^ist. 2.
scholast. (...). Genesis 3. (...). 1.18, 19. (...) c. 8.
The law delivered to Angels was transgressed in heaven. If we follow the
common opinion, that Angels were created in that imperial Palace; the Law
given in the state of innocence was broken in Paradise, the unwritten Law
under the Patriarckes, the written Law of Moises the Evangelical and most
perfect law of Christ has too often been violated in earth. Of this all ages,
times, and places have complained, God and Angels from heaven complained,
Exodus 16. and 32 Genesis 13. Number. 2^ Prou. 20. Is. 3.59 Hierem. 7.16. Amos 5. Ose
4.^ Romans 5. Galat. 3 Jacob. 1. Senec.
careful and virtuous Kings, Regents, and Governors have complained, the
Patriarchs before the Law, the Priests and Prophets under the Law, Christ his
Apostles, and all holy men in the time of grace, and remedy of original
offense have complained. The first man complained, the last will make
complaint; and (as Seneca says) hereof our elders before us have complained,
we complain, hereof they which live after us will complain.

SECT. II. How this age of Protestants exceeds all others, both in respect of
errors, and practical impieties.
YEt notwithstanding all this (most honorable Peers) the unfortunate deluge
and inundation of manifold notorious impieties, that have surrownded and
ouerflowed the manners and conversation of all men, estates, times, and places,
where it made irruption, since the violent streams of strange doctrines Martin
Luther brake out into the world, has left so manifest unclean arguments in
the lives of those it invaded, that I am bold to affirm, this unhappy age
since then, has hatched far more errors and heresies in the understanding,
and brooded up more other sins and wickedness in the will, and executiue
powers of men, then ever any age or generation did in the school or regiment
of Christ and those which professed him. I will pass over the complaints of
Catholics in this controversy, lest they might be had in suspicion, and in
the cause of Protestants use their own witness for evidence. ^at. in parl. 1.
Eli.
In England, the Protestants have a rule, the Court of Parliament, and her
Majesty's Supremacy, to keep in some kind of unity, those, that will not be
in double degree of disobedience; ^rrors and sects ^ong Prote^ants.
first to the Catholic Church, which they have forsaken; secondly, their
Princes proceedings, to which they have made submission. And yet I appeal in
this question, ^owe histor in ^e year 1551. ^554. and 1561. ^o^lensh. Graft.
^oxe and Regist. ^ondon. Norw. ^nod. Land. anno ^62. stat. 13. ^iza. art. 1.
art. 2. art. 3. art. 4. art. 5. art. 7. art. 26
to our Protestant historians, to the Records and Registers of London,
Norwich, and other Cities, to the first Protestant Synod under our Queen
Elizabeth, subscribed twice by all Protestant Archbishops, and Bishops of
England, ratified by her Majesty, and confirmed in parliament to be
authentical, wherein so many heresies and infidelities then reigning in our
Country, are condemned; what Arrians, Eunomians, Vigilantians, Nestorians,
Eutichians, Gretians, Donatists, Iouinians, Henricians, Wicklefists,
Berengarians, Catharists, Anabaptists, Maniches, Ialians, Aerians, Brownists,
Barrowists, Ketists, Antichrist^ damned Crew, Pretenders of themselves to be
Prophet yea Christ himself, Epicures, Atheists, and oth^ have been disclosed
in this time, and remain to this day, as justly may be suspected.

What errors are like to be in Germany, the mother and nurse of this unlucky
child, where both the temporal and spiritual regiment are diverse, having no
common rule among them, every man may conjecture, ^h. to. 3. Ient. ^ma fol. 340
^ol. 144 Nich. ^l in thesib. ^hol. Selnecc. com. in psalm. 131. and praef. in
catalog. council. Alberus contra Carclo 1. Swing contra Luther. Tolsan Schutz
(...) serpent. antiq. Georg Hamfeld in mon^rat. Sle^ dan histor. lib. 1^
Mansieldens in confess fol. 89. and fol. 226. and ^7 Calvin ep. so. 57 See Casp
Vlenb. l. 22. cause. c 9.
and the Works of Luther himself, Nicolaus Gallus, Selneccerus, Alberus,
Swinglius, Schutz, Hamfield, Sleidan, Calvin, and other chief Protestants
bear testimony, every one condemning other to hell for heresy and
infidelity, in the greatest questions of justification, Sacraments, original
sin, free will, predestination, of faith, of the Law, of the Gospel, of the
nature of Christ, his discension into hell, ascending to heaven, his glory
there, properties of the divine and humane nature, of penance, confession,
resurrection of the body, mediatorshippe of Christ, and other essential
things. Such be the Lutherans, Antinomians, Stancarians, Maierists, Flaccians,
Synergists, Adiaphorists, Vbiquitaries, Substantiarians, Accidentarians,
Anabaptists, Carolostadians, Swinglians, Oecolampadians, Puritans
Caluinopapists, Clancularians, Politickes, Causarians, Consistorials,
Nonconsistorials, Muncerians, Apostoliks, Separates, Catharists, Silentiars,
Enthusiasts, Ectasists, Free brethren, Adamites, Hutites, Augustinians,
Monasterians, Bocaldians, Hoffmanists, Georgians, Memnists, with the rest,
amounting to the number of two hundred and three score known Sects, by the
computation of Caspar Vlenbergius, Casp. Vlenber. 22. Cause. Rainold. Caluin^
Pantal. in Oec^ lam and apud Cas^ Vlenberg.
and others above twelve years ago; and who will doubt, but the number is
far greater, than he, or any private man could gather together; especially
if he considers what Oecolampadius (that so highly esteemed Protestant,
calling him self the light of the house, as his name in Greek which he took
does signify) writes within nine years of the reue^. of Luther, that there
were then about seventy seven divisions and dissentions among them? And no
wonder, where every city, town, borough, and almost village, or particular
person, has, or may have at pleasure, a particular religion; which Luther
himself was not ashamed to write to the Citizens of Antwerp, within eight or
nine years of his new doctrine, Luther ep. ad Antuerpens. tom. ^. Germ. Ient.
fol. ^01.
in these words. There be almost so many Sects and Religions among us, as
there be men: there is no Ass in this time, so sottish, and blockish, but will
have the dreams of his own head, and his own opinion accounted for the
instinct of the Holy Ghost, and himself esteemed for a Prophet. What the flood
of practical impiety has been in England, Practical sins among
Prote^ants.
I appeal for trial hereof to the testimony of Judges, Records of Courts,
Indictments, Judgments, and Executions, in most foul and unnatural offenses;
for matters of dissentions, disagreements, and contentions between Lords, and
Tenants, Tenant and Tenant, Lord and Lord, and other unkind proceedings among
kinsfolks, brethren, parents, and children, and such unnatural suits and
debates, to the courts of law, where they be still depending and increasing; to
the newly and strangely increased number, and rich estate of so many Lawyers,
grounded upon other men's losses, quarrels and unquietness; and your Honors
far more often than your Catholic predecessors, have been molested with
the hearing, examining, and condemning disordered riots, ^ut. in Perliam. ^.8.
from an. 23 ^. Ed. 6. and stat. izab.
and misdemeanors. Lastly, I call for my record herein, the public statutes
and acts of Parliament, since the reuolte of king Henry the eight from the Sea
of Rome, unto this day wherein, (without fear) I affirm that more vices and
insufferable abuses in all kinds of people, not only unknown heretofore in
Catholic regiments, but intolerable in any Pagan, or Ethnicke commonwealth,
both for number and strangeness, have been recorded and condemned, then ever
were in all the Parliaments of her Majesty's christian predecessors; the laws
be extant, I have compared them, every man may examine my comparison. Edict.
Geneu. Edict. Basil Wittember. Pet No renbergens. ad Carol. 5. Imperat apud
Sot. 4. sent. and Diego de stell Com. in Luc. Luther colloq. mensal. Germa
folio 224
For foreign countries I cite the Edicts, complaints, decrees, and provisions
of the Protestant Princes, and free states of Germany, Switzerland and other
places; or if the testimony of the prime Apostles of Protestancie, Luther,
Calvin, Andreas Musculus, Iacobus Andreas, John Riuius, and such may be
admitted, you shall hear their own words. Luther affirms, that the scholars
of his School, for the most part, are Epicures, and only seek to spend their
days in pleasure. Calvin. ep. ad H^phel ser. 10 and sermon. 30
Calvin speaks of his fellows in these terms, They are portents and
woonders of Knaves, such as are no where else to be found, they are called
reformed, when they seem indeed rather to be devils incarnate. The saying of
Musculus is this; Andreas Musculus libro prophet Christ: 1
The matter is come to that pass among them (speaking of his fellow
Protestants) that if any man desires to see and behold any company of knaves,
usurers, dissolute persons, and deceitful men, let him enter into any city of
Professors of the Gospel, and he shall find enough of such: among Pagans, Jews,
and Turks, and other infidelles, men can scarcely be found so disobedient or
stubborn among whom all honesty, and whatsoever does savor of virtue, is
dead, and no reckoning is made of any sin. Jacob Andreas conc. 4 de planet.
fol. 140 141
Iacobus Andreas utters his opinion of them in this manner, among them no
amendment or emendation is thought upon, they live an Epicurean, and altogether
beastly life, in place of fasting, a custom of eating, and excessive rioting
in banqueting, and bawdery has succeeded; in place of alms, oppression and
extortion over the poor; for prayer, blasphemy against the holy name of God.
instead of humility, pride, elation, and most filthy exceeding superfluity.
^ohn Riuius ep. And Mauric. Duc. ^. ^xon. in l. de ^oenit.
Io. Riuius says, that the wickedness of the^ has increased to the
astonishment of all men; No man seeks after God, no man blusheth at the
violating of his commandments, every man's life is polluted with great sins,
and wickedness. I dare affirm (says he) that in this corrupt and wretched
age of ours, all manner of vices have so increased, that hardly greater
wickedness can be: for what sin or wickedness at this day is wanting, ^t c.
4. sup.
which if it reigned, this age might be said to be more ungodly for that
respect? and although to judge rightly hereof, in every age there has been
riotousnesse, sumptuous feastings, costly dinners and suppers, surfeiting,
drunkenness, whoredom, adultery, oppression, injury, neglecting of well
doing, and other such wickedness, which every man in his time has found
fault withal (as Seneca says) and no age that has been void of sin: yet
looseness of life, neglect of order, and discipline, outrageous wickedness,
has in this our age so increased, and gotten strength, that it appears even
Atheism and Epicurisme has invaded the life of man, ^n Praefat. sup.
and as it were, bears dominion among Christians, laws take no force, lust
rules altogether: for what? think you they believe the soul is immortal,
who live in manner as beasts? or be they persuaded there be either rewards for
the godly in heaven, ^en. Sim. de Lu^he^ fid. page 324 ch^md. cont. Germ in
verbo Christ. Luc. 21 ^uc li. 1. de Reg. Christ. c. 4. Wi^ and in adm. bon. ^
mal. Germ. 11. ^al.
or punishment in hell appointed for sinners, who in every thing dread not to
violate the commandments of God, and run altogether headlong into sin, even as
though they did either think, that God were but a vain and fained thing, or
believe, that when the body dies, the soul likewise perishes, and comes
unto nothing. such be the testimonies of Nennon, Simonius, Schinmideline, and
others of the chiefest original Protestants, of their fellow professors. I
will cite more hereafter, when I will prove those which give this evidence of
the rest, to be worst of all themselves.

SECT. III. How all these errors and abuses proceed by disunion from the
Catholic Church.
WHerefore that which so many private and public writings affirm abroad, and
at home, which every man sees and feels to be true, and those principal
Protestants recorded of their Disciples, in the prime and flourishing time, the
very zenith and highest of their exaltation, when the reformers of others
should have given some example and show of reformation in themselves, I trust
it will not be offensive for me, a Catholic subject of England, after so many
years of experienced increase of their impieties, and in their withering and
decaying age, every thing with them growing worse and worse, to affirm to be
true. Then (most Noble) as ordinary effects proceed from ordinary causes, so
extraordinary and strange things (such as this kind of iniquity, so wicked,
so universal, and erroneous is) must have some unwonted cause, more than is
usual in christian men. I will not be so severe a Sentencer against them, as
their confederate John Riuius is, to say, that they be Atheists, Epicures, and
deniers of the souls immortality, and thereby thinking there is no religion
in the world, no life after death, no reward of virtue, or penalty for vice
have given themselves over to all kind of sin. Neither will I enter to so
bloody a judgment in this place (reserving it to be discussed hereafter)
against these men, Conuoc. Land. ^nno Dom. 1562 ^rt. 12. Qu. Eliz. ^etters pat.
stat. ^n parl. 13. Eliz. art. a. Resolut.
as their own general and common approved doctrine, especially in England,
that true faith and good works are inseparable, condemns such men for
infidells, and misbeleeuers. But to reserve these and such arguments as may be
enforced by that which is spoken, to their proper place, and prosecute my
present intent; it is manifest by the Babilonical division, which is in the
understanding of this people, that they have forsaken the true faith, religion,
and rule thereof, which can be but one; and by the gross impieties which have
taken so quiet possession of their lives, that they are so far from al
interest, either of reforming errors of the mind, or abuses of life in others
(by which in the beginning they claymed title to a new religion) that they have
been the only cause of so many infidelities, Atheismes, Epicurismes,
Iudaismes, Mahumetismes, and other intolerable sins, and offenses which are
daily by their own confession before, practiced among them: for when and where
the infallible rule and censure of supernatural difficulties is denied, and
every man left to his own private deduction, and deceiptfull judgment, far
unable to descipher supernatural mysteries, what hope can be had of truth?
what probability of agreement? who will be encoraged to seek for verity,
where it is impossible to be found? If it were in natural arts, and sciences,
which be connaturall, and proportionable to humane capacity, if there were so
many opinions, diverse and contrary, as are among them in religion, so that
before he could follow any, he must learn to confute all the rest, what man
would willingly profess that art as true, though it were never so gainefull,
if it were obtained, about learning whereof there is such dissension, that
three hundred to one he should be deceived? By that reason, in Arts, Alchimie
of making gold is ordinarily refused, having brought so many to error and
beggary, by the uncertainty thereof, although in it self it is wonderful
commodious. For matters of antiquity, the diversity of opinions about the
original of the Brittans in this land, has caused many to think there never
was any Brute at all. Hierom. lib. de vir illustr. l raen. lib. 3 c. 3. Eusebius.
lib. 2 hist. c. 14. Arnob l. 2. contra Gent. Epiphan. haer 27. Chryso. in psalm.
48. Paul. Oros l 7. hist. 6. Leo ser. 1. de natal apost. Ignat. ep. ad Romans
Dionys. Corinth. apud Eusebius. lib. 2. Egesip. lib. 3. exe. ca. 2. Theodoret.
epi. ad Leon. Ter tull. li de prae. script. Lact. lib. 4 Ambr lib. 5. ep.
Sulpit. lib. 2. hist. lib. 7. etc. Synod. Land. artic. 6.
It is as manifest both by all Histories and Monuments, that Saint Peter lived
long and died at Rome, as that William of Normandy surnamed the Conqueror came
into England, and subdued it, or as any such antiquity can be; and yet because
(as Protestants say) there is difference between Saint Hierome, Orosius, and
Fasciculus temporum, about the time of his coming thither, (although they
agree with the rest, that he lived and died there) some Protestants are not
afraid to affirm he was never at Rome. For a like cause, the whole Protestant
Clergy of England in their authorized Convocation, deny the Books of
Machabees, Judith, and Tobias, to be canonical scriptures. So it chances in
Sciences, where controversy and multiplicity of opinions is. Then how much
more true is it in things so elevated above natural understanding, as the
mysteries of religion be? What a palpable provocation and allurement of
delightful atheism, epicurisme, and infidelity is it to carnal minds, to
see so many divisions, and no agreement? For can any one particular voluptuous
man or other in judgment think himself wiser than so many great companies
and congregations as he is most sure are all deceived? And if he should
adventure to believe, and be religious, as others do, there is odds, three
hundred to one, he shall be brought into error, because he sees so many
religions erected and defended, against whatsoever he shall choose to follow,
the pleasures he should forsake are certain, sensible, and forcible to move
affection; that which he should believe is most uncertain, ineuident, and
without motive to be followed, as it is proposed in these men's proceedings.
Barnard. Lutz. ^catol. haer.
Or if that man be of reading and judgment to consider former times, he shall
find four hundred more religions contrary to any that is now professed in the
School of Protestants; so that it will more than double the former danger: and
the same man shall understand, that the Catholic Church, for whose election,
calling, preserving from error, and consummation, the whole mystery of Christ
was wrought, Council. Florent. ^n union. Council. Constable. in Wick. Husse etc.
Council. Trid. John 3. Revel. 21. Luke 5 ^. Tim. 3. John 14. and 16.
has condemned and utterly extirped all those four hundred, and by the same
infallible authority, and censure in diverse general Councelles, where the
whole christian world was assembled, reproved, and anathematized those that
reign in Protestants: So that if a man in case of religion, will deny the
voice of that spouse of Christ, that pillar of truth, and society assisted by
the promise of Christ, from falling into error, it is evident, that a thousand
to one he shall shall be seduced and damned. Who then will wonder if many infidels
and atheists are entered among these men, when at the worst their atheism, and
that only in the end, can bring but to damnation; and in the mean time brings
al pleasures and delights; and their professing of religion in such uncertain
manner: first, most certainly depriueth of those plesures, and 1000. to one
brings to the same damnation? Or who will marvel if those that be not come to
this, perfection of policy, and nullifidianitie (as I trust there be but few,
one being too much in a christian nation) be far more careless, negligent, and
undutiful in living well, then such as do live in the unity of the whole
Catholic world, wherein there never was, or is any disagreement, or
contradiction in matters of believing. For if (as I showed before) a man might,
would, or should, in reason, doubt to give assent to any religion, where there
was so manifest and apparent danger of a false election; if it be true in a
speculatiue consent of faith, only exacting an agreement of the
understanding, how much more doubt and difficulty will be made, for men of
reason to adventure so great pains and labors, as holy Scriptures prescribe
to be used for obtaining heaven, when by reason it is evident, before they
begin, that a thousand to one, al their labors will be lost, and their
endeavors rewarded with euer-during damnation in hell? Will any man now muse if
the song of Epicures is so often tuned, and so much impiety put in practice?
If it were in the execution of daily and ordinary affairs, no man would
labor much for that, which so many affirm he could not get, but contrariwise,
every one in reason should and would contend for principal preferrement and
commodity, which all men grant he might obtain: he that by consent of all,
has undeniable title to a kingdom, or meaner dignity, will refuse no
adventure to win it; he, whom all, or most deny to have such interest,
either will not at all, or faintly take it in hand, having little or no hope to
bring his attempt to pass; even so in these spiritual affairs. For although
the Crown and inheritance of heaven proposed to Christians, is incomparably
more excellent, than such terrene preferments; yet being a spiritual and
supernatural reward, and not so proportionate to the manner of humane
knowledge, and affection in this life, (depending of sense and imagination) as
temporal aduauncements and pleasures are, and being so uncertain, improbable,
or rather impossible to be obtained, as these men make it, it can be no matter
of admiration, that so much wickedness does rule, and so few adventure so
certain and painful a work, for so uncertain and doubtful recompense.
Lact firm. lib. 1, 2 ^iu. instit. Andr. de la cur. ^ist. Turc. ^eonic. Chal.
^cond lo Fab. ^arth. Georg. pe^egr. lib. de afflict. Christi etc. Mich. ^oirer.
lib. 1. bell. ^anon. man.
Thus it always chanced in temporal things, so it ever did, and will come to
pass in questions of religion, whether it be true or false. The Idolatrous
state of the Gentiles when they were most divided for their diversities and
placalities of gods rites, and sacrifices, were far more wicked, then when
fewer pretended title to be worshipped. The Mahumetans, though ever lewd and
impious, yet after the Persian schism and divisions among them, they daily
fell to be more wicked than before; and the Jewish people sometimes the true
servants of God, and religious, Bact. lib. 2.3. Reg. 12, 13, 1^
so long as they remained in unity among themselves, after they were divided
into Sects, became more careless of serving God, as is manifest, not only in
the schism between the houses of Roboam and Jeroboam recorded in holy
Scriptures, but most evident in their last desolation. For at the coming of
Christ (the time of the Messiah being expleated) they were divided into many
Sects and Religions, who should be he, and what they should believe. So that,
besides Christians the true worshippers, there were, Job 2. See Caes. Baron,
tom. 1. Joseph. li 17. antiquitat. 8 li. 18. c. 1. etc. 2 lib. 20. c. 26.
at that time, in that nation, Samaritanes, Pharisees, Sadduces, Essenes,
Baptists, Herodians, Galileans, Ezechians, Atongists, Theudists, Egiptists,
Barrownosbonists, Vespasianians, and other sects, whereby that nation so
virtuous and religious, when it was united in true worship, was come to that
carelessness of religion, and living well, that they were drowned and
overwhelmed in such monstrous and erroneous iniquities, Joseph. lib. 7. b^
Iudaic. c. 7.
that their own Historian Josephus affirms their sins to have been so
great, that if the Romans had not come to take such extraordinary reuengement
upon them, he did think; Authiatu terrae deuorandam fuisse ciuitatem, That
their City Jerusalem would either have been swallowed up of the earth, or
drowned with some deluge and inundation, or be consumed with fire and
lightnings as the Sodomites were. In like manner it always happened in all
times, places, and persons polluted with heretical Sects and divisions, as all
Antiquities and Historians witness.

SECT. IIII. The scope and intent of the Author to teach a most undoubted
certainty and unity in religion.
WHerefore (right Honorable) as it is so evident that it can not be denied,
but such troops of errors and impieties have embatteled themselves in the
camp of Protestants, and by ample reasons may be had in just suspicion, that
many doubters, or rather deniers (at least in affection) of all Worship, as
ever in like times have been, are entered in: So, seeing contraries are, and
must be cured by contraries, and certainty and true unity in religion is the
only remedy of such intolerable and profane abuses, as have proceeded from
want thereof, I have written a co^pleate confutation of all enemies to true
reverence, of what condition soever, Atheists, Epicures, and such as be deniers
of all worship; or external infidells and adversaries of Christ, Pagans, Jews,
Mahumetanes; or internal ennemies as the heretics of all ages, either past,
present, or to be hereafter, which I have named, A Resolution of Religion,
because therein, not only all doubts and difficulties, either pretended by
any of those misbeleeuers, or by any means to be imagined, or conceived, are
loosed and resolved, but every article and question of that most holy and
approved Religion, which I defend, is solued from all errors, and resolved to
the most assured and infallible word and revelation of God, which by no
possibility can either be deceived in himself, or be cause of error unto
others. Whereby every point and proposition of religious duty will be proved
to be so certain, that no infidel or false believer can make it doubtful. So
certain as Saint Chrysostom writes, Chrysostom. homi. 8 in ep. ad Romans Augu.
lib. 7. Confess. c. 10.
as any natural demonstration is; or to follow saint Augustines phrase so
undoubted, that a man in judgment should sooner doubt, whether himself does
live, than call any article of that faith into question. So that, as nothing
can be more holy, credible, and worthy to be believed, then that doctrine
which I am to teach; so nothing can be more irreligious obstinacy, and
wilfulness, than to deny, and not embrace it: and as great madness to follow
any other false profession, being as resolutely proved, that they are all most
vain, false, erroneous, and resolved to the lying spirit of the Devil, and
wicked deceivers and seducers.

SECT. V. The certainty, excellency, and dignity of Catholic Religion.
AND lest any Reader should marvel, that in a time of so great question and
uncertainty of true Religion, I should so peremptorily undertake to so great
personages, and with so much security, to show any Religion so undoubted and
certain, as I have assumed: Resol. part 1. tract. 1. arg. 1, 2, 3 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9. Philip. Bergom. hist. Fox tom. 1. Mon. part. 2. chro.
I do not mean thereby, any of those erroneous professions, either affirming
or denying reverence. Not the blasphemous impiety of Diagoras, Lucretius,
Epicures, and Epicurians impugning all Religion, to whose sacriligious lives
and sentences, God and all creatures are so repugnant; to which all reasons
dissent; to whom no Argument or authority of any Country, City, Town,
Villadge, or particular man, not mad with passions, or frantickly distracted by
pleasures, in so many thousands of years, as the world has been, and in so
many kingdoms and countries thereof, Resolut. Relig. part 1. tract 2.1 argu 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6 Mahum. in Alcoran. Thal. Iud. Pet. Maff hist. Ind. Lact. 7. firm.
libt. diu. instit.
yet agreed. Neither any of those Infidelities of Jews, Mahumetanes,
Brachmans, and Pagans so often by that Religion I will defend, both
miraculously and otherwise confuted and condemned by their own confessions;
and withal, maintaining either pluralities, or corporeitie, mutation, change,
and dishonorable imperfections in God, to whom Religion is belonging, have in
all reason spoiled him of all worship, and reverence, for none can be due to
such a God or Gods as they imagine: besides so many irreligious errors against
the light of nature it self, which are impossible to be taught of God, and yet
be rewarded in the chiefest Rules of these Religions. Resolut. Relig. ^art 2
arg. 1, 2, 3 ^que ad 114. and ^tim.
Neither any of so many hundreds of expleaded, or now reigning heresies, or
any that shall arise hereafter, not the Religion of Martine Luther so often
professed, and both privately and publicly recanted, altered, changed,
doubted, and redoubted by himself, Fox tom. 2. Monum. fo. 971, 972 Luther to.
2. Ger. Ient. folio 9. and in colloq. mensal. folio 10. and to. 1. Ient. Germ.
fol. 4. colloq. mensal. fol. 244. fol. 158 and fol. 273. Sur of holy
discipline. Hamelt. hist. Fox tom. 2. fol. 1486.
as his own works and all protestants do witness, neither of licentious
Calvin, and a few artificers of Geneua, or of Knekes that gally slave of
Scotland, or of Edward Seymer duke of Somerset, or King Edward the sixth, a
child of nine years old, without any assent or assembly, either of parliament
or other (as Fox himself is witness (the will and testament of K. Henry the
eight being violated, and his Bishops and Clergy committed to prison, or
deprived. Neither of the Protestants of this time, which without disputation,
or advise of any learned or parliamentall divine (all such then deprived) by
the consent of some unlearned Noble men, Stowe hist. anno 1. Elizab. statut. 1
Elizab. cap. 1
Knights of Shires, and Burgesses of the towns of England was enacted and
decreed. Nor any other builded upon the deceitful deduction of any private
man, or framed upon any such feeble and false foundation: for so I should
commit my self, and bring my Readers to the same pitiful danger, whereof I
complained in those professors. But I defend that Religion and Worship, Bellar.
in Chron pantal. in chron. Philip. Barg. hist. Tom. Council. Resol. Relig. part
2. per mult. arg.
which all most learned and virtuous men of the whole christian world, as well
privately by themselves, as twenty times gathered together in general
Counsels, have ever concluded out of holy Scriptures, which many thousands of
national and provincial Sinodes, every one of far more authority than any
Protestant assembly, all universities, colleges, schools, and places of
learning, the Laws of all christian Princes, spiritual and temporal have
decreed. For although we ordinarily defend the infallible definition of POPES
in controuersiall questions of Religion, when Counsels and such Remedies
cannot be called and used; stat. Elizab.
as in temporal, yea spiritual causes the Queens Majesty by her new taken
prerogative proceeds without Parliament; yet all doubts and difficulties
between Protestants and us, Resolut. Relig. part 2. argum. scrip. trad.
we defend as defined in general Councels out of holy Scriptures, and yet the
definition of any Pope in such cases, by all moral judgment, is impossible to
be false: for never any did, or does, or will define any sentence, but that
that was, or shall be the common opinion of al schools, and universities, with
the assent of the best learned of the world, and such examination, as the
difficulty to be adindged requires. I defend that Religion, which only is
ratified by all authority, all Scriptures, Traditions, Prophets, Apostles,
Evangelists, Sybils, Rabbis before Christ, all holy and learned Fathers,
Historians, Antiquaries, and Monum. al Sinodes, Councels, Laws, Parliaments,
Canons, and Decrees of Popes, Emperors, Kings and Rulers, all Martires,
Confessors, and holy witnesses, by all friends and enemies, even Mahumetans,
Jews, Pagans, Infidels, al former Heretics, Schismatikes, and these
Protestants themselves, when they were most probable to speak the truth, and
al testimonies that can be devised, not only in this world, but of God, of
Angels, and glorified souls, whose evidence cannot be untrue; of Devils and
damned souls in hell, condemned for their contempt or negligence thereof, of
souls in Purgatory, and whatsoever can be cited for witness in such cases; as
will be most evident in my particular arguments, not only of the Titles here
recited, but many others. I defend that Religion which has confuted al
foreign adversaries, Atheists, Epicures, Jews, Pagans, Mahumetans, Magicians,
Bernard. Lutz. ^atol. haer.
Philosophers, which has conquered and left without memory, above four
hundred Sects of internal and domestical heretics, subdued all nations, and
brought to subjection, all that have opposed themselves against it: not any
Religion builded upon the deceitful and vain conjecture, or blown abroad
to be believed, with the whirling spirit of private men, Luther tom. 2. germ.
Ient. f. 101 part 2. Resolut. arg. 18, 19, 20, 21 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 79, 80,
etc. Sur. of holy discipline Peter Frarin. orat. cont. Sectar. Cocl. in vit.
Luth. Stowe hist in H. 8 Fox tom. 2. Mon. in Henr. 8. Grafton in cod. Sleid.
comment.
Quot capita, tot religiones, so many heads, so many religions, as Luther
said, unlearned, deniers of Scriptures, and their sense, at their pleasure,
liers, deceitful, false translators, corrupters and forgers of holy evidence,
deuisers of new Doctrines for temporal pleasures, and respects, to be exempted
from obligation, and vow of obedience, chastity, poverty, to be obeyed, live
in lasciviousness, and pomp of wealth, without any other argument at all, as
those innouators did. But a Religion founded upon the most certain and
infallible word and revelation of God, expounded by those undeceivable Rules
before remembered, and that holy and euer-during society and Church of Christ,
for which he gave himself, and ordained Religion; where so much virtue is
practiced, such obedience, chastity, poverty, and contempt of all impediments
of heaven is vowed, and professed, which society, if it might err, no
preseruance of true Religion is to be hoped: for where none should truly
believe, all should be in error. I defend that religion which in all times and
places has been witnessed and approved with such Arguments, as are disabled
to be untrue, by infallible and undeceivable signs, by thousands of
supernatural miracles and wonders, which by no means could be counterfaite,
or falsely reported, So many naturally incurable blind restored to sight,
deaf to hearing, lame to going, sick to health, dead to life, by most famous
and notorious known Catholics, or Papists, (as it pleases Protestants) which
all Philosophers agree, no natural cause or art of Devils themselves could
bring to pass, neither God grant unto man, for confirming falshoode. Not that
Religion, Luther saep. in disput^ Lypsic. Luther l. de Miss. ang. tom. 6. lent.
Germ. folio 281 c. 5 folio 485 to. 2 folio 77 colloq men's. Germ. folio 274, 275
Bed. l. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 hist. Greg. l. Dialog. Palad. l. hist. Fox tom. 1.
Monum. Pantal. chr. Cocl. in vita Lutheri, vita Calum. Stowe in chron.
which as it was taught of the Devil, father of lies, as the Authors
themselves shall witness, and certainly by all arguments of reprobation,
condemned them, their fellows and followers to hell. But that which by all
testimonies and vndeceitfull arguments, brought the professors thereof to
heaven, and the most earnest and zealous therein, as religious Heremites,
Monks, Freers, Nuns, Priests, Bishops, Popes, as all Calenders, Histories,
and approved Records give evidence, to the greatest happiness. Not that
Religion which made those that before were good, chaste, obedient, and contem
ners of the world, to be wicked, and given to al impiety, as their own
writings witness; but that Religion which those it reclaymed from false
worships, Hier. in vita parr. Eusebius in histo. pantal. in Chron. Foxc tom. 1.
Mo. Bed. li. 1, li. 2, lib. 3 lib. 4, lib. 5 hist. Greg. lib. 1, 2, etc.
Dialog. Greg. tu^ 10 Ruff. socr. Sozomen. tom. 2. Sleid. contra Fox Book of
Articles anno 1562 stat. H. 8. Ed. 6. and Elizab. Reg. Iniun. stat. Book.
made them so holy and such Saints, that all creatures have done homage and
duty unto them; the sea and waters against nature supported them, the wild,
savage, and devouring beasts adored them, the ravening fowls in deserts
nourished them, the winds, tempests, air, fire, earth, all elements, simple,
compounded, sensible, and insensible things, the Diuelles themselves those
triumphing and tyrannical enemies against humane nature commanded and
ouer-ruled by authority, with trembling obeyed them. Not a Religion tossed and
tennised up and down, with so many bounds and reboundes, choppes and changes,
universally both in head and members, containing so many falsities by their
own proceedings, so many contradictions in essential things, as there be
essential questions. Neither, do what it could, having the temporal sword
and all jurisdiction in it self, has hitherto condemned us, such as I will
prove the Religion of English Protestants, Resol. Relig. part 1. arg. 5, 6, 7.
and others to be; but a Religion which in this space of almost 1600. years,
never changed one point of Doctrine, never admitted error in faith, or the
least contradiction therein, either in Decree of Pope, or confirmed Council,
but clearly condemned and confuted all misbeleeuers. Not a Religion, that
contrary to the name, nature, and office of true Religion, separateth man from
his God and Creator, by so many sins and iniquities, and yet has no grace no
Sacrament for men of reason and actual offenses, no means or preservative to
prevent them, no help or remedy to redeem them; but suffers man to lie
laden under so mighty a mass of impieties, and to be drowned in hell (for
that instrument of their justifying faith can be no benefit to them, Part 2.
Resolu. Relig. arg. 1, 3, 4, 5.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 12
which as before by their own grounds have no faith at all; and as I will
demonstrate hereafter, have not one property or condition of true believing,
or matter tending to man's salvation.) But that Religion, which as it teaches
and counsels the way of perfection unto all, by renouncing Honors, and
wealth, 1 Timo. 6.1. cor. 7. luke 9.
the Temptations and snares of the Devil, as the Apostle calls them, by
professing Chastity, more perfect and better then the matrimonial state, as
the same saint Paul witnesses, and by abnegation of a man's own will, and
forsaking terrene and temporal dignities, which might hinder his heavenly
journey, such as our Savior his Apostles, the Primitive Church, all reason and
experience teaches to be the path of perfection, and readiest way to Heaven;
when, and where nothing is left to hinder it. Matthew. 28. Mark 16. Romans 6.
Gala. 3.1. Peter 3. Acts 2.8.10. Coloss. 2. Acts 8 and 19. John 14, 15, 16
Art. 11. Council. acel. 1. c. 8. Ar. 2 17. Council. 6. gener. Floreut. Trident.
John 20 Trid. sesi. 14. c. 1 6. Florent. in Bull. Eng Jacob 5. Florent. in
union. Arm. Trident. 5 14. 1 Acts 6. and 13 1. Tim. 4. Romans 12 1 Cor. 12 Hebr.
6. Council. Calce. c. 2 Council. Bta. 2. cap 3 Council. Triden. 5.23.2, 3
Ephesians 5 council. Trid. fess. 24 can. 1. Eucarist. ^p. 1. Tertull. lib. ^2.
conc. Carth. 4 ^c. 13. Ambros. ep. ^70. Ciril. ep. 1. c. 4 Innoc. ep. 9.
That Religion, which taking compassion of the frailetie of man to sin, in
every state has a stay to keep from falling, and a remedy for those that have
offended. For the state of all, until they came to such discretion and
judgment, as may be cause of sin, the Sacrament of Baptism, both taking
original offense away, and arming the soul against new and actual infection.
To confirm the former grace of that tender age, and enable us against so many
temptations and persecutions as Christians have, the Sacrament of Confirmation.
To feed and foster all estates in the whole course and circuit of this life,
the food of divine Eucharist, and Sacrament of the most holy body and blood of
Christ: and (seeing all are subject unto sin) the Sacrament of Penance, for
the cure and comfort of all offenders. And because the agonies and temptations
at the time of death be urgent most against us; the Sacrament of Anointing, or
extreme unction, to remove the relickes of sin, and give strength in that
extremity, And for the particular helps and assistance of particular states,
particular Sacraments; the Sacrament of Orders to dignifie the calling of
Clergy men, and make them worthy and fit instruments to perform so many holy
and supernatural functions, as are belonging to that preeminence. And lastly,
for the consolation and defense of married people, such as encomber themselves
with the cares of the world, and practical life, the Sacrament of Matrimony,
giving grace and strength against the difficulties and cares of that condition.
No state, no sex, no age, no time, no place, order, or degree among men is
left unprovided of spiritual comfort, and protection. Not a Religion, whose
grounds and principles overthrow all christian and true Religion, where God is
made author of all sins, and thereby worthy no Religion, where the decision
of spiritual doubts appertain to temporal and unlearned Princes, men,
Resolut. part 2. argum. 5.6. stat 1 Elizab. 13. Eliza. 5. Elizab. Com. Book.
Conuoc. London. 1562.
women, or children; where such sentences, although never so much disagreeing
even to them selves, and apparently false, must be obeyed for the infallible
word of God, where man has not liberty and freedom of will, where our good
works are necessitate, where the predestination of God takes away all
election and indifferency; By which, and such like positions, as Protestants
teach, it follows, that no Article of Religion can be certain; no Religion
can be; nothing is to be accounted sin, nothing reckoned for virtue. For who
can certainly believe that, which most certainly is uncertain or false? or
who can either praise or discommend, that which is done whether the doer will
or no? How can such actions be rewarded or punished? How can that soul be
immortal, and perform religion, which should want free and reasonable
operations, the arguments and pledges of immortality? But I defend a religion
so measured, as before, that by no possibility any Decree can be untrue, a
Religion that so concordeth the eternal praescience and predestination of God,
with the temporal cooperation of man, that it both leaves the first
infallible, and yet proves the temporal action, appetite, delight or consent
to any things, to be voluntary, free, and in the power of man, to be effected
or omitted, praised or discommended, rewarded or punished, as the nature
thereof deserves. Not that Religion which has raised such dissentions, that
it has taken all unity and communion of Saints away, divided the millitant
and triumphant Church, and dishonored both, depriving Angels and glorified
souls of that honor their excellency and dignity with God requires, men in
earth, the militant church of that help and assistance it needs, and always
had from them, as inferior causes from superior, all pity and compassion of
those that live and be in state of merit, from the patient Church of the
faithful departed, and spoiled them of that relief they ever received of
those that live, and made such hauoke and confusion even among the living, that
no man regards other, every one almost of a different and divided mind from
the rest in these things, and never at concord with himself, but upon every
new conceit differing from his former assertion, in continual combat and
controversy with his own will and understanding; and so no communion and
participation one with an other, no care of offense, and injuries, no mind of
satisfaction for wrongs and iniustices, no co^bination of comembers, no
penance, no restraint from sin, where the passion of Christ has bin so long
vaunted and triumphed of, that except in most sacrilegious and blasphemous
swearing by the instruments of our redemption, no memory at all thereof is
left; no sign or token to put us in mind, no image or representation, no
commemoratiue sacrifice, or signification of so many pains, miseries, and
mysteries, as our Savior endured and wrought for our redemption; where no
order or hierarchicall subordination, no consecration, or distinction of
callings and vocations is, Statut. Elizab.
except the letters patents of a temporal Prince can give that to others,
which is not, and cannot be in the giver. But that Religion, which as it is
united, and one in it self, in earth consists of a most perfect
hierarchicall regiment, of Pope, Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests,
Deacons, Subdeacons, Acolathists, Exorcists, Lectors, and other Under-officers,
every one in his room and dignity, and the meanest of all, by calling and
consecration, of greater honor than any ministerial preferment among
Protestants, being no real thing, but an ens rationis, an Idol of the mind,
as the making of Pursuvants, Apparators, and such Officers appointed by others;
where our POPE which is so odious in England, is so ample in jurisdiction in
all the world, that no temporal Prince christian or infidel, no ruler or
professor of regiment in ecclesiastical and spiritual causes, at this time;
or any heretofore, either is, or was' by many degrees possessed of so large a
regime^t^ And our private Priests, namely, the most reverend and learned
Fathers of the Society of JESUS, (so contemptible in our country,) are
honored of the greatest Princes of the world, and by their preachings and
pains have added so many kingdoms both to the spiritual regiment of Christ,
and temporal government of Catholic kings. Our Catholic kings be most
mighty, and they which regard us most, the most rich, puissant, and greatest
Princes of the world. Our religion religeth and binds together, (as the name
imports) not only kingdoms and men in earth, but God, and his Catholic
servants, the triumphant, militant, and patient Church; no duty is omitted, no
compassion or pity wanting: where the mystery of our redeeming is so esteemed
and remembered, that no festiuitie, no office or part of divine service is
celebrated in the year, but represents unto us one benefit or other, no
ceremony is used in the holy sacrifice of Mass, no action of the Priest, no
ornament or attire he wears, no benediction he gives, no sign of the
Cross he makes, but has his religious signification, and preaches unto us;
his introite to the Altar, his actions there, his return from thence, the
very vestments wherewith he is adorned, the putting of them on, the wearing of
them in that celebration, his putting them off, his Amice, Albe, Girdle,
Manciple, Stoale, Vestiment, and all he uses, speak nothing but Christ
crucified, the manner of his oblation, the cloth wherewith he was blindfolded,
the white garment put on by Herod, the cords and whippe wherewith he was
bound and scourged, the purple vestment wherewith he was deluded, and that
mystical and most holy sacrifice, his bloody and cruental oblation upon the
Cross; no action, gesture, prayer, or the least ceremony, either in word or
deed, silence, or otherwise, but brings a religious lesson and meaning, and
tends to instruction; no benefit that Christ bestowed upon man, from the
first instant of his conception, left unremembered, but one time or other
celebrated. Not that Religion which denies al things, and properties of
Religion, as their opinions all negative do witness, that has taken away and
converted from common and spiritual religious uses, to private and temporal
pleasures and preferments, all monuments, and foundations of devotion, and
places of religious exercise, leaving, and using nothing necessary to man's
salvation. But that Religion whose opinions against these men, are all
affirmative, professing devotion, and one act of piety or other; that has
founded Churches, Schools, Colleges, Monasteries and places, where Christian
learning ever was, or is exercised at this day: that observes all things, and
wants, or omitteth nothing belonging, Resolut. Relig. part. 2.
or that can be required to true Religion. I defend that most holy and
religious worship, which I will prove by above an hundred arguments, and all
kind of invincible reasons, divine and humane, natural and supernatural, to
be the only true and lawful reverence which we owe to God, by which we were
labij vnius, Sleid. com anno 1517. Stowe hist. in H. 8. Pant. in Luth. etc.
spoke one language, and one Religion, until that confused Babel was begun
in Germany, from whence so many different tongs, and confusions in Religion
have proceeded.

SECT. VI. What moved the Author to dedicate his Work to the Council.
WHerefore, right Honorable, although the ends and offices of a religious and
spiritual common wealth be distinct and diverse, from those of a temporal and
civil government, wherein you are supreme Lieutenants under our gracious
Princess; and in that respect, matters handled in the one, do not so properly
appertain to the judgment and redres of those, which rule in the other, but
are to be decided and reformed by the governors of that profession, to which
they are belonging; yet as the glory of the first cannot commonly be
maintained, without the favor of the second, so this cannot rightly be ruled
without direction from the former, for where there is no greater or more
forcible motive to keep in order, but fear of temporal correction, (for no
temporal magistrate can punish eternally or after death) which is only a
bridle against public and notorious offenses, which may be denounced and
proved by witness, as every civil magistrate must proceed, secundum allegata
and probata, as matters are, and can be alleged, and proved, and that which
cannot so be determined, can neither be punished or condemned; but in secret
men may practice all impiety without controlement, if no Religion and dread of
a divine majesty by his infinite wisdom knowing, and by his immutable justice
punishing secret sins, were to keep in awe. Therefore, as this cause I have
in hand is the most honorable of all, that can be entreated, so I am bold to
offer this introductory Epistle and defense thereof, to your honors, the most
honorable and noble consistory of our nation; and as it is most necessary to
be considered, in regard of duty to God and man, which it teaches, so I tender
it to you, the supreme Deputies of our gracious Sovereign, whose chief care
and solicitude must be, in taking order for such causes; because you are
Christian magistrates, and take upon you the defense of the law of Christ,
which I here maintain; because you are sworn Councellers to assist our
Princess, whose chief style and title is granted to her father King Henry the
eight, by Pope Leo the tenth, ( defendor of the faith) for defending the
Catholic Roman Religion against Luther, Fox tom 2. mo^ mon. in Henr. 8. Stowe
hist gest. Leon. 10.
that Archprotestant, which I here defend, and to prevent all suspicious
censures, and conceits of such as will imagine, I go about to present a work
unlawful by those laws, whereof you pretend defense, in that respect you are
the highest, wisest, and most honorable patrons of the laws of our Country, I
humbly pray pardon under your protection, to publish this work; because it is
confirmed and demonstrated, not only by all ancient laws of England, al laws
Papal, imperial, princely, national of foreign countries, and former times,
but the present forcible laws of England, established by our Qu^ Eliz. to
which I will prove, Resolut. Relig. part 2. arg. 5, 6, 7
only that Religion I defend to be conformable, and others repugnant, and
thereby condemned. Wherefore most Hh patrons (for I must challenge this title at
your hands) be my protectors, the piety of my cause and complaint enclines to
mercy, our unjust persecution under your predecessors requires amends; and I
hope at least shall receive toleration, by you hereafter, the law of nature,
the laws of all nations, of all Princes of England it self in that state it
is. The law of God calls upon you, and brings evidence of this obligation,
to which you are bound, when you were newborn, and ruled by others, you vowed
it in Baptism, now you are rulers of others, both them which so justly demand
it, as those which should, (and many would) so willingly yield it, your promise
to God, to his Church, to your Country, is to be performed, many, or most of
you being of age, and discretion, in the time of Queen Marie, have practiced
and professed it, so many of your noble company, Book of the order of the
Garter: the oath of the knights. Mag. Chart. Stowe hist. 1. Elizab.
as are admitted to the honorable order of the Garter, have sworn it, you are
all sworn counselors to our Queen, which by title of inheritance, and at
here coronation by the oath and fidelity of a Christian Prince, has obliged
her self to maintain it, of that which is her office, your place professes
performance, your vow to God, obedience and voluntary submission to his church,
fidelity to Prince, promise and duty to Country, compassion to unjustly
oppressed, calls upon you to see it done. I demand but justice, by those
laws, which my Prince, her nobles, and other subjects your predecessors, and
you have enacted. For your wisdom you were chosen to govern; your mercy
exalted you, where you may and ought to exercise most compassion; justice and
equity have advanced you to that high seat of equal judgment: as you are
wise, as you are merciful, and must be just, take pity upon just complaints.
And by the same titles I humbly crave you condemn me not, before I have
showed worthy cause of reproof. Never any Catholic subject of England
hitherto, has so much abused your Honors, dishonored the cause of his
religion, for which we daily undertake so many troubles, and disgraces, or
disgraced and discredited himself, to make so bold a challenge, except he
were able to perform it; and my confident assurance is, I shall not be the
first unhappy and unadvised man to do it. Pardon noble Patrons, peremptorily
without al exception I undertake, to prove directly, not only by all other
arguments, but by the Parliament laws and proceedings of Qu. Elizab. that the
Religion those men profes as confirmed by the^, is false, even by them, and
that we defend, to be true, even by those grounds and decrees. I will prove
thereby, That Christ is really present in the blessed sacrament of the Aultare,
Resolut. part 2. argum. 5.6.
that Saints and Angels are to be reverenced, and prayed unto, that there is a
Purgatory, that prayer, alms, and other good deeds are available for the
faithful souls departed, which had not perfected penance and satisfaction in
this life, that only faith justifies not, that good works are meritorious
before God, that there is an external Priesthood and sacrifice in the church
of Christ, that we are not justified by an imputative justice, but grace and
justice are inherent and internal things, that the Sacraments of Christ give
grace, that there be seven Sacraments in number, Baptism, Confirmation,
Eucharist, Penance, Extreme unction, Orders, and Matrimony, and all other
matters of moment in controversy between them and us. Which when I have
performed, no objection can be made against the allowance of my petition. And
because I was sometimes demanded of your predecessors in that place, being
conuented before them for professing this Religion, I still defend, what reason
should move me, then very young in years, borne of parents conformable to the
time, in, and under the Protestant regiment of Queen Elizabeth, brought up in
that University and other places which were always least favoring of that
belief (all which things were either known before, or acknowledged by me to
that assembly) to be of a different and contrary opinion, when if I would have
been of the same profession, I might have been regarded as others of my
condition: to whom (as I hope) my answer then was sufficient for my own
private so doing. So now lastly, for that cause, I humbly entreat license,
to direct these reasons, which I have gathered in that question, both for the
excuse of my self, and others, to your Honors, their successors in that
court of judgment, although far more merciful moderators in such causes.
And that I may give full assurance, I do it not to vpbraid any of your
Honorable society, but only to make my account and complaint to them, in
whom I have reposed most hope of relief. There is not now one left alive, to my
knowledge, that was then of the privy Counsel, or present there, except your
poor suppliant, such is the variable course of earthly things. Wherefore my
humble suit to your Honors, is, that you will, not only accept of this my
poor present, which for those reasons I have alleged, your wisdom, piety,
mercy and justice will not, may not, cannot refuse to do; but as you are in
the highest degree of credit with my Soueraign, so to be a means to her, and
as you can rule the rest, to give but indifferent and deserved defense against
those which unjustly shall dislike it.

SECT. VII. The Authors particular defense of his writing to all estates, and
first to her Majesty.
THen (noble Patrons) be my defenders, in this my so just and godly cause,
excuse my attempt to my Princess and Queen, let not my doings be offensive
unto you, and the rest of the Nobility, and protect me against the inferior
controllers; I would be loath my endeavors should be misexpounded of any.
Therefore I humbly crave favor by you to tender a particular excuse to all.
And beginning with my Catholikely christened, anointed, and crowned Queen
Elizabeth, to whom I wish, both as much spiritual benediction, and terrene
honor, as any subject may to his temporal Sovereign, or as I would, if she
were of my own Religion. I desire her gracious leave in this enterprise: Stat.
2. Edward. 3. Magn. Chart. c. 1. Com. B. stat. Mag. Chart. folio 164. and 166.
imprint. an. 1556.
I defend that Religion which the law of God, whereof she, and all christian
Princes profess defense, defends, the Laws of the Church of Christ defend,
whereto she has vowed defense by the vow of a christian in baptism, by the
promise and truth of a Catholic in profession, and life, by the promise,
oath, and fidelity of a christian Catholic anointed, consecrated and elected
Queen at her coronation: for defense whereof that most renowned and princely
title the glory of her style was first granted to her father, and still used
of her Majesty for that intent, and by the POPES donation. I defend that
Religion, whereof she yet retains in her Princely person some reverent
notes, which the piety of her Catholic education gave her, as the using upon
sudden and strange accidents, to sign her self, or women with child, with
the sacred sign of the Cross, the great character of our glory; and as it is
reported in her own private opinion, not preuaricating in the maine point of
the real presence, and others of chiefest moment, evident hopes and tokens of
no irrecouerable laps. I will teach nothing contrary to her princely dignity
and prerogatives, nothing repugnant to her own truly interpreted proceedings.
I will defend the lives, religion, fame and memory of all her famous and noble
christian progenitors, Kings and Queens of England, many of them while they
lived honorable in earth, and now glorious in Heaven, whom her wicked
Protestant ministers must needs condemn all to hell and damnation, if they
will leave any little hope for themselves to be saved, for one heaven can not
possess them both: The law of God commands me, the law of nature
enforces me, humanity compels, gratitude obliges, duty and reverence to
my Queen Elizabeth their heir and successor, does necessitate me, in this
extremity, and desperate danger of their eternal noble fame and memory, to
relieve them that be dead, and without relief of those, by whom they should
be both relieved and reverenced in that behalf; and not permit them for want of
just defense to be condemned of men in earth, that are so happily translated
from corruptible to euer-during kingdoms. They were such as the condition of
honorable Kings requires, Historians write it, their yet living laws, and
other monuments do prove it, it cannot be imputed folly to him that shall
defend them. Pantal. in Chron. in S. Edm. S. Ed. Fox tom. 1. Monum. in many
kings.

Stowe in histor. Graft. hist. Hall.


Many of them were holy Saints, and miraculously witnessed of God to be in
heaven, even by Protestants testimony and confession. Therefore it cannot be
impiety in a subject to the heir of their Scepter, to defend their Religion,
but wickedness and heresy in those, which shall deny it; for false Religion can
neither be approved by miracle from God, neither bring the professors thereof
to their felicity. Of what degree soever we are, all that live in England are
indebted to those Princes. If we be Clergy men, for learning, schools, and
educations; if noble, for nobility; if soldiers and men of arms, for
fortitude and heroical acts; if peaceable and civil governors, for matters
and presidents of regiment; if of the comminalty, for common peace and
tranquillity: they were prudent, potent, religious, magnifice^t, and
triumphant Princes; by their wisdom they ruled us, by their victorious gests
in arms they subdued and conquered unto us mighty strange and foreign
Nations; Scotland will witness, Ireland can make report, Jerusalem, Iewrie,
France, Britanny, Normandy, and other Countries made tributory and subject
unto us, will bear me record; the Princely style of my Sovereign ( Queen of
England, France and Ireland) to this day avouches it to be true; if we be
men of arms, the order of Martial discipline, munitions, ordonance, artilery,
victuals, towns, walls, gates, castles, fortresses, garrisons, musters,
tributes, services, lieutenants, generals, captains, soldiers, their rewards,
honors, maintenance, and pensions were provided by them. If we affect the quiet
and peaceable life, all possible means of procuring, and preserving thereof,
has been their study and invention: they spared no cost, omitted no labor to
perform it; they personally sat in judgment, Brirton. Bract. Glanuile de
leg. Natura breu. Guil. Malmes b. ^ gest. Hen. Hun^ng. hist. Stowe Cron. Hall.
Cron. Graft. Hollensh. ^ist. Fox tom. 1. ^on. Fab. hist.
and heard the complaints and causes of their subjects, comprimitted matters
without expenses, divided counties and provinces, privileged cities, towns,
and borroughs; to that purpose constituted courts, assigned Judges, ordained
pensions, provided Magistrates, gave directions, freed from taxes: so
established a kingdom, that neither any community or private person can
justly make complaint against them: touching the spiritual and religious,
they gave us schools, colleges, and universities for learning, and
instruction, founded churches, monasteries, altares, for professing Religion,
and devotion. There is no grace, privilege, or prerogative needful or
belonging to an honorable and absolute christian kingdom, which either Prince
or subject from the greatest to the least enjoys, but we received it by
them, if it be temporal; and by their help and means, or allowaunce and
consent; if it be spiritual, as from the first conversion of the British,
Saxon, and Danish Nation to the faith of Christ, all antiquities will witness;
her royal Majesty has received life, being, her crown, kingdom, and
diadem, won and converted under Kings, Ethelbertus, Adelwaldus, Bed. lib. 3.4.
etc. histor. Angl. Fab. hist. Stow histor. Fox tom. 1. mon. fol. 149, 150, 151
Hollensh. hist. Camb. in Britan.
Kingylsus, Edwine, Peda or Wiferus, Sygebertus, and Redwalde, her most noble
and renowned christian catholic Predecessors, Kings of England; united by king
Egbertus, augmented and enlarged by so many Henry's, Edwards, and others, known
Catholic Kings: by whom so many immunities, favors, and privileges were
granted to our religion. So many altares, churches, chapels, monasteries, and
places of professing Papistry (as Protestants name it) were founded and
provided, in the first time of our conversion from Idolatry, and the very
Primitive days of christianity in England. The Churches of saint Paul in
London, of Canterbury, Winchester, Bed. histor. Angl. l. 2. etc. Fox tom. 1.
mon. fol. 177. Guil. Malmesb. l. de gest. pont. Angl. Bed. and Fox sup. Stow
hist. in K. Elfred. Cestren Cambd. in Britan. Math. Westminster.
Lincoln, Westminster, and others; the common Schools of Cambridge by king
Sigebert, the university of Oxford, by king Alfrede, the monastery of
Gloucester, by king Ofricus, the monastery of Hetesey, by king Oswye, who
assigned possssions for twelve more monasteries in Northumberland, the
monastery of Saint Martine in Dover, by king Whitred, the abbey of Lestingey,
by king Oswalde, son to Saint Oswalde, the abbey of Abington, by king Cyssa,
the monastery of Ely, by Queen Etheldred, wife to king Elfride, the monastery
of Chertsey, by king Edgar, the abbey of Peterborow, by king Ethelwalde, the
abbey of Bardney, by king Etheldredus, Glastenbury by king I^a, the monastery of
Winchcombe, by king Kenulfus, the abbey of Saint Albons, by king Offa, the
abbey of Ethelingsey, and nunnery of Shaftersbury, by king Alfrede, and forty
monasteries by king Edgar; Fox tom. 1. mon. folio 177.
all which were edified and founded in the time of our Primitive Church, and
within two hundred years of our first conversion, as Fox himself
acknowledges. What donations and free gifts were granted to the English
Clergy, Donat. Reg. Ethelwal. Clero facta apud Fox tom. 1. mon. folio 181. and
folio 178 Guil. Malmesb. l. 2. Chron.
by those first christian kings? the donations of king Ethelwulfe, Ethelbalde,
and others were, to be free in their lands and territories, from secular
services, and payments, tributes, and taxations to Kings etc. that all churches
and monasteries should be absolved from al public vectigales, works and
burdens, that they might thereby more diligently serve God, by how much they
were more alleuiated of those services. Such likewise were the graunts of
Kings, Sigebertus, Fox tom. 1. Monum. Artic. Cler.
Cissa, Edgar, Etheldredus, Offa, Aluredus, for the praying to God, and Saints,
for the souls of them and their posterity. So that no man can doubt of what
faith they were, except it be a question, whether he that prays to Saints,
prays for the dead, offers sacrifice of Mass, grants church liberties,
honoreth the Sea of Rome, builds altares, monasteries and nunneries for Monks
and Nuns, and foundeth these things, be a Papist or a Protestant. And it is
so manifest, that these holy and sanctified kings were popish and moonkish men
(as they term them) and of our religion, that presently upon their believing
in Christ, the greatest care and study they had, was to provide ornaments, and
necessary furniture for that profession. Fox tom. 1. mon. folio 154.178. Bed. l
3. hist. angl. and l. 4. and 5. stow in chr. Gui. Mal l. gest. Pantal chro.
Cambd. in Brit. Lypp. and fur. in vita sanct.
And among the Saxon Kings, within the space of two hundred years, as Fox
himself with others reports, in the English Primitive church, nine Kings at
the least, King Kingylsus, Iue, Colulfus, Eadbertus, Ethelredus, Kenredus,
Offa, Sebbi, and Sigebertus voluntarily forsook their kingdoms, professed
monastical life, and lived monks in vow of poverty, chastity, and obedience:
and for that most religious action, as our ennemies themselves acknowledge,
were most highly honored, and commended of all historians; and still to this
day, for that cause, are more glorious both to themselves, and our nation, then
the other of our Kings, how honorable soever. The words of that history which
Fox in his Monuments cites to that end, are these; Religion did most clearly
shine, insomuch that Kings, Queens, Fox tom. 1. monum fol. 185.
Princes, and Dukes, Consuls and Barons, and rulers of Churches, incensed with
desire of the kingdom of Heaven, laboring and striving among themselves, to
enter into monastical life, into voluntary exile and solitary living, forsook
all, and followed God. And no man can deny it to be true, all Historians
report it, all Monuments and Antiquities avouch it. Wherefore my assurance is,
that my gracious Sovereign, and prudent Princess clayming all things by their
title, Gyld hist. Bed. hist. Fox tom. 1. fol. 145.152. Bed. hist. Angl. li.
3.4.5. Mat. West min. in Chron. Hen. Hunt hist. Gui. Malm. l. gest. Stowe hist.
Fab. hist. Foxtom. 1. mon. fo. 149, 150
cannot be offended for defense of the faith of all her noble christian
progenitors and ancestors until now. Besides so many christian kings of the
Brittons about thirty in number, from Lucius the first, to Cadwall ader; and of
the English or Saxon, Danish and Norman nation, a hundred and fifty kings,
from the conversion of Ethelbertus, Adelwaldus, or Ethelwaldus, Kingilsus,
Edwine, Peda or Weda, or Wiferus, Sigebertus, and Redwalde the first christian
Kings of the Saxonish Septarchie, most wise, prudent, virtuous, and triumphant
Princes, which both they themselves embraced and maintained with all zeal and
devotion, and promulged and delivered by all laws and constitutions to their
posterity, Kings and subjects to be believed. Which her Majesty's father K.
Henry the eight (although denying the Roman jurisdiction) observed in all his
life, Stow hist. in Qu. Mary Fox tom. ^ Mo. Mag. Ch^t. praerogat. Reg. ^at.
Westminster. c. 49 ^raerog. Reg. stat. Alien. san. lic. 1.2. Auous. 2. Citat. 2.
Corporat. 2. Echet. 1. Esch. 15 ^ooles 1.2.
and of denying that jurisdiction at his death repented, (of king Edward the
sixth an infant; more needing to be taught, than to teach, I say nothing) and my
Sovereign that is, in the time of her sister Qu. Mary, professed with much
devotion, and after her death, at, and after her own coronation, in the
fidelity, oath, and promise of a Prince, according to our ancient laws and
titles of Kings of England, has obliged and indebted her self to protect and
defend. And for defense whereof, as appears by the statute of Westminster the
first, and other authentical Records, Forfeit. 4.5. Franchis. 20 Intiusion 1.
Mortdamr. 1. partic and parcen. 1 1. patent. 1. Prim. seisin 1 prouis. 21
tenure 2. ward. 3.13, 14, 15. women 2. wrecke 2.
all those regal and princely prerogatives which were granted by the free
subjects of England to their Kings, her Catholic predecessors, and which she
still enjoys by that title, were granted and confirmed, as every one may
read in the kings prerogatives and statutes, in the titles of such
principalities, as were then, and for that reason and intent given unto them;
as the privileges of alienations, auowsons, citations, corporations, escheats,
fools, forfeitures, franchises, deodands, intrusions, mort dauncestries,
partitions, pate^ts, primer seisins, provisions, tenures, wards, services,
releefes, wrecks, and other preeminences. Therefore this defense of those holy
and ever most honorable kings can not be offensive to my wise and prudent
Princess, having, clayming, and pretending all tide and interest she has,
either to temporal or spiritual dignity, as heir and successor to their
regal right and authority. And to descend lower to those which have bin
benefited by those Princes: you first, (my noble Patrons) that possess those
honorable offices and dignities, you enjoy them by their institution, they the
first donors and founders of those preferments, that life and being, which you
have, I mean, not only your honorable, orderly, and pea^ceable life, and
living in government, of their provision, but that very natural life it
self, wherein you communicate with all other reasonable men, in some sort you
possess by them, for if those Princes had not advanced your ancestors to
honors, and nobility, those parents of whom you are descended, and have
received being, had not bin matched together, for so great disparitie between
them: and so you had neither enjoyed honor, dignity, life, or any being at
all. So that, how much, or whatsoever you can challenge to have, you are
indebted unto them. And the rest of the nobility of England, though not chosen
to that high credit and favor of our Princess, yet whatsoever it is they
have, lands, castles, manors, titles of dignity, they possess it by their
ordinance; as every Citizen his privilege, and immunitie, every country
vplandish man his quiet and orderly government and protection. And that
miserable people of England, that untruly challenges the name of Clergy
among Protestants, whatsoever honor Archbishop, Bishop, Deane, or inferior
order, or degrees and titles in Schools, as Doctors, Bachilors, and Masters,
and places of learning, Universities, Colleges, or Learning it self, or their
Bishoppricks, Benefices, Churches, Houses, Donations, Privileges, or any other
thing they can name, was derived from our Catholic Kings and Princes, Fox tom.
1. f. 177 Gui. Malm. l. gest. Cestr. in hist. Bed. l. 2.3.4 hist. angl Fab.
hist. Stowe hist. Graft. hist. Cambd. in Brit. Hen. Hunt. histo. Caxton hist.
Hall hist. Flor. hist. Fox 10.1. fo. 178.181.^14.215.
and those that were of that Religion, Sigebertus, Kingylsus, Ethelbert,
Ofricus, Wiferus, Etheldredus, Oswye, Wbykred, Oswalde, Cissa, Edgar,
Ethelbalde, Iua, Kenulfus, Offa, Aluredus, Ethelwulfe, Edward, and others
before the conquest, and such as reigned after to the Protestant regiment, no
Protestant Prince enriched, many spoiled churches. Wherefore seeing all estates
in England, Sovereign, and subjects of every condition, and calling, have
received, and do enjoy, so many and irrecompensible favors from those
Catholic Kings, and by as many obligations are bound and endebted to so
honorable and immortal benefactors, no person can be so unmindful of duty,
or irregardfull of gratitude, to be displeased with my defense of them, which
every Englishman is so much obliged to defend. Stat parlam. 1. Hli. Conuocat.
c. 1. Land. 1562. parl. 5. Elizab. 13. Eliz. Will. synops. Pap.
And if it appertain to the title and jurisdiction of christian Kings, (such
as no man can deny them to have been) to determine matters and questions of
Religion, as the English Protestants maintain, then if I should bring no other
argument, but the decrees and constitutions of those holy and learned Kings to
prove my intent, it ought to be admitted; especially joining therewith the
authority and consent of the still forcible laws of my ever honored Princess:
for in so doing, I shall prove my Religion by that ground, whereby only it
is impugned by the Protestants of England, Parliam. 1. Reg. Elizab. cap. 1.
assigning the temporal prince, for the time being, to have supreme
authority in that cause: and of what credit soever the Statutes of the
Protestants are in this question, touching her Majesty's catholic
predecessors, it was in all upright judgment impossible they should be
deceived. For if God gives ordinary or extraordinary assistaunce to Kings and
Princes, either for their own virtuous endeavors, and sanctity, or for the
piety, learning, and number of them, by whom they are counseled and advised;
there is no comparison, but rather Protestant princes should err, then they;
the zeal and devotion of those Kings catholic I have cited before, and
Protestant writers Pantaleon, Pantal. Chron. Fox tom. 1. mon. in 1. Oswal s.
Edm stowe^ hist. Graft. hist. Phi. Bergom. hist. fol. 172. stowe histor. in
king Ellrede.
Fox and others acknowledge many of them to be glorious Saints in heaven,
whither false Religion could not bring the^. And to give example; it is
written, not only by English, both Catholic and Protestant, but foreign
Historians, that king Aelfred builded the monastery of monks in Ethelingsey,
and that of nuns in Shaftesbury, he founded the university of Oxford, he
translated the laws into our English tongue, and diverse other profitable
Books, for the instruction of his subjects; he divided the four and twenty
hours of the day and night into three equal parts, eight hours he spent in
writing, reading, and praying; eight hours in sleep, and other bodily
provision; and the other eight hours, in hearing and dispatching the causes
and complaints of his subjects. Such was the exercise of Kings in those
catholic times, as all Historians and Registers are witness, Fox tom. 1. mon.
fol. 216. in leg. s. Edward. Regist. antiq. of Guild Hall in Land.
and their constitutions themselves contained among the Laws of Saint Edward,
reported by Fox, and yet to be seen in Guilde Hall give evidence, wherein is
contained, that King which does not such things in his own person, is not
worthy the name of a King, and that he ought to take his solemn oathe upon
the Evangelists, and blessed Relickes of Saints, before the whole state of his
realm, to execute such things, and maintain the holy Church, with all
integrity and liberty, according to the Constitutions of his Ancestors and
Predecessors, before he be crowned of the Archbishops, and Bishops, and that
he ought to have under him three servants as vassails, fleshly lust, avarice,
and greedy desire. This was the integrity, exercise, and profession of those
Princes; so that if these ^ters must be referred to Princes judgments, in
regard of themselves, it is not likely they were permitted by God to be in
error, which performed all things, both for the aduauncing his honor, and the
public peace, which was the rigorous execution of their duty. If we
considder what counsel and advise they used, as in matters of war, they
consulted with such expert and valiant captains, as were both a security at
home, and a terror to foreign Nations; and in causes of peace and public
government with the most prudent, wise, and sage men, judges and others of our
nation, Donat. Reg. Ethelw. fox tom. 1 mon. f. 181. stow^ in Chron. Berg. Chron
Fortesc I de laud. leg. Angl^ Nature. bre^. Registr.
as the words of the ancient donations of our Kings ( Cum consilio
Episcoporum and Principum, by the counsel of Bishops and Princes) and as all
Monuments, and the test of every Writ in law to this day will declare; so
concerning matters of practical conscience, the greatest offices, as
Chancellor, privy Seal, and Treasurer, which be the chiefest places of
confidence and conscience, were always executed in those days, as Master Fox
reports, by the Claergie and Bishops of England. And touching matters of
Faith and Religion they had always of their privy Council, the most holy, Fox
tom. 1. mo^
virtuous, and learned Bishops of their time, such were Saint Cedde, Saint
Anselme, Saint Dunstane, stowe hist. G^f^ hist. Fox tom. 1. Monum.
Saint Thomas of Canterbury, Saint Thomas of Hereford, Lanfrancus, and others
to their Kings: and whatsoever any public decree of religious causes was to be
enacted, or received in parliament, the whole Clergy of England in their
Cardinals, Archbishops, stat. parliam. Ric. 2. Edw 3. Henr. 3. Magna charta.
Articl. Cler.
Bishops, Suffragans, Abbots, Priors, and other chief ecclesiastical persons,
ten to one in number to the parliament ministry of this time, was always
present; and no decree of faith ever concluded, but by the general consent of
the whole christian world, general counsels, and the universal Church of
God, which can never be seduced, so that no possible place of error was left
for those kings, except God would (which he could not) permit the whole world
to be deluded. To which if we add so many supernatural signs and miracles,
as are written and confessed by Protestants themselves, Pantal. in Chron. in S.
Edm. S. Ed. Fox to. 1. mon. in ^s. Oswal. s. Edm. ^s. Edw. stowe hist. Cambd.
in Brit. Graft. hist. Hollen sh. hist.
in the lives of Saint Oswable, Saint Edmunds, Saint Edwards, Lucius,
Kingylsus, Iua, Ceoluisus, Offa, Sigebertus, and other known catholic kings
of England, showed by God, to testify the truth of their Religion in earth,
and the greatness of their glory in heaven, and whereof some, for the sanctity
of those Princes are hereditary to their posterity, not by any desert of
Protestants, as the miraculous curing of that naturally incurable disease,
thereby called the Kings or Queens evil, Stowe histor in ^s. Edw.
obtained by the holiness of Saint Edward; every man must say, that either God
immutable and undeceivable, has given testimony to falshoode, which is
impossible; or else, that their Religion was true, which is most certain.

Strange punishments imposed by God upon all English Kings that opposd them
^lues against the ^oman See.
And if it should not be tedious to your Honors, I would crave to enlarge this
Argument, by the unhappy success of those Princes, which in any sort have
opposed themselves to that holy See of Rome, where the Vicar of Christ, and his
viceregent in religious causes lives: and as we have seen before, all those
kings of England that have been the greatest favorers of that faith, and most
obedient to that See, to be most happy and glorious, so contrariwise, we shall
perceive, all Kings that have showed repugnancie to him (for that religion no
christian King of England before this time denied) to have had the most
unfortunate and dishonorable life and end, and that Apostolic governor to
have always been conqueror. That holy See from the first Bishop thereof
Saint Peter, Pantal. chro. Platin. de vit. Pont. Fox to. 1. and 2. monum.
to Clement the eight, that now reigns, has had two hundred thirty and six
Popes, and has been assaulted by all foreign and domestical enemies, the
gates of Hell have been set open against it, and yet never any prevailed, and
because Christ has spoken and promised it, Matthew. 16.
they shall never prevail. In the Primitive age of Christianity, Eusebius. hist.
Ruffin. Socrat. Zozom. Theod.
it was assaulted by the Pagan Emperors, such as were Conquerours of the
world, and commanded all things, and yet they could neither conquer, nor
command it; although they had put the greatest part of the first Popes to
death, but it subdued them in the end, and their ends were miserable; and the
prophecy of Sybilla, that the Fishers Hook should subdue the Roman Empire,
Lacta. fir. l. divine. Institut. ^ Blond. 1. Decad. 1. Osor. l 7. c. 39 Eutrop.
l. 13. Socrat. l. 7. c. 10. get Leon. Blond. l. 6 proc. l. 3. bell, Goth.
Volat. Pantal. in Chronol. i^
and conquer the world, was fulfild in the successors of S. Peter. Rome was
sacked and spoiled by Halaricus, Huns, Goths, Vysegothes, but that holy and
indefectible See prevailed, and vanquished. Attila that surnamed scourge of God
and unconquerable captain was miraculously caused to retire at the voice of
Saint Leo then Pope. Rome was besieged by Limprandus, Zacbar. fol. 60.65 Blond.
2. decad. 2.
but the very countenance of Pope Zachary enforced him to desist, as Pantaleon
himself confesses. The Saracens twice subdued Theophilus, Emperor of the
East, and made Nicephorus his predecessor tributorie unto them; conquered
Candy, persecuted Affrike, a great part of Europe, and Asia, destroyed Italy,
burned the suburbs of Rome, and yet Pope Gregory the fourth without force
repelled them. In the time of Luther the Duke of Burbon besieged Rome, but
being excommunicate the satterday before his desperate attempt, he was
miserably slain at the assault, Fox to. 2. f. 1122 Pantal. Chr. f. 124
and died censured, as Fox reports; and since such time many Protestants
affirm Papistrie entered in, that invincible See has been oppugned and
resisted with all the might and endeavors of the Kings, Princes, and supreme
Regents of Germania, Bauaria, Munster. in chro. Jacob. Meier. Paul Diac. l. 4.
ca. 17. platin. in Serg. Babell. Aen. 9. li. 9. Bed. li. 5. hist. Angl. c. 10.
Platin. in Nich. Blond. lib. 2 Hec 2. Bonfin. dec 1. l 10. Aen. Sylu. ^. 3.
Munster. in Chro. Vitichund. ^ Saxon. Platin. ^ steph. 7 Krants ^. 3 c. 25.
Aen. Sylu. c. 16. Krants 14. Blond. l. 2. ^ec. 7. Volater. ^etr. Maff. hist.
and. Osor. histor. indic. epist. indie. Council. Flor. in union. Ph. Ber. hist.
Persia, Caesarea, Saxonia, Frisia, Bulgaria, Dalmatia, Slauonia, Morauia,
Normandia, Dania, Vandalia, Polonia, Prussia, Hollandia, Zelandia, Hungaria,
Pomerania, Noruegia, Liflandia, Lithuania, Maiorica, Granata, Graecia, Armenia,
the east and weast Indies, Iapponia, and so many vaste Nations in those parts
of the world, yet that little See of Rome, and the faith thereof has subdued
them all, and the poor Moonkes, Freers, and religious Priests sent from
thence, and that authority, have miraculously ouerthrown them. That See was
assaulted by Julian the Apostata Emperor, but how miserable was his end?
Valens and other Arrian and heretical Emperors persecuted it, but they were
confounded. The Graecians, Armenians, and Iacobines denied their obedience unto
it, but were both in disputation condemned, and after made vassalles to the
infidel Turkish Empire. In the primitive Church before Constantine, almost a
hundred Pagan Emperors, either truly elected, or reputed, persecuted it, and
al of them, except ten or eleven died miserably; when the persecuted Popes put
to death by them, came not to the third part of that number. Bernard. Lutzenb
catol. haerer.
Above four hundred Archheretikes and their associates with all craft and
subtlety before Luther, and the Protestant rebellion, rebelled against it, but
they are so blotted out of memory, that no mention is made of them, but by
Catholic writers, impious, politic, and ambitious christian Kings and
Emperors, although not in matters of doctrine and faith, yet in cases of
jurisdiction have wrastled with it: but they all were maugre all their might
and power put to foil. Buccan. l. 5. hist. Scot. page 157.
Frecardus king of Scotland warred against it, but he had been deposed of his
nobility, if Colmanus their Bishop had not forbidcen them, wishing they should
expect the vengeance of God upon him for his disobedience; which soon after
came to pass, for he died morbo pediculari, eaten with lice: and his
grandfather before him, for the like disobedience, was apprehended and
imprisoned by his nobles, C. 2. de supplic. negl. praelat. in 6. Duard. non.
hist. Reg. Portugal. Crom. l. 4. de reb^ Polon. Krants li^ 3 c. 13.14. Munster.
l. 4. Cosmograph page 895. et 890. crom. l. 1^
and desperately killed himself. Such was the end of Sanctius king of
Portugal, for his contempt to Pope Innocentius the fourth. Bolislaus King of
Polonia striued with Pope Gregory the seventh, but his body was cut in
pieces by his own soldiers, and cast to the dogs, and no successor of his
for the space of two hundred years could ever obtain to be called a King,
Nauel. ge. 3. page 157. Emil. l. 3. Reg. 38. s. luo ep. 28.49.81 and 134 Emil.
l. 3. Reg. 33 Paul. Langr. chro. Magdeb. 100.11. c. 10. Fox tom. 1. mon.
Genebrard. chr. anno 1254. Pig. l. 5. c. 14, 15
except Vladislaus his next successor, which could never procure his
coronation. Like was the success of King Philip of France, with Pope Vrbanus
the second; such was the end of the Emperors with their empire, for
disobedience to that See, it was translated from the French to Otho the third;
and the case of the Emperor Henry the fourth, Frederick the second, with Pope
Gregory the seventh, Honorius the third, and Gregory the ninth was not unlike,
the first being lamentably deprived of his imperial dignity, and the second
both spoiled thereof, and pitifully strangled to death by Manifredus the
bastard, and left the Empire void by the space of eight and twenty years.
Such was the recompense of Otho the fourth or fifth, and Lodowicke the fourth,
for their contention with Pope Innocentius the third, and Clement the sixth:
Phil. Berg. histor. Stowe Graft. hist. Fox to. 1. mon.
how long the East Empire favoring the Grecian Schism against the Church of
Rome, has been drowned in the Turkish regiment, every one knows; as how
their Emperor was miserably put to death, and their imperial city
Constantinople sacked, and taken in the very festiuitie of Pentecost, and the
holy ghost, concerning whose procession they are in error. John Alibrettus king
of Navarre contended with Pope Julius the second, and the two Henry's of
Burbon with Sixtus the fourth, but the kingdom of the first, was taken away,
and given to Ferdinando of Arragon, and the two others were also deposed, and
deprived. Thus I might write of other Kings and inferior Princes, that have
encountered with that See. Cocl. in vit. Luth. Beza in vit. Calu. Sleid. com.
Petr. frar. orat. cont. sect. Fox tom. 2. mon. Stowe hist. in reg. Mar.
And concerning Protestants, to omit the more than miserable lives and
deaths of Luther, Oecolampadius, Calvin, Swinglius, Cranmer, and others of
their Clergy, and speak only of Princes. The first Protestant Duke of Saxony
and Lantgraue of Hesse were dispossessed of their regiments, and committed to
prison. The Prince of Condie in France, and the Admiral there, the one
pitifully put to death, the other like Iesabel, cast down headlong, his
legs broken, his body cut in pieces, drawn like a dog through the
streets, and hanged up for a spectacle, Buccan. histor. Scot. in Iac. spur.
Iouius l. 7. vir. illustr. Stowe hist. in Henr. octau.
at the place of common execution. For Flaunders, the Prince of Orange
miserably slain by a private man, and in the time of his greatest triumph and
joys. For Scotland, James the bastard dishonorably put to death. In Denmark,
Christine their king deposed of his kingdom, enclosed in a cave with iron
bars, and consumed to death. And least any manne may fondly persuade
himself, that the Kings and Rulers of England have a Charter of immunitie from
such vectigalles, and impositions, as God has laid upon those Princes, I will
recite all the Kings of our Nation, that presently occur to my memory, that
have opposed themselves against it, and what effect their opposition had. Bed.
l. 3, 4, 5. hist. Angl. Stowe in chron. Fox tom. 1. mon. Fab. hist. Flor.
hist. Caxto^ hist. Fox tom. 1. ^ 163. Bed. l. 3. hist. Angl.
In the beginning, these Kings, Ethelbertus, Adelwaldus, Kingilsus, Edwine,
Peda, Sigebertus, and Redwalde opposed themselves against the faith and
jurisdiction of that See, and the doctrine of religious Monks sent from
thence; but they were all conquered and subdued, without any force of arms,
and so submitted themselves, that Kingilsus and Sigebertus became religious and
monastical men; king Ofricus and Eanfridus were apostataes from the Roman
faith, but they were miserably put to death. And those three Kings whereof
Saint Bede writes, for their apostacy, besides other manifold temporal
punishments, were blotted out of the Genealogy and Catalogue of the Kings of
England, and never remembered or numbered among them. Such was the wonderful
desolation of the disobedient British Kings, and their nation, for their
disobedience to the Roman See, only in the paschall observance, and manner of
shauing the crowns of Priests, as Saint Bede does witness, prophesied against
them, by Saint Augustine, and recorded by the same Saint Bede, Galfridus,
Guilielmus Malmesburiensis, ^ed. hist. angl. li. 3 ^alf. mon. hist. ^olychron.
li. 5. c. ^0. lib. Biblioth. ^nal. Guil. Mal. 1. de Reg. Fab. ^r. 5. c. 109,
120. ^oxe tom 1. fol. ^50. stowe chro. anno 1070, and ^087. Osber^. in ^.s.
Dunstan.
Fox, and others, that at one time eleven thousand of their Monks defending
that repugnance, were slain, by the Pagan soldiers, their whole nation
distressed, and deprived of all regiment in their own country, by their own
hired soldiers; their kings dispoyled of principality to this day, and made
subjects to them, whose Sovereigns they were. King Edwine before the conquest
opposed him self to some iuridical proceedings of the Popes of Rome, and
banished Saint Dunstane his Archbishop of Canterbury, but he was deposed, died
miserably with infamy, and in his life, his brother Edgar was chosen and
crowned King. ^owe histor. in ^il. Conq. Graf. ^t. in cod. Caxt. ^t.
William surnamed the Conqueror spoiled all the monasteries of England of their
gold and silver, neither sparing Chalice, nor Shrine, and in his last voyage
in France, burned our Ladies Church in Meux, and two Anachorets, which were
enclosed therein, but he encouraging his men to maintain the fire, was
suddenly stricken with sickness, his entralls were strangely broken, and he
died with misery, and to him that had been so great a conqueror in his life,
after his death a private gentleman drawing his sword, denied burial, in his
own Country and Town, Cane of Normandy, and in the very house himself had
founded, and in his life there was such famine and dearth in England, that men
were enforced to eat horses, cats, dogs, and that which nature abhors, the
flesh of men, such outrageous floudes and inundations destroyed the country,
that not only towns were overflowed, but the very high hills themselves were
surrounded, made soft, and consumed. And after him, his next successor and
son William called Rufus, stowe histor. in Will Ruf. Caxt. and others, Ediner.
in vita s. Anselm. lippol. in s. Ansel. Sur. supr. Stowe in K. Will. Rufus.
afflicted the Churches and Monasteries of England with grievous oppression,
makes a decree against some jurisdiction of Pope Vrbane in England, and exiled
Saint Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, for his defense thereof, but he was
not left unpunished; his natural brother Robert duke of Normandy, and others
his nearest kinsmen and Nohility, raised and maintained wars against him, the
Welchmen invaded and spoiled Gloucester, Shrewsbury, and other parts of England,
and took the I Will of Anglesey, and the very insensible creatures rebelled
against him, and called for vengeance, the earth at Fynchamsteed in Barkshire
flowed forth with blood: the wind in one tempest ouerthrewe six hundred and
six houses in his chief City of London, the sea surrounded and overwhelmed
all the lands that belonged to his friend, the earl of Goodwine, and is called
Goodwine sands to this day: and that the death of such a Prince might be
aunswerable to his life, and deserts, the morrow after the feast of Saint Peter
in August, whose successor Pope Vrbanus he had so persecuted before, he was
slain by his servant and friend sir Walter Tyrrell shooting at a Dear, and
being wounded in the breast, fell down dead, never spoke word, and his own
men and retinew presently forsook him, scarcely any remaining to take care of
his body, but it was laid upon a Colliers cart, and so drawn with one seely
lean beast, from that place of the forest where he was slain, to Winchester.
Stat. in parliam. 24. He. 8. Parl. 1. Edw. 6.1. Elizab. Edmer. in vita sancti
Anselmi.
Mention is made in the statutes of the supremacy of king Henry the eight,
King Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth, that title to be the ancient right
of the Kings of England, and yet never any king or governor before king Henry
the eight challenged any such prerogative, except in the inuesture of Bishops,
as Edmerus seems to insinuate of this king William Rufus, and his next
successor was enforced to revoke, as the same Author does witness. Then that
which was so strangely punished of God in the first challenger, and refused by
his whole posterity, let others Judge, whether it was a right or a wrong. And
his next successor and brother K. Henry the first, so long as he perseuered in
his brothers steps, and let those decrees of his to be in force, was tossed and
turmoyled with manifold afflictions, both of unnatural wars, seditions, and
unwonted punishments, so that he was conquered with the very prick of his own
conscience to make his submission, and revoke those former constitutions of his
brother King William enacted, Edmer. sup. lipp. in vit. s. Anselm.
and brought in against the Ecclesiastical liberty, and was never quiet,
either in body or mind, until he had effected it. Like was the case of king
Henry the second, challenging to himself jurisdiction in the criminal causes
of the Clergy, stowe histor. in H. 2. Caxt. in H. 2 M. Eduuard. in s. Th.
Caxt. lipp. sur. and al in vit. s. Th. archiep. Cant.
contrary to the prerogative of the Constitutions of the Apostolic See of
Rome, under whose time Saint Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury their earnest
patron, was put to death, and after the excommunication promulged against the
king; for those proceedings, he was most pitifully scourged and afflicted,
both with external and unnatural domestical wars, and other miseries; his
own natural son taking Arms against him, the father against the son, and
son against his father, that as Edwardus living at that time does write, M.
Eduuard in s. Tho archiep. Cant. supr.
all England did quake and tremble, looking for nothing but extreme confusion
and desolation; for preventing whereof, no humane help, either of wit or force
could prevail, until the king admonished in a vision, that no help was to be
expected, or had, but to be reconciled to the Catholic Church (which also his
proved experience that had tasted all, and to no purpose, taught him to be
true) was enforced to humble himself, revoke his decrees, seek
reconciliation, and undergo that penance, which the Sea of Rome enjoined,
which every man may read in the history of Grafton, a Protestant writer, and
such, Graft hist. in H. 2
as such a Prince as Henry the second was, would have scorned to do, if any
other remedy could have prevailed. And to give evidence to all posterity, that
these afflictions were laid upon him of God, for his disobedience to the
Bishop of Rome; upon his submission and reconcilement, all his miseries had
their end, and ceased the very same day he was reconciled to the Church of
Rome: ^towe histor. in H. 2. Lippol. in ^it. s. Tho. Cant.
the earl of Flaunders, which with an huge Army ( cum immenso exercitu) had
appointed to invade England, presently, and strangely changed his mind, and
retired, and the next day after, the king of Scots that had made invasion, was
taken prisoner in the field, and put to ransom. King Henry his son (for he
had crowned him king before) and his brethren were reconciled unto him; his
subjects became obedient, and he was restored to his pristine tranquillity,
both of mind and body. stowe histor. in K. Ioh. Caxt. in ^od. Graft. Fab. ^b^d.
Like controversy had K. John with the Sea Apostolic, but how he was punished
of God, every man may know; the Welsh men took his castles, destroyed his
towns, beheaded his soldiers; his own barons made war against him, his
tresure was drowned, the French men invaded both Normandy and England, he was
deposed and deprived of his crown, as Peter the Heremite had prophesied
before, he died miserably, as all Historians write, and was so odious after his
death, that his own servants spoiled him of his very clothes, leaning his
body stark naked, and unburied, had not the Abbot of Croxton, Radulph. Cicest.
^ppol. in vit. s. Ri. Cicestr. stow hist. ^ Hen. 3.
of charity, given it burial. His son king Henry the third opposed him
self against Pope Innocentius the fourth, but what plagues, penuries, and
strange punishments, he and his country were oppressed with, what prodigious
and portenteous apparitions both by sea and land were seen, what inundations
of waters, tempests of winds, and other torments were inflicted upon him and
his nation, all Historians can witness; what rebellious wars and invasions was
he infested with, how subdued by his own Barons, he and his sons taken
prisoners, and brought in subjection to their own subjects? and he that by
his kingly office was to govern others, enforced to be a pupil to those he
should have ruled; for twelve Rulers were assigned, which were caled the douze
peers, to correct, rule and govern, and the king with his brethren, were
sworn to be obedient to that law. It seems by some, that king Edward the
second meddled too far against that See of Rome, stowe histor. in Edouar. 2.
Graft. Fabian. histor.
restraining the executing and exercise of the jurisdiction thereof in England;
but he wanted not his punishments; his people were afflicted with strange and
extraordinary plagues, his countries invaded, his barons and subjects arose in
arms against him, such spoilers and thieves infested his nation, that noble
men with their force could not travail with security, such famine and hunger
reigned, that horse flesh was accounted for delicates, dogs were stolen to
be eaten, and the parents did eat their own children; the thieves that were
in prisons pulled in pieces such malefactors as were newly committed, and
devoured them, (to use Stowes words) half alive; Such diseases and death
ensued, that the living were not able to bury the dead; his own wife Queen
Isabell, and his own son (after king Edward the third) and his natural
brother Edmund of Woodstocke, made war against him, put him to flight,
subdued him, and by common consent of parliament deposed him, and elected
Edward his eldest son to govern. stowe hist. in Ric. ^. Caxt. in cod. Hall
in praesat. ^ist. Fab. Pa^l. 24. H. 8. 1. Elizab.
Like was the case of King Richard the second, enterposing himself too far in
those causes, although he never challenged any title of supremacy, as the
statute of king Henry the eight, and Queen Elizabeth seem to insinuate. For
by express statute, as is yet to be seen among our Laws, Parliam. 2. Ric. 2.
^.7.
he decreed, that Pope Vrbane was the supreme head of the Church, and so to be
obeyed in England, yet because he meddled too much in Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, what a troublesome and unquiet regiment did he find? What civil
insurrections of base persons, as Wat Tiler Jack Straw, and others, in
diverse Countries, at sundry times, what extraordinary and strange quakings and
tremblings of the earth? Was he not so odious, that his own uncle Thomas duke
of Gloucester, and the Earls of Arundell, Warwick, Darby, and Nottingham
raised an army of forty thousand men, and brought him to some conformity, and
after was resisted, vanquished, taken prisoner, and imprisoned in the Tower, by
Henry duke of Hereford, (afterward king Henry the fourth) deprived of al
kingly dignity, and miserably put to death? What has bin the history of
these things, which our Protestant Princes, since the new title of supremacy,
brought in by K. Hen. the 8? what crosses the said king suffered after, in his
life, at his death, and after his death, and what befell to king Edward the
sixth (though an infant, yet not unjustly punished in his fathers fault,) and
what is like to be the event thereof hereafter, I had rather others should write
and show their conjecture, which I for reverence to my Sovereign will here
omit, though our own Protestant Historians have already committed much to
writing, which many may remember, and every man know to be true. And my hope
is, my prudent Princess, will rather, in her latter days immitate the
examples of her noble predecessors king Henry the first, and king Henry the
second, in recalling that which they did in their inconsiderate times, and
lived and died with honor, then any, or all of them, that still persisting in
their former course, were punished both in themselves, and their country,
which they should have te^dred equally, or more then themselves, in such order
as I have recounted. Parliam, 1. Eliz^ c. 1.
All the title she claims in religious causes, her statute of Supremacy
pretends to be derived from her former ancestors, neither can any man
imagine how she can challenge by any other; what interest was in them, what
success they had, that ever advanced any; we have heard it to be such, that
no Prince either in prudence, or policy, can follow their example, being all
that persisted therein, both strangely punished of God, and accursed of men, in
this life, and by all arguments of reprobation, perseverance in sin, final
impenitencie, obstinacy, and the like, after death damned in hell for ever.

SECT. VIII. His defense to the honorable Council, and all other men of
Nobility.
COncerning you (my honorable Patrons) that wisdom and prudence which has
exalted you to that tipe of dignity, does tell you, that you are not wiser in
these causes, than thousands of so wise, learned, virtuous, and honorable
predecessors in that place, counselors to those holy kings; suppose you might
contend in politic government with many, or most that went before you, let it
be, some might be admitted fellows in arms with so many martial and
victorious men, because in such cases you have been experienced; yet to that
which is most, or only material in this question, and controversy of
learning, religion, and divinity, you are too wise to make so unequal a
comparison, to balance your selves, untrained and unskillful in such
faculties, with so many Saints, most holy, learned, and professed Divines,
Bishops, and others, famous in the whole christian world: such as great
numbers of the counselors of those Princes were. Therefore, seeing it is the
same virtue of prudence which teaches and directs what to do, and
admonishes what we are not able to perform, it must needs put you in mind,
of the place you possess, the charge you have undertaken, promise and
fidelity you have given: and I remain assured the piety, mercy, justice,
and heroical munificence, which be the undivided companions of that virtue, and
the natural gratitude you owe to so many descents of your noble predecessors,
benefactors and most zealous professors of the religion I defend, will both
conquer your wits, and move your wills. As I have proved of the Kings of
England in all former times, those that were our greatest friends, still enjoy
the greatest honor, both in heaven and earth, those that frinded us least, have
the least interest therein; and those which were our enemies, heaven and earth
are still at enmity and variance with them, so it was with your predecessors
in that place, and the ancestors of our whole nobility: the examples are too
many to be cited, if any man desires the view, he may have it in the catalogue
of our unfortunate Nobles: and for Protestant counselors, let him call to
mind, stowe histor. in H. 8. in Tho. lord Cromwell. Gra^ hist. Fox tom.
monum. stat. H^
what an Agent Thomas Lord Cromwell was in these affairs, how he was advanced
thereby, what spiritual lands, yea offices he had, what favor with Prince,
how potent over subjects; yet by that law which he had provided for others,
himself was first that was thereby condemned, not admitted to the presence of
his Prince. stowe and Graf^ in Edw. 6. For eodem.
What was the tragical and mournful interlude of the two Protestant
Protectors of king Edward the sixth, the chief pillars and first originalles of
English Protestancie, the Dukes of Somerset and Northumberland, so basely
disgraced and put to death? Who in the time of her Majesty that is, so violent
an enemy against us as Robert earl of Leicester, yet the professors of that
faith do live, and he at the very time when he had designed the most bloody
persecution against us, miserably died, terrified with monstrous visions of
devils, and now his name is not alive. Sir Francis Walsingham his dear friend,
was the mast cruel adversary, for his degree, which this time has maintained
against us; yet his miserable death, his despairing words, Lay me aside, and
let me be forgotten, the illusions he had at the same time, and the filthy
stink and corruption of his body, wanting all funeral pomp, basely buried in
the night, will be an eternal infamy against him. I could easily exemplify
in others, both of the peaceable and martial condition; but I will not be
offensive to any of their families; these which I have recounted have left few
heirs, either of honor, or their names behind them. Wherefore, most
honorable Patrons, and you the rest of the wise and noble gentry of England,
Honor is the crest of your endowments, Glory is that you desire, true honor
and glory are only, or chiefly belonging to that honorable state which I
defend: this glory is truly in him that is religious, he is honored here of
God by grace, and in heaven by glory: other honors be rather in men that
honor, than in them that be honored. And yet if your immortal appetites must
needs possess these mortal honors, there is none you now enjoy, none you can
desire, which ever any of our Nation had, but was derived from the gifts,
donations, and bounties of our Catholic Popes, and Princes, to your ancestors
and predecessors, and so to you by inheritance from the one, and succession
from the other. It was never hitherto accounted dishonorable to any, to be
professor of that religion, which made him glorious. There have been many
renowned families in England, which have brought forth many glorious men: and
yet they which were most religious in our profession, always were, and ever
will be the chiefest honor of their houses. Guil. Rams. hist. S. Guthl. Foelix
Crol. in codem. Caes. Baron in S. Tho. Heref. Sur. in vit. eius lippol. in vit.
eius.
Saint Guthlach the poor Eremite of Crowland was son to the noble Penwalde,
of the lineage of king Ethelred, and yet far more honorable for his religion
than nativity, and now chiefly honored for that cause. So S. Suitbert son
of the Earl of Nottingham, and his Lady Berta, whom Saxony honors for the
Apostle of that nation. So S. Thomas Bishop of Hereford, Chancellor to King
Henry the third, son of the noble Cantilupus and Millicent Countess of
York, and Saint Ceadda councellor to King Alchfride, Saint Dunstane, and other
religious counselors to our catholic Princes, before named, Bed. hist. in
lipp. in S. Dunstane. Edmer. in S. Ans. T^ith. de script. in S. Ben. M. Eduuar.
in s. Tho. Cantuar. Stowe hist. Fox tom. 1. Monum.
are now in all Histories and memories more honorable, than any of that place,
that were not of their profession. The only order of S. Benedict, so renowned
in our Nation, has had about twenty Kings and Emperors, above an hundred
great Princes, many Popes, sixteen hundred archbishops, four thousand
bishops, fifteen thousand famous men, and fifteen thousand and six hundred
most honorable canonized Saints. And such was the continuing and never fading
honor that our religion gave, that our Kings, Queens, and greatest Princes
thought it more honorable to be religious, than to seek honor in temporal
regiments, It will be no easy thing for any Protestant to single forth one
ancient family of England, of which there have not been many Bishops, Abbots,
or religious rulers in our Country, and yet those by all Records and
Monuments are, and ever will be more renowned, than the others of their
descent. And to exemplify these names and houses following, either still now
are, or heretofore have been great in England; Cambd in Britan. l. H^al. Graft.
in catalog. Nobil. Norm. in G^ul. Conq. Registr. Cantuar. catalog arc^. Cant.
Fox tom. ^. monum. Graft. hist Fab. hi^. Man. West. S. Ludger. in vita ^.
suitbe^t.
Baldwine, Hubert, Kylwarby, Peccam, Stratford, Offord, Braidwarden, Islepe,
Langhton, Witlesey, Sudbery, Courtney, Arundell, Chichelsey, Burchier, Morton,
and yet those Archbishoppes of Canterbury which were of these names and
families, when they lived, were the most honorable of their lineage, their place
of dignity highest among subjects, and next unto our Kings, and now so long
after their deaths, they are more honored and remembered with glory, than any
of their lines. Thus I might allege of other persons and places. And it is
written in the life of that noble Saint Suitbert, that the children of the
greatest Princes and Nobles of England were Priests and Bishops. The
conformity of Catholic religion to all true and lawful civil policy and
regiment, and the repugnancie of Protestancy unto the same.
But, most Honorable, as by name, place, office, and calling you are chief
Counselors to our Prince, Comites, even companions to Kings, Barons, Milites,
the bulwark and patrons of our country, whose principal pillars and members,
under our Queen, you are, so your honor and glory consists much in defense
thereof. And it might seem more then a blemish in you to be defenders of that
which is offensive to that kingdom, and common state, wherein you are advanced
to Regiment. Then seeing this matter must be disputed between Protestants and
us: so many hundred years of the flourishing estate of this Nation under our
Religion, in the days almost of two hundreed Kings, when no other. Catal. reg.
Britan. and Angl. Fox tom. 1. monum. stowe histor. Grafton. histor.
Religion was known among us, will plead for our preeminence: or if we must
needs descend to particulars, although my condition is not to entrouble my
self with politic affairs, further then they are subordinate, and belonging
to that high faculty of divinity, whereof I may be supposed a student; yet if
it may be lawful for me to take notice of that, which the law of God, the law
of nature, and the laws of al nations, and the word Respublica it self
teaches to every man, that it signifies a public, and not a private wealth,
being a congregation of many, and not one particular person to be ruled,
maintained, defended, and preserved, and not be destroyed: and if either the
testimony of Catholics, or Protestants in their own cause may be admitted,
and trial may be made by the opinions which be defended on either part, or by
the effect which have proceeded from thence, Doctrine and proceedings of
Protestants against commonwealth.
this question will be soon at end, and your honors will be double honored
to be Patrons of that Religion, whereof I profess defense. And to begin with
him, that was the first beginner of this innovation, Georg. Wiccl. de retect.
Luth. Luth. ep. ad fratr. inferior. German. Luther. l. de potest secul. l.
cont. edict. 2. Caesa. l. de bell contr. Turc. Luth. l. captiu. Babyl. Claud.
de sanct. l. de Saccad. englise fol. 58.55.
the holy polliticke and peaceable propositions of Martine Luther are these.
Their (Protestants) hands must be embrued in blood, it is the nature of the
gospel to raise wars and seditions among Christians, there is no magistrate,
no superior, it is to be entreated by many prayers, that the countrymen obey
not their Princes, that they go not on warrefare against the Turk, no
contribution must be given to Princes, for their wars against him: no law,
neither any syllable of a law can be imposed upon Christians, more then
themselves will, either of men or Angels, there no hope of remedy, until all
humane laws be taken away. Which positions utterly destroy all governments,
and common wealths, yet such was not only the doctrine of Luther, which
exercised in act to his power, what he taught in word, as not only all
histories, Cocl. in vit. Luth. Petr. Frat. orat. cont. sectar. Staphil. apolog.
Fox tom. 2. mon. Test. t^ ord Burgund. in remonstrat. supr. edict. reg. Gal.
part. 2. Petr. Fr. orat. cont. sect. Defens. reg. and relig. Erasm. Albert. and
Conrad. Wimp l. contr. Swingl. Cocl. in Art. Luth Melancth. com. ad Coloss.
but the ruins of Germany are witness to this day: but it was both the word
and work of Calvin, Beza, Othomanus, Spiphanius, and others in Switzerland,
and France, which taking all authority from Kings, and magistrates, decreed
in their conuenticles, not only that all ancient and noble families, but civil
government, lawful policy, and jurisdiction must be taken away, and kept a
council to destroy the King of France, his wife the Queen, his children,
Queen mother, and all good magistrates in that Kingdom, and not content with
this, the basest people (as a Tailor and Cobbler at Franckeforde) instituted new
Courts, new Senators, and other officers of the meanest conditioned men,
expelling and putting to death all ancient rulers. Whereupon ensued so many
outrages, and desolations in those countries, the intolerable seditions,
rebellions, disobediences, and violence, in deposing and expelling lawful
Princes, abrogating laws, spoiling Innocents, and other enormous crimes,
against a common wealth, which have bin practiced by the Protestants of
Denmark, Sweueland, Scotland and Flaunders, are so famous, they need no
recital. And lest English Protestants, which so much in words, and little in
deeds, contend for a Common wealth, should be exempted from this general
proposition; who in England was so famous a Protestant in the beginning, as
Tindal their great apostle; and who in the time of our Q. Elizabeth, so great a
writer and monumenter, as Fox, and whose works more generally applauded, then
his acts and monuments and yet Tindall taught and Fox defends in his
publicly allowed and approved books, these propositions following. It is
impossible for us, to consent to the will of God, Fox tom. 2. monum. in
Tyndall. haer. arti. 3. artic. 2 artic. 18.19. Fox sup. Tynd. obed. art. 18.
the law requires impossible things, the law makes to hate God, every man is
Lord of other men's goods, the children of faith are under noe law? What common
wealth can be, where these doctrines are published and proposed to be true? Did
not their Protestants write a book against the temporal regiment of women,
entitled, Contra monstrosum regimen mulierum, against the monstrous regiment
of women? What monstrous doctrine, Goodm. l. cont. monstr. reg. mulier.
and pestiferous were this now in our nation? What Common wealth men were
those, which were the greatest and chiefest promulgers of this Protestancy in
England? Stowe hist. Graft. hist. Fox to. 2. mo.
The Lord Thomas Cromwell so exalted by King Henry the eight, John duke of
Northumberland, father to the late Earl of Lecester, Cranmer and others, I
refer to their deaths for treason against their Princes. Who are chiefest
actors in affairs of a Common wealth in England, but the privy council of our
Sovereigns, and yet how far unlike Commonwealth men did the council of
King Henry the eight (only the Lord Chauncellor Wriothesly excepted) behave
themselves, Graft. vlt. H. 8. Stowe hist. Anno 1. Edw. 6.
presently violating their King and masters last will, in which they were also
constituted executors? Graft. and stowe Ann. 1. Mar.
Would not the Protestant council of King Edward the sixth have disinherited
her Majesty that is, and Queen Mary? The Protestants of England testify that
the Puritanes platform tends to the overthrow of the whole state, and
government of the common wealth: Respons. adm. parliam. Adm. parl 13. Eliz.
the Puritanes affirm as much of their doctrine. I will pass over so many
Protestant positions, which as they be al negative, denying Religion and duty
to God, so in things concerning temporal government, subject to Religion, they
must needs be repugnant to civil regiment. I will only crave leave to
exemplify in three or four questions, it is a common opinion with this
people, Calvin. Instit. Andr. Will. synops. papism. c. Laws.
that the laws of magistrates do not bind in conscience, and secret, but
only in public and open show, for avoiding scandal. What treason and
treachery may not privately be plotted, practiced, and put in execution by
this doctrine? What Realm can be secure, what Kingdom is not in hazard to
be overthrown, where every rebellious vassal shall be made a judge of his
Princes laws? Conuoc. Protest. Land. 1562. parl. 5. and 13. Elizab.
What other thing does their approved doctrine of sole faith portend to the
world, but a desolation of all order, obedience, and regiment? If a man is
only justified by faith, he cannot be unjustified and condemned, but for
wanting faith, and so treason, felony, murder, rapine, perjury, and all
offenses against a common wealth, Protestant English doctrine against a common
wealth.
even to take away the crown and scepter of a prince, may securely be put in
action, as not destroying the virtue of faith, and so not able to condemn the
workers of such impieties. Let us speak a little of marriadge: statut. in
parl. 32. H 8. c. 38.
it was enacted by parliament of K. Henry the eight, that all contracts of
marriage whatsoever, were void by a second marriage consummate, hereupon
ensued not only such shame and dishonor to that law, against the light of
nature, and civil contracts, Parl. Ed. 6. tit. Maryag.
but to use the words of King Edward the sixth his Protestants in open
parliament; such incontinences intolerable to Christian ears, men and women
breaking their promises, and faith made by the one to the other, taking new
husbands, and wives at their pleasure, even as it pleased them, that it was
revoked by King Edward the sixth; Parl. 1. Elizab.
yet by the first parliament of our Queen it is revived, and now in force,
from which opinion, and the doctrine of remarrying, for the incontinency of the
first husband, or wife, what deuorcements, dissentions, remarryings, breaches
of wedlocks, false accusations, translations, and lamentable decays of ancient
and honorable houses by adulteries, and most wicked suppositions of unlawfully
begotten children, have ensued? And because I have spoken of marriage;
Marriages of Priests and Ministers how much against a commonwealth.
I with the indifferent Reader to consider, whether the marriages of Priests
and ministers consist with a common wealth or no: let him but look into this
one article, and he shall perceive, that even by the nature of the thing it
self, so many wants, miseries, distresses, and hungers as have been since, in
this kingdom, and other floods of dangers to a civil regiment, have flowed
from that fountain. Graft. hist. an. 15. H. 5. Cambd. in Britan.
The ancient number of parishes in England (every one having at the least one
Priest, or Minister) have been accounted forty thousand; (though Camden and
later Writers muster a meaner reckning) besides Bishoprikes, Deaneries,
Archdeaneries, Prebendaries, pety Canonries, and almost as many Chapels more,
many of them having their particular ministers, and diverse richer Protestant
parsons their subcurates: and among all these it is a dishonor at this day,
for a man to be unmarried. Then to make some conjecture in this case, because a
certainety can not be surueyed, let us compare this new married brood so
given to generation, to the first inhabitants of countries, which of a far
fewer number, in process of time have grown to so great and populous Nations;
and because the increase of the people of Israel in Egypt is most exactly
above all others remembered, and registered in holy Scriptures, which these men
receive, I will take an example from them, and yet to the Protestant advantage;
for the Israelites in Egypt were persecuted, and their children put to death,
when contrariwise the generation of Ministers in England has flourished, and
been defended. The number of the Israelites, men, women, and children, Genesis
46. acts 7.
entering into Egypt, were only 70. as is written in Genesis, or 75. as it is
expounded of saint Stephen: if the first survey of English parishes, and
ministers is admitted, although we allow many of them to have lived, and
unmarried, yet numbering their wives, which by chastity in catholic times also
were unmarried; it is probable, that for every married Israelite, there were
more than two thousand married ministers: Genesis 46, 47.
for the grandchildren of Jacob were not married at that time: and if we
admit the least survey of thirteen thousand, fifteen thousand, or sixteen
thousand parishes, yet for every married Israelite, there was a thousand
married ministers. Within the space of four hundred years, the number of
Israelites, from the age of one and twenty years upward, besides many more
thousands of women, children, and young people, and the whole tribe of Leui,
one of the twelve which was not nu^bred in this account, Numer. cap. 1.
the number of such men amounted unto six hundred thousands, three thousands,
five hundred, and fifty. Now let my Protestant Arithmetitians make a
calculation of the Ministers offspring; if we take my least account, if their
religion should last four hundred years, which is but so long as the true
Church of Israelites lived almost pilgrims or captives: yet a true Religion
must be such that it carry no destruction to commonwealths, though it last for
ever, as the worship of Christ was instituted to do then by my meanest
reckoning, the number of men increased in that time, will be 603550000, six
hundred thousands of thousands, three thousand thousands, five hundred
thousands, and fifty thousands, which is a greater number to be added in our
nation, then many Englands are able to maintain, though we neither reckon
woman nor child. What then will the apparel and other expenses of this
generation be to a little country? yet I have not counted how many since
Protestant Religion, have multiplied in this order, which before lived in
monasteries and religious houses, in chaste and single life, by common
judgment, little, or not inferior to the former multitude; which as it
doubleth, the number of people increased, so it doubleth the miseries and
perplexities of this kingdom. Such chargeable, bloody, and continued wars as
England in this time has had in France, Flaunders, and other places, both at
sea and land, are neither easy, nor secure to be maintained: And to ordain or
permit multiplication of men to such ends, to utter them by slaughter, is
wholly Turkish, and more like to Canaballs, than to Christians. And yet, if they
had not been, to prevent so many marriages, and kill so many thousands of men,
how could this nation have provided for so many? Protestants doctrine and
practice of Neglect, of Abstinence, and Fasting in England, how prejudicial to
a common wealth.
or how will it deal hereafter, when the present inhabitants have tasted so
many wants? Let us make an other trial, what damage the taking away, or
neglect of fasting and abstinence in this religion has brought to our common
wealth. In Catholic times, besides so many days of abstinence, whereby many
thousands of fishers were maintained, and much cattle and flesh preserved,
there were observed above an hundred fasting days, with only one meal in the
day, if we account the several days of Lent, Fridayes, Ember days, Vigils,
and euens of Saints, that were fasted; the number of the eaters then were fewer
by much, as is reckoned by ministers marriages, the diet was not so delitious,
as Protestancie teaches; then let us give all advantage to Protestants in this
commission of inquiry, and suppose contrary to all judgments, that there be
but twelve thousand parishes in England: let us allow that there be only in
every parish one with another, but an hundred persons, men and women, which
were wont to fast, though this number is much too little: let us further
imagine, that the expenses of every ones supper would only be the value of
one penny, which is no dear ordinary; yet by this favorable reckoning, every
person in these hundred days, spares one hundred pence, which is ten
shillings, and the hundred persons of every parish one hundred times ten
shillings, which is fifty pounds; which together amounts yearly to six
hundred thousands of pounds, besides the consumption of so much victualles,
original of so many wants: and yet it has been credibly reported, that of
late years upon general musters in England, the muster books have amounted
unto thirty hundred thousands of able men, to which if we add so many women,
making the number of threescore hundred thousands, the sum will be five times
so much, that is, thirty hundred thousand pounds by the year, and to make a
better esteem of the Ministers progeny in expenses; let us suppose, that in
so many years, they have only amounted unto one hundred thousand of people;
and that every person of that increased tribe, spends but three pence in the
day, penny halfepeny a meal; and to help this reckoning, let us forgive their
apparel, and all other costs for nothing, which is no unequal dealing, yet
their expenses in the year do make 547500. five hundred thousands, seven and
forty thousands, and five hundreds of pounds; which is more than any
victorious king of England spent in the continual maintenance of a royal
army, and will discharge more and greater wars, than ever her Majesty had, and
spare so many taxes, raised upon better subjects: thus I could exemplify in
other Protestant excesses; But to urge many of these doctrines, would be too
tedious, therefore I will pass them over. How their other actual proceedings
have been conformable to their words and teachings, has been somewhat
declared before, Supr. 2. Resolut. Relig. part. 2. Arg. 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79
80, 81, 82.
and I may remit the Reader to the second part of my Resolution in many
chapters, where I have proved even by the Protestants own confessions, and
testimonies, that their behavior, and disobedience in commonwealths is worse,
then among Jews, Turks, Pagans, or any Infidelles, and whosoever at this time
enters into view of the manners of all conditions of Protestants, both of
this and other nations, can not call it in question, neither can it be imagined
how amendment can be had, e^cept a reformation of the original of these
abuses, Protestant disobedient doctrine be made, for like causes must have like
effects.

The Conformity and Honor of catholic Religion to England, or any well
ordered Commonwealth.
Now let us examine whether such disobedience in doctrine, or disloyalty of
behavior to commonwealths can be noted in Catholic religion; do we not teach
all duty unto Princes and superiors? what office, either of Prince, or
inferior Magistrate, what estate, or condition of men, clergy or laytie, what
time, peace, or wars, or any thing that can be said belonging unto
government, is not most sincerely delivered by the Casnysts and Canonists of
our religion, and that consenting to the regiment of the most famous and
honorable Kingdoms of the world, governed by such constitutions? Or is there
any thing we teach, different, or not agreeing to the ancient and most
polliticke regiment of all christian Nations? To begin with that most
reverend function of Priesthood, now treason by the proceedings of England (as
some Protestants allege) what is there in that most sacred Religious
dignity, that can be guilty of so great a crime? Treason is the greatest
offense that can be committed in England, and is called with us, Crimen laesae
maiestatis, an offense that hurts the Kings or Queens Majesty; Stat. 25.
Ed. 3. c. 2 5. Ric. 2. c. 5 stat. 1. Hen. 4. c. 10.
and Proditio, a betraying, because, as appears by our ancient Laws of King
Edward the third, where it is set down, what shall be treason, nothing is
remembered, but that which tends, either to the betraying of the King, or
country; and so it is provided by other laws. Alas what is in Priesthood
now, that was not in former times, that it must be so accounted in the days of
one Queen, Catal. Reg. Brit. and Angl. Fox to. mon. Stowe hist.
which in the regiments of almost two hundred Christian Kings within this
kingdom, has ever been reputed both in parliament, and elsewhere, the most
honorable calling, next to the prince, as the places of our great Priests or
Archbishops are evidence. Nothing is, or can be changed in that sacrament,
howsoever the minds and proceedings of Protestants do change. The same
priesthood which was given to Saint Peter, and the Apostles, the same which
saint Augustine, and his associates had that converted England, the same
which has been so honored of al English Kings since then, is the same, which
this people is not ashamed thus to term. The same Sacrament unchangeable, the
same power of order, the same jurisdiction; then except the state of England
be not the same it was, Priesthood must be honorarable, and not treacherous.
There is not any point of civil regiment in that sacrament, being wholly
spiritual and supernatural, nothing concerning a temporal common wealth, no
renouncing or denial of any authority in England, no conspiracy to Prince, no
betraying of a kingdom, of whom no one word or mention is made, or can be
intended; no matter given in charge, no authority communicated, but to offer
sacrifice, to pray, to preach, minister Sacraments, Pontifical. Romans ^n ord.
sacerd.
and such priestly functions, as the Pontifical will witness, which are not
prejudicial to a commonwealth, but such as the Ministers of England immitate
the like, as I have proved in other places. Part. 2. Resol. ^rgum. 5.6.
That Priests do absolve from sins, and excommunications, which they
pretend, the cause is no temporal thing, and yet it cannot be the cause of
this treason, ^tat in parliam. ^7. Elizab. c. 2. ^esol. part. 2. ^rgum. 5.8.
for Deacons which have no such authority, be traitors by the same statute.
That our Priests be consecrated in foreign countries, neither can be, or is
the cause, that this dignity is now so unworthily reputed: ^ed l. 2.3.
histor. Angl. Fox tom. ^. monum.
for in former times it has been the greatest honor to our Clergy, to be
consecrated in those famous Countries; and all our Primitive archbishops of
Canterbury were so sacred; and at this time Priesthood given in France, to
which we be friends, and in England it self, to which England must not be
enemies, Parliam. 27. Elizab. sup.
is equally treason with these men, as to be ordered in Rome, Spain, or any
place most offensive to our state of England. And yet I would desire all
States men to consider, that the Graecians, Germans, and other people, having
their doctrine diverse to the Church of Rome, have their Seminaries in the same
City, and their Priests maintained by the same Popes, and ordered by their
authority; and yet the Princes of those Nations being Infidel Turks, for the
greater part, condemn not their Priests for Traitors, but suffer them to be
quiet, without incumber, admitting the exercise of their function as agreeable
to common wealth. And as it were a great absurdity to say, that the Pope in
releeuing the Catholic Students of Palestina, Graecia, Armenia, and such
nations, should do it in hope to be temporal Lord of those Countries, but
only for love to true religion, so it is as improbable he should have any such
intent to England, as improbable as the others to be under his temporal
regiment; or, how can those religious schools be such adversaries to our
English government, where neither Reader, Professor, or Student of Policy is,
or by the foundations and statutes of those places may be maintained? No law,
order, rule, exercise, lecture, or disputation in any of those Seminaries that
has affinity with such affairs; where no one point or opinion in doctrine
against our English, or any other well governed commonwealth (as is proved) is
practiced. But all those Schools by institution, offer weekly or daily
sacrifice for our nation, where prayer is continually made by deputed persons
for her Majesty, where so many public prayers, processions, fasting,
disciplines, and austerities are used to that end. The rules and government
there consent with the ancient foundations of our Cambridge and Oxford, the
Religion there used, the doctrine there taught, the Priesthood, and other
Orders there taken, sacrifice offered, prayers that be made, Sacraments that
be frequented, Laws that be observed, all things there practiced, be the same
which so many renowned Kings of England ever professed and defended, as
conformable to their temporal regiments: and to which our Qu. Elizabeth, by the
fidelity of a Prince, by solemn oath, and all greatest security an absolute
Ruler can give, has indebted her self to observe at her Coronation. And what
disobedience or want of duty can it be, to deny to her, or any temporal
Prince, Supremacy in ecclesiastical causes, a preeminence so distinct and
independing of the civil government? And it ever was so far fro treason, to
deny it to any of our Kings or Queens, that not only all English subjects,
but our Kings themselves ever approved it in the Roman See. And never any
temporal Turk, Tartare, Goth, Vandall, or impious ennemy of Christ, heretic,
or infidel challenged it as belonging to their temporal style; and no
Protestant Prince at this day, except in England, either claims to him self,
or makes it treason to give it to the Pope of Rome. Neither does, or ever
did, any or these professed ennemies to that See, condemn for a temporal
disobedience, to appeal thither in spiritual causes; or makes it a matter of
state, to go on pilgrimage to Rome, or bring a Crucifix, Picture, or any
hallowed thing from thence, which can be no business of a commonwealth. But all
other Christians of the world, even such as be under the Turkish regiment, or
any other, whether they be Iacobites in above forty kingdoms, 6. supr.
Septeme. l. de m^ rib. and Rel. Turc. Fran. Aluar. hist* Ethiop. Belfor.
Cosmograph. l. 6. liturg. Ethiop^ to. 4. Bibliothec. patr. Osor. histor Eman.
l. 3. Theuet. l. 11.
Nestorians, Maronites, in Libia, and Phoenitia, Armenians, Georgians, Suryans,
Mozarabes, Indians under Peter Johannes in seauentie and two kingdoms, or any
others, besides all Catholic and Christian kingdoms, in this, or other parts
of the world, have free access, without prohibition of their Princes, either
to Rome, Jerusalem, or any place, where Christ, is, or has been reverenced.
And in the days of the greatest temporal honor and renown of England, under
the most glorious English Princes, it has been so far from disturbance, or
indignity to our temporal state, to go that journey, and fetch, or receive
such things from thence, that our most puissant and triumphant Kings themselves
have performed those offices, Fox tom. 1. mon. Stowe his^ Graft. histor.
in their own princely and royal persons, as our Protestant Writers be
witnesses. How honorable those Princes were for those and such offices, as
also how dishonorable with men, and strangely punished of God, not only al
Kings of England, but of other nations, which practiced any thing offensive to
that Roman jurisdiction, I have declared before. If we should enter into
comparison of this kingdom now Protestant, either with it self under
Catholic regiment, or with foreign Catholic kingdoms, my sentence is true:
whether we consider the glory of king Henry the eight, and this kingdom
before his fall, or their infamy and dishonours after: or the short or
turbulent season of king Edward the sixth, or for this present time what it is,
and what like to be, which, duty to her Majesty charge me to leave to the
lamentable consideration of all men now, and the pitiful experience of those
which shall prove it hereafter. When contrariwise, if we enter into conceit
of Catholic kingdoms, ruled by that Religion and law which we defend, they
will be named the flowers of the world; our neighboring countries, France,
Spain, Italy, and others may be given for instance. And to particularize in
them that be most hated of English Protestants, the Pope of Rome for a
spiritual person, and the Spanish King for a temporal Prince. Is not the power
and jurisdiction of the first extended by many degrees, and whole kingdoms,
further, and more glorious than ever was the Regencie of any spiritual
superior, high Priest in Iewrie, Caliphe of the Turks, Archflamine of the
Pagans, Archbishop of the Protestants, or any their supreme head or governor
in Ecclesiastical causes, in this or any other Nation? never allowed further
than one country, and no man can question, but the kingdoms, riches, and
reuenews of the king Catholic are the greatest of any Monarch, or Emperor in
the world. How the glory of all kingdoms was ever most, when they most
religiously embraced and maintained our doctrine, I have demonstrated at large
in my Resolution: no Article we defend, Resolut. Relig. part. 1. c. 14.
prayer and adoration to Saints, prayer for the dead, restitution for wrongs
and injuries to those that live, obedience to Princes, their just and equal
regiment, the validity of their laws, the force of good works, and their
working, the number, grace, and reverence of Sacraments, other holy things,
penance and punishment for sin, both in life, and after, with the rest, being
all affirmative positions, teaching duty to God, honor to Magistrates,
equality to all, injury and oppression to none, the chiefest points of true
regiment, cannot be offensive to a well ordered kingdom. What quarrelles and
contentions between Princes, Kings, and Subjects, Nobles and Nobles, and all
estates, have been comprimitted in England, by the spiritual Roman
authority now so hateful among us, which could by no other means be appeased,
the turbulent dealings in the time of King Henry the second so pacified, the
Barons wars quieted, D. Edward. in vit. S. Tho. Cant. Stowe histor. in Henr.
2. Graft. hist. sup. Stowe in K. John. Caxton. in eod. Hall hist. in H. 5. Fox
tom. 1. and 2. Monum.
rigorous onerations imposed by Princes eased, contentions and unappeasable
wars of this kingdom with France, and other Nations, and the like, appeased
and brought to end, will witness. What peace, concord, amity, and agreement
in all estates, the Protestants denial of Restitution and Confession has
taken away, what wrongs, enmities, and abuses it has wrought, the ancient
love, neighbourly friendship, christian charity, and peaceable agreement
generally since then exploded among Protestant people, are evidence; for those
bridles being broken, what so convenient means is either left, or invented by
this generation, to tame the inordinate passions of unruly people? How can the
beginning of sins, first inwardly hatched in the mind, before they proceed
to outward action to be controlled by civil Laws, be stayed and prevented?
How can secret offenses, the mother and nurse of public disorders, be punished
and destroyed? Who can keep Subjects from devising against Sovereigns, these
from plotting against Subjects, Subjects against themselves? Who can now vmpire
so many quarrelles, even with extraordinary and intolerable charges and abuses,
which the Consistory of Confession in every parish, so freely, without bribe,
trouble, or contention decided and rooted out? For want whereof, so many suites
and actions in law, such multitudes of Lawyers, and their lately obtained
riches have ensued. What abuses in their proceedings, what unjust causes
defended? What just and pitiful complaints of the poor forsaken? What
dilatory plees, nonsuites, unnecessary essoines, wagers of law, false
pleadings, unlawful arrests, wicked impannelling, suborning, and corrupting
Jurors, delayed false and corrupt judgments, and executions, unconscionable
Writtes of error against right, such remooueings of suits, appeals, and I
know not how many shifts to defraude, avoid, and with-holde true titles, have
been, and are practiced and uncontrolled by these Protestant doctrines, which
catholic Religion condemns, binding the wicked practisers of such iniustices
to an equal amends and restitution to the parties grieved. These and such
abuses the law of Nature, the law of Nations, Canon, Imperial, Provincial,
in all christian Nations do condemn, and not only in countries and kingdoms
professing Christ, they are disabled, but exploded in all heathenish regiments
of Jews, Turks, Tartares, Persians, Indians, and all ancient law makers among
the Romans, Graecians, Lacedaemonians, and others, only practiced, and not
disallowed in Protestant regiments.

That portion of wealth, which the religious Clergy of England enjoyed in
Catholic times, (if Fox may be believed) amounted to the third part of the
substance of our nation, Fox to. 2. monn. in Henr. 8.
and was then employed concerning them, to the necessaries of their poor,
chaste, and single life: the remnant was bestowed, some for maintenance and
defense of our Kings, and country: Caxt. histor. Hall in H. 5. Stowe and Graft.
in Henr. 8.
the Catholic Clergy was then able, and often did furnish maine armies to
that end, more then all the ministers of England, and Abbey gentlemen are able
or will perform, the rest was in Religious uses: the poor were relieved, so
many statutes against them, and to burden the country, were not known,
strangers were lodged, pilgrims entertained, the sick and maimed provided
for, orphans kept, widows defended. Was not this so offensive part of
religious goods in Protestants judgment, better bestowed, then in hunting,
hawking, cardings, courtings, and such like alms, to which the Protestant
possessours have disposed it? Let us speak of friends at home, and abroad;
Catholic Religion kept, and left England in friendship and amity, with the
Popedom, Empire, Spain, and all countries in the world: protestancy has
either set us at open variance, or suspicious peace withal. Quarrels among
countries and kings, are ever grounded from behavior of Princes, public
magistrates, and persons of regard in those states: Protestants of England ever
since their entrance have supplied those places private, persecuted and
rejected men, such as Catholics of England have been, and are there esteemed,
cannot be the origin of such contentions. What should I speak of honors, or
other public profits wherewith England was adorned by our Religion, and whereof
Protestancy has dispoyled it? Was it not an honorable, quiet, and secure
preeminence, to be at league with so many and mighty christian Princes? Were
not all communions with them and their countries as ordinary to England, and al
estates thereof, as to themselves, had not our kings their legarde, and
continuing ambassadors in those dominions, whereby peace was preserved,
quarrels prevented, perrils avoided, the country in security, wars but
seldom, and never of such continuance? What history does make relation of so
chargeable and prolonged wars of this kingdom, with other nations, as our late
and present Spanish, Flemish, and Irish be? What Nobleman ot Gentleman of
account did not then, and would not now desire, both for his own and countries
honor, and reputation, to know other nations, to be present in the Courts of
foreign potent Princes, to learn language, to see diversities of people, and
manners, to know their order of Regiment, to win experience? What learning,
nurtriture, and knowledge have our gentry and nobility lost by that separation?
What a blemish it is, even in some of highest order, and in the greatest
affairs of common wealth, England finds, and forrainers are not ignorant,
and the great advantage and highly esteemed preeminence of him or them in that
place, which has enjoyed it, will witness. Would not a soldier, for his
skill and honor in arms, affect to know the order and discipline of their
wars, especially against Infidels, and misbeleeuing Princes? What scholar
for his instruction in learning, might not covet those universities, wherein
for an Englishman to have been student, or consecrated Priest (now so odious)
was ever had for high honor and reputation? Would not the merchants of England
esteem it both a private help to themselves, and a public profit to our
nation, to have free trade and traffic in their dominions? Should not all
England, Nobles, gentlemen, meaner people, and all estates of men, Catholics,
Protestants, and whatsoever be desirous, that we might always be free, both
from foreign and domestical wars? or if by any necessity, not in time
prevented, we should by probability be infested with the one, could, or would
he wish to be afflicted with both? Peace is to be desired, strife to be
avoided, friends esteemed, many and potent enemies to be feared. If any man of
indifferent sentence enters into judgment, to consider the time of
Protestancie, which is past, the present estate wherein England is, and what
we are like to taste hereafter, by such proceedings, I doubt not but he will
be of my opinion, that it were better to be in such condition, Stow hist. in H.
8.
as it was in the two and twentieth year of King Henry the eight, when this
reformation, or soon after began, then ever it was by Protestancie since,
now is, or by probability will grow to be in time to come. For avoiding
offense, I will voluntarily omit particulars of comparisons, as also the
conformity of our catholic Religion, to the true and equal interpretation of
our present laws, both in the same regard, as that it demands a larger
treaty then this place allows. These may now suffice for excuse, not only
to your most Honorable Company, but to all inferior and subdepending
Magistrates, principally such as persecute us under the false pretense of our
repugnancie to a lawful and civil regiment: for whose cause I have both been
longer in this question, Resol. Relig. part. ^. Argum. 5, 6, 7.
and must be enforced hereafter to use more speech of our obedience to the
English laws of this time, than I otherwise had intended.

SECT. IX. The Authors defense to all honorable Ladies and Gentlewomen.
AND as I must not be ungratefully undutiful to so many Catholic Ladies,
and noble Gentlewomen of England our nurses and foundresses in former times, so
I desire pardon of that present sex and condition, not to be offended with my
writing; for I defend the faith and religion of all honorable, holy, and
virtuous English Queens, Princesses, Bed. hist. Angl. l. 2, 3, 4, 5. Math.
Westminster. Henr. Hunt. Caxt. hist.
Ladies and Gentlewomen. I may not permit the Foundresses of so many Churches,
Chappelles, Aultares, Monasteries, Nunneries, Colleges, and Religious places,
to be reproved for that piety. I cannot in conscience suffer such a
triumphant and victorious company of that calling, so famous for miracles, and
renowned for sanctity, Fox tom. 1. mon. Pantal. Chron.
as our greatest ennemies, Fox, Pantaleon, and others acknowledge in them (an
evident argument of true Religion) to be condemned; nor the immortal fame of
the souls of such to be defiled by false accusers, whose bodies many years
after their death, Bed. hist. Angl. l. 3.4.5. Guil. Malmes. l gest. Fox tom. 1.
mon. Stowe histor.
to witness the innocence of their Religion and life, remained uncorrupted:
nor those whom so many testimonies from heaven and earth have confirmed to be
most happy Saints, to be rejected as impious. I am out of doubt, no Protestant
Lady of England, will, or dares to compare her self with the meanest of many,
which, for the love and honor of our Religion, forsook all temporal
pleasures, and princely honors, and preferring the poor, chaste, and
obedient religious life, before all dignities, became sacred and consecrated
Nuns, Fox tom. 1. mon. fol. 178. Bed. l. 3, 4, 5. hist. Angl. Guil. Malm. l.
gest
such (as Fox is enforced to consecrated were Queen Edelburge, wife and
Queen to King Edwine, and daughter of King Anna. Saint Etheldrede wife to King
Elfride, and married before, and yet a perpetual Virgin, as Saint Bede, Fox,
and others do witness: Sexburga, daughter of King Anna, and wife to King
Ercombert: Kineburga wife to King Alfride, daughter to King Penda and sister to
king Ofricus. Elfloda daughter to King Oswy, and wife to King Peda, and
Alfritha wife to King Edgar. Hylda daughter to the nephew of King Edwine.
Erchengoda and Ermenilda daughters of King Ercombert. Werburga daughter to King
Vlferus. and Kinreda and Kinswida his sisters. Elfrida daughter to King Oswy,
Mildreda, Milburga, and Milginda, daughters of King Mirwaldus. Saint Editha,
daughter to King Edgar, and others, most holy, religious, and miraculous
Princesses, the glory of our English Ladies. Or if the glory and happiness
of Catholic Princes will not move, yet let the fearful examples of the
principal Protestant Ladies of England, chief Agents in this quarrel,
grievously afflicted of God, and made dishonorable to the world, put us in
mind what we ought to do, Stowe and Graft. in hist. Henr. 8. Argum. 87.88.
2. I art. Resol.
which though Stowe and Grafton have too bluntly set down, my self, for
some reverent respects, will here omit. Think it (you Protestant Dames of
England) no disparagement in honor, to be followers of those renowned
Princesses, which in all Antiquities are recorded to be the glory of your
kind, and the supreme womanly honor of our Kingdom; That RELIGION (the
greatest honor) which has given to them such eternity of honor in Heaven,
can not make you dishonorable in Earth. It is the nature of your sex to
immitate, and in some things you will sometimes immitate too much: If you that
live in Court, did but know the guise of attires, which those holy Queens
and Ladies used, before they were Religious you would follow it, in the highest
degree; although therein you should consent with the Dames of Italy, France,
Spain, and Rome it self, or any other place or person, to which you profess
your selves most distasted. And in such things though never used of Queen
Sexburga, Etheldreda, Edelburga, or any of those, or other Saints, your daily
and new devises are evidence against you, that you esteem it not
dishonorable, to learn of the Ladies of those Nations. These agreements are
not so worthy praise, and yet therein you will not be at variaunce. Then,
seeing the Religion of those Countries, whose Ladies you allow in matters so
little deserving immitation, is that which makes so honorable with God and
man, and not for a short courting, but an euer-continuing time, fear not to
be French, Spanish, Italian, and Roman, in that, wherein the tipe and diadem
of true honor consists; or if you have chosen to be wedded only to
terrene and debased honor, yet you may not think so basely of that Religion I
defend, to disallowe it. For all your earthly honors, titles, names, and
ensigns of dignity, were either first founded, or after allowed and confirmed
to your ancestors, and in them to you, by the Popes, Emperors, Kings, and
Regents in Catholic reverence. England Protestant wants many degrees of
chiefest place, which England Catholic enjoyed. England Protestant has
diminished, and added none to those, which were before. And those Countries I
named, and whose Religion I commend unto you, have many of that condition,
which never any England had. Catholic Religion never denied any thing unto
you, which was truly honorable: it gave you your dignities, honorable
places, and privileges; it gave you credit with our Princes, and for their
and your honor, ordained you estates; it defends your marriages to be
honorable, and a sacrament, by that Religion your matrimony was not in the
pleasure of your Lords; repudiations and deuorcements at their wills were not
known; remarrying to a second wife (the former living) was ever most
unlawful. Concubines could not possess the maintenance of your honors,
their bastardes might not enjoy the inheritance of your legittimate, for fear
of offense, I will be silent in most honorable favors, which your Catholic
ancestors had, and you might have by that Religion, and Protestancie cannot
give; and refer that cause to your more serious examination, and favorable
construction; which, for my promise of writing nothing offensive to our English
state, I must willingly, in this, and other places, leave naked and unfurnished
of many and greatest arguments of defense.

SECT. X. The Authors defense to all inferior subjects.
IF I should entreat what benefits and preferrements, so many diverse orders
and conditions of inferior subjects enjoyed, by enjoying our Religion, and
what they lost by loss thereof, as I should make my cause too popular and
pleasing unto them: so I fear I might be offensive to some, to whom I have
promised to give no occasion of offense. Therefore I will only put them in
mind, that as all their ancestors and predecessors were of the same RELIGION
with us, so an innumerable company of their kinsfolks were religious men, and
women, and in them, the care of their parents ended, and they became Fathers
and mothers to their parents, and families; others were attendant, instructed,
and maintained by pensions, corrodies, farms, annuities, leases, and tenements
of our religious houses; the poor were relieved in our Hospitalles, and by our
alms; others living upon our lands without fines, or enhaunced rents; every
temporal man and woman enjoying more for them and theirs, by how much so many
hundred thousands of religious persons claimed and needed less, by their
poor and single life. No wife to provide for ioynture, no daughter to endowe
and give in marriage, no elder son to enrich with new inheritance, and spared
purchases, no younger son to be advanced by emprooued rents, toils or
turnings out of Farms, no tenant changed, no fines, no forfeitures taken, no
woods destroyed, no privilege or freedom withdrawn, many new and greater
granted by Kings, and Noble men, to religious persons, their tenaunts and
tenures: not so many iarres and quarrelles in law, contentions and debates of
the poor subjects, comprimitted by ghostly confessors, religious persons, and
kings themselves.

SECT. X. His defense to the Ministry of England.
LAstly, to come to the Protestant Ministry of England, whose anger and
displeasure, as I esteem it least, so I name them last. I appeal to all those
estates I have recounted, for judgment, whether in accusing them of
ignorance, or wilfulness in error, I offer them wrong or no: It is more
agreeing to the law of God, of nature, nations, reason, humane civility,
conscience, or whatsoever may be termed and taken for a law, when it does so
chance, that either all learned and holy men in the christian world, that
ever were in so many hundred years, in all times and places, should be
condemned, or else a few, neither learned nor virtuous, but ignorant and
wicked, should be reproved and disallowed, that the most and first must be
freeed, and the least and last condemned. Then let the Ministerial Clergy
of England yield me patience; for I defend the doctrine and opinion of all
godly and famous professors of Divinity, all Popes, Fathers, and Doctors that
ever were in the Church, all Councelles particular and general, all foreign and
domestical Universities, Schools, Colleges, and places of christian
learning, since the time of Christ, to Martine Luther: where so many thousands
or millions of miraculously approved holy Saints, have lived and died, in
this profession, and only impugn a new, poor, lewd, licentious, and
unlearned company of Ministers, of one Kingdom, or age, and such as in
particular reasons I will demonstrate to be evident wilful, Part. 2. Resolut.
Argum. 72, 73, 74, 75, 79.83, 84, 85.
and ignorant mis-expounders, false translators, and alleadgers of holy
Scriptures, liars, deceitful, heretical, maintainers of old condemned
heresies, actually erring, and reerring in greatest questions, and matters of
Faith, ensigned and marked with all tokens and badges, which holy Scripture
purtraiture, Heretics, Seducers, and Reprobate persons by, that they learned
their religion of the devil himself; that it was first devised, and after
maintained for carnal liberty, and wicked ends, that they teach they know
not what themselves, contrary to holy Scriptures, although we expound them by
their own rules of exposition, contrary to their own proceedings, contrary to
all authority, humane and divine, contrary to all Laws of God, of nature,
nations, particular Countries, of all civil and politic government, having
nothing conducing to man's salvation, or that can bring to heaven; that by all
judgment of Christianity, those that died in that state, without repentance
(except invincible ignorance could excuse some simple Souls) are condemned
in hell: yet, seeing in this I shall dispute chiefly against the private
Religion of one Nation, in one only time, if I should leave out the rest of
the christian world in all ages; and because England now has a particular
Religion to it self, compare the sanctity, learning and authority of former
Catholic English Bishops and Divines, with our present Ministers, I shall
justify my cause to their great confusion.

As to give example in our chiefest Metropolitan See; Whether is it more
equal, and consonant to reason, to give credit (for either the one or the
other must be utterly discredited) to Thomas Cranmer the first Protestant
Regent there, Parkar, and Grindal, notoriously known, Fox tom. 2. mon. in H.
8. Edw. 6. Qu. Mary. parl. 24 H. 8. c. 12. parl. 25. c. 14.20. parl. 26. c.
1.3.14, parl. 27. c. 15. parl. 31 e. 9.14 parl. 32. c. 15.26. parl. 35 c. 5.
parl. 1 Ed. 6 c. 1.2 parl. 2.3. Edw. 6. c. 1.21. parl. 3.4. Edw. 6. c. 10.
parl. 5.6. Ed. 6. c. 1.3.13. parl. 1. Eliz. c. 1. parl. 5 c. 1.28. parl. 13. c.
1. Conuoc. Land. 1562. artic. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. Fox tom. 2. in Cranmer.
not only to have been of three diverse Religions, in substantial points,
one against an other, but every one of them at diverse times to please their
Princes often in the greatest questions, to have differed from him self, and
they to have been of seven or eight diverse Religions, for none of them was
either burned for Protestancie, or quartered for denying Supremacy, or a Saint
for life (to speak the best) renowned for learning, for any monument or
argument I could ever find. And to exemplify in Cranmer their first and
principle, that was to condemn so many learned and holy Saints, that had been
in that Archiepiscopall See, and be a pattern to all his successors: he was
condemned of high treason against his Prince, proved publicly perjured, and
to have counterfaite the hands and consents of fifty Clergy men, for the
advantage of his cause, he recanted his error, was in case of relapse, and
for ignorance was hissed, and exploded in the common Schools of Oxforde, in
public disputations; all which Fox himself is enforced to grant, and can
not deny. Then whether is it more equal to give credit to these, than to Saint
Augustine, Bed. l. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. hist. Angl Admer in vita sancti Ans. Guil.
Malmesb. (...). gest. pont. Angl. Math. West. hist.
the Monk, first archbishop there, Saint Laurence, Mellitus, Iustus,
Honorius, Deusdedit, Theodorus Berctualdus, Tacuinus, and others, three score
and eight in number, almost twenty to one, many, or most holy and learned men,
miraculously approved of God, and for piety and learning admired of the whole
world? If they pretend the decrees of any Protestant Prince, for exposition
of holy Scriptures, and proposition of Religion, Fox tom. 1. mon.
I have cited almost two hundred to one before, and in the laws of that
Prince, which soever any Protestant will assign, either King Henry the eight,
King Edward the sixth, or our Queen Elizabeth, I will overthrow them; and
prove how every one of them has defined false and contradictory things to
themselves, Part. 2. Resol. Re^ig. Argum. 5.6
which (in some part) already appears in my last citations of Statutes. If
they allege their Universities, they are ouermatched: Fox tom. 1. mo^um.
Armar.
in Catholic times at once Oxford has had thirty thousand Students, all ever
of the same mind with us. For other Clergy men, England Catholic had at the
least, if we will conjecture by Fox his computation, above a hundred thousand
more, than England Protestant is able to show. If they speak of sinods, our
sinods were greater in number of men, ten to one, in number of assemblies,
two hundred to one. If they speak of Parliaments and Laws decreed there, the
excess is more, in both respects. If they urge Scriptures, Syn. Land. pro^
1562. articul^ parliam. 5. Eliza. and 13. Eliza. Will. Synops. Pap.
and true sense of them by deduction, by resorting to the original tongues,
the Hebrew in the old, and Greek in the new Testament, comparing of places,
and examining circumstances, which be their own rules of exposition, and the
ground of their profession, or howsoever the comparison is made, the victory is
ours. We use more Scriptures for numbers of Books, Council, Flor. in un. Arm.
Council. Trid. c. de script. Syn. Land. Prot. 1562. art. 6. Trithem. l. script.
Zuit. Sen. Bibl^ sanct. Pantal. Chronol.
more for diversities of tongues, than they, and yet refuse none which they
admit. All our expositours of Scriptures have been continual professed
Students in divinity, expert and acquainted with all Rules, and means of true
exposition, diverse of them most excellent Linguists, and many natural borne
Greeks and Hebrews; and we never received or believed any thing as a matter
of Faith, but that which the whole Catholic Church (which cannot err) had
defined and received. Their expositors of Scriptures were never to be compared
unto these: and at that time when their Religion was decreede and established
(out of Scriptures they must say) there was not one person present, which
either understood Greek or Hebrew, or could use any other of their Rules.
Stowe hist. an. 1. Eliza. parliam. 1. Eliza. ca. 1. Graft. hist. an. 1. Elizab.
For their religion was first approved in the first Parliament of our Queen
Elizabeth, where, not one man learned in Divinity was present, and had
parlamentall voice.

That we Catholics would wilfully err, is too wilful impudency to affirm
it; the profession of that Religion we defend, is severe and strict, in regard
of that we do deny: the punishments and penalties we undergo for our
profession, are many and greatest; the temporal preferrement is none at all.
The contrary Professors are in the contrary case; their Religion is pleasant,
and by professing it, they live in honors and delights, which have enticed,
not only many Catholics to follow Protestancie, Casp. Vlenb. l. 22 cause.
Rain. Calu. Sleid. com.
but Protestants to be Mahumetanes, or of no Religion. That by ignorance we
should be seduced, such sentence cannot proceed but from ignorance, or
malice. We have all authorities, times, and places for our defense: our
enemies have none at all, we were borne in the same Country of England, bred
up in the same Universities English, where, and whence, those Protestants be;
we have travailed all Countries; studied in all christian Universities; we
have learned Divinity of the most famous Professors of the world: we have
disputed in all Schools, and enjoyed the best means of study; we want
wives, riches, honors, pleasures and all impediments of true divinity and
study thereof. Our adversaries are snared and entangled with all these, and
other lettes to hinder them. That rather they than we would be more careful,
to examine any authority or argument belonging to these questions, no man can
imagine, it concerns us most, and the reasons be evident before. If Religion
can be tried in this world, we have sought and found all means; they have
not far sought for any, and found none at all: their daily doubts, changes,
and uncertainty prove it. If they would stand to any trial, we know the
order of all, and will accept of any one, with equal conditions. Conuoc. Land.
1562. arti. 6. parl. 5. Eliz. and 13. Eli.
If they will appeal to Scriptures, as their highest Convocation does, or to
any other authority, so many Catholic Divines of England; And the poor
Author hereof (because I have taken this Work in hand, and must justify my
writing, and not feed my Readers with vain reports, and heare-sayes, as
Protestants do) have read and studied them all, and more than Protestants use.
If they contend to credit the Hebrew Text in the old Testament, and the
Greek in the new, Fulke, Charke, Hanmer, Andr. Will. Synop. Pap. Rain. contr.
Bell. Whitak. contr. Campian.
as the common opinion of their Writers is, I have studied them in those
languages, and the ancient Glosses and Scholies Latin and Greek, for their
Exposition. If they will stand to the report of the most ancient Historians,
Eusebius, Ruffinus, Socrates, Sozomenus, Palladius, Saint Hierome, Saint
Bid, and others, what was the practice of the Primitive Church, and believed
in the unspotted time of Christianity, I have perused them. If they will be
judged by the decrees of the first POPES, Contr. Adm^nit. parliam.
that were Saints, and be in Heaven, as they confess, and ruled the Church in
those times, as their Archebishoppe of Canterbury does acknowledge, I have
often with diligence considdered the Decrees, both of all that were before the
Council of Nice, and after. If they will be arbitrated by the present
Schools, and scholasticall reasons, I have been a poor Auditor both of
scholasticall and controuersiall Questions, where all doubts and difficulties
that wit or learning can devise and invent, are handled, and most exquisitely
debated. If they admit the first four general Counsels of Nice,
Constantinople, Parlam. 1. Eli. c. 1
Ephesus, and Calcedon, which the highest judicial authority of England has
expressly approved by name, or any of the rest, to which, the same, and her
Majesty's consent also gives approbation, I have seen and read them all, from
the first of Nice, to the last of Trent, as all approved particular and
provincial Counsels, which be extant or ordinarily used. If they think there
ever was true Religion among Christians, and that it was exercised in the first
six hundred years after Christ, and that those ancient Fathers which were
the most famous in those days, and ruled the Church as Bishops and Doctors
thereof, were acquainted with it, or Professors of it: I have carefully read
over all the works and writings which be to be had, of Dyonisius the
Areopagite Scholar to Saint Paul, Saint Ignatius, Saint Polycarpus, Saint
Clement, Martialis living in the Apostles time, Saint Iustine, Origin, Saint
Basil, Saint Athanasius, Saint Gregory Nazianzene, Saint Gregory Nissen, Saint
Gregory the Great, Saint Irenaeus, Saint Cyprian, Fulgentius, Pamphilus the
Martire, Palladius, Theodoretus, Ruffinus, Socrates, Sozomenus, Euagrius,
Cassianus, Lactantius Firmianus, Vincentius Lyrenensis, the most famous and
learned Fathers of those uncorrupted ages, all the works of all these I have
read and examined, and conferred them with Saint Augustine, Saint Hierome,
Saint Ambrose, Saint Leo, Papias the scholar of Saint John the Evangelist,
Theophilact, Tertullian, Eusebius Cesariensis, Prudentius, and others, most
excellent Divines, living when all Protestants agree, true faith was
universally preached, and believed. And yet I take God, and the whole Court of
Heaven to witness, before whom I must render an account of this protestation,
my belief, and all my actions (my constant writing in defense of this Faith,
my self voluntarily in disgrace and persecution professing it, will be my
warrant of sincerity.) That the same Faith and Religion which I defend, is
taught and confirmed by those holy Hebrew and Greek Scriptures, those
Historians, Popes, Decrees, Scholies and Expositions, Councels, Schools, and
Fathers, and the profession of Protestants, and all other Sects by the same
condemned. I have examined, and with diligent advise read over many Books and
Writings of the best learned Protestants (the Work to which this Epistle is
a Preamble will be my witness,) and not any that ever came to my hands,
contains any argument or reason, in my judgment, worthy, or able to
withdraw a reasonable and indifferent mind, not blinded with pleasure, or
seduced by affection, from embracing that Catholic Faith which I defend; or
that can establish or prove any other Religion to be true. That I should not
be able to judge what makes for us, what against us, I hope no man will
challenge me of so great ignorance. That I would willingly err and persist in
error, (if my religion were error) to follow a profession so austere and
rigorous to sensual appetite, and desire, if it be compared to Protestant
doctrine, and obstinately heap disgrace and affliction upon my self, to
profess it, when by reforming my opinion or conscience to the contrary, I
might both avoid the penitential life of Catholic profession, and the
perilles and penalties which the Parliaments of Protestants have imposed upon
us, and enjoy the liberties and delights which Protestancie yields, and the
preferrements wherewith their Scholars are rewarded. I am out of doubt no
Reader can be so partial and unequal judge against me, or any one of so many
English Catholic Students, which are in the same case, and defend the same
cause.

SECT. XII. The Conclusion: how dishonorable and unreasonable it is, to
persist in Protestancie: how honorable to grant a Reformation.
WHerefore (noble Patrones) seeing so many worlds of witnesses give evidence
against the profession of Protestants, and every age, time, place, person, and
thing of worthy and credible authority, yield testimony to my defense, I will
recomfort my self, that by your gracious and just protection, no man will be
so wilful to impugn that which God, and all reasonable creatures, and reason,
have always, and by all means propugned. I know your Honors are wise, and I
trust no man will so much condemn himself, in obstinacy, to be of Luthers
mind, (and if he be not, he cannot be a Protestant) which although he
evidently perceived in his own judgment, and manifestly confessed in his own
writings, the whole christian world, all times, places, persons, and
Authorities to be against him, yet he obstinately proceeded in his
singularity. The words of that graceless Luther are these: Luther. tom. 2.
Germ. Ientac. fol. 9. and Praefat. l. de abrog. miss.
How often has my heart panted, and reprehended me, and objected against me?
What? art thou only wise? can it be credible, that all others do err, and
have erred so long a time? Have all Generations so often ever been deceived?
What if thou do err, and bring so many into error, that shall be damned
for ever? Luther. in colloq. mensal. fol. 10. and praefat. sup.
Art thou only he which has the true pure word of God? Has no man in the
world the same, but thou? That which the Church of Christ has hitherto
defined, and so many years observed as good, do thou overthrow it, as
though it were evil, and so do dissipate by thy doctrine, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil Commonweals? Thus, in those, and other places, his
own conscience and judgment did accuse and condemn him, of singular
obstinate rebellion, and disobedience, to the Church of God, as appears, and
he further declares in these words: Luther. tom. 1. Germ. ^entac. fol. 4
colloq. mensal. fol. 158. and 273.
I never put those thoughts and cogitations forth of my mind, that is, that
this work and business (he means his Apostacy) had never been begun by
me: For, what a great multitude of men have I seduced by my Doctrine? I never
had a greater and more grievous temptation, than for my preaching, because I
thought with my self, thou have stirred up all this tumult, in which
temptation oftentimes, I have been drowned even to Hell it self. Thus, his
conscience, so long as he had any, condemned him; thus, he repented his
disobedience, and said, that he hoped, Luther. in Praefat. in tom. 1. Germ.
Ientacul.
the Books which he had written would be burnt, and infect no more. But
when the bridle of Obedience was altogether broken, his Conscience
extinguished, and plumes of pride and sensuality had mounted him so high, and
carried him so far, he behaved himself in his spiritual apostacy, as by
the testimony of Suetonius, Sueton. in vita Iul. Caesar.
Julius Caesar did in his temporal rebellion against the Roman state; which
in the beginning, doubted whether he should go forward, or no; but when he
had cast off shame, brake out into this speech, Iacta est alea; My chance is
thrown, the matter is gone so far, that I can not retire, therefore I must
go forward, howsoever it falls out. Even so Luther (as you have heard) did
in the beginning; but when shipwreck was made of all shamefastness, he
uttered his desperate and unreasonable resolution of obstinate perseueraunce in
these terms; Because I have entered into this cause, Luther. in colloq.
mental. fol. 241. to. 5. germ. fo. 141
now I must look unto it, and of necessity say, It is just. If you ask a
reason, Doctor Martine Luther will have it so. Sic volo, sic iubeo, sit pro
ratione voluntas; So I will, so I command, let my pleasure stand for a
reason: for we will not be Scholars, but Masters and Judges of Papists, yea
we will once (Proteruire and insultare) be malaparte and insulte over them. I
Doctor Martine Luther, an unworthy Evangelist of our Lord Jesus Christ, do
say and affirm this Article (faith alone without works does justify before
God) the Roman Emperor shall suffer it to stand and remain, the Emperor of
the Turks, the Emperor of the Tartares, the Emperor of the Persians, the
Pope of Rome, the Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, Moonkes, Nuns, Princes,
Lords, the whole world, with all Diuelles, and they shall further have hell
fire over their heads, and I will give them no thanks for their pains: let
this be my instinct from the holy ghost, of Doctor Luther, and my true and
holy Gospel. This (right Honorable) was the spirit and ground, whereupon
you see Protestancie was first founded, by this it was builded, by this it was
and is continued. Eccles, c. 10. c. 1
As the Scripture witnesses, Pride, Wine, and Women are the originalles of
Apostacy; and so it was in Luther, so it was in all these Authors of this
innovation. If Pride had not been, they had kept their vow of obedience: If
wine, delicacies, and riches had not borne a sway, they had continued their
vow of poverty: if women, wantonness, and carnal pleasures had not carried
them away, their vow of chastity had not been broken, Protestancie founded
upon those three pillars, had not bin known; true Religion had not been
forsaken. And yet experience has proved, that all the pride and glory of the
world, all the riches, pomps, pleasures and sensible delights, that have moved
carnal men, to oppose themselves against it, cannot overthrow it, but Truth
is stronger than all: and the Problem which the nobles of Darius put under
the pillowe of their Prince, L. 3. Esdr. c. 3.
to be disputed and argued, when he should awake, is performed, Wine is
strong, the King is stronger, Women are stronger: above all things Truth does
overcome. For, whatsoever pleasures, riotous and banqueting delights, honor,
ambition, preferrement, or the power, potencie of King or Potentate could ever
do, or wantonness, and carnal solace, or any thing else King or Queen, man
or woman could hitherto effect, or bring to pass; the verity of this
Religion, and only of this, has still prevailed. My Honorable Patrons, let
this Schedule and Conclusion of the Persian Nobles, be put under the pillowe
of our Princess; Stowe in Comp. hist. in aetat. Reg. Angl. Graft hist. Tom.
Council. Stat. parl. Reg. Angl. Resol. Relig. part 2. per mult. arg.
if she sleep and slumber too long, (she is the oldest Prince since the
Conquest) awake her forth of dream, and let this question of Religion be
now at last disputed in her time; let equal audience be had, the whole
Christian world twenty times in Gennerall Councelles has given sentence for
us, many thousands of Provincial Councelles have pronounced judgment, that
our cause is right, al Christian Kings of England, and other Nations in their
Laws and Parliaments have ratified it to be just, all Popes, Fathers,
Schools, Universities, Colleges of all ages have pronounced their opinion on
our side, all Arguments humane and divine, Bernard. Lut^. Catalog. haeret.
miraculous and ordinary; yea all former Heretics four hundred in number,
all differing from Protestants, in all, or most matters, wherein they disagree
from us, have approved it, and all these condemned Protestants Religion. Salu.
conduct. fact. protest. in Council. Trident. Fox tom. 2. mo^. in Cranm. Lati^.
We have offered them all trialles, given them as great security and safe
conduct, as Popes, Emperors, and Kings could give, to come to disputation:
their own Schools condemned them, and if clapping hands, hissings, and
exclamations, in place of disputation, be arguments of condemnation. Fox
himself bears me witness, that their prime Protestants, Archebishoppe
Cranmer, and Bishop Latimer, their principal Disputants, were thus exploded
and condemned in Oxford. We never had so much as a piece of promise of our
Princess, for any equality of Disputation: what that in the time of her first
Parliament was, our Protestant Chronicles will tell, and many remember, to
their little glory. What the latter in the Tower was, no man is ignorant how
much it did disgrace them. No law of God, of Nature, of any Nation, does, or
can judge, convict, and condemn the vilest Subject in the meanest matter, if
he be absent, but where by contempt he refuses trial. The Question whereof
we contend, is the greatest, the means we have made for audience, be all
that can be deui^, those that have sought it, are not to be contemned, the
judgments that have been pronounced for us, be innumerable, and of highest
authority, if ever any was given against us, you see how unequal and unjust
it was: and yet I offer to prove that no Law or Parliament of England has or
can condemn us, even by her Majesty's proceedings.

Then my Lords and Patrones, as you are wise, you know what to do, as you
are gracious with our Queen, in whose hands the redress of this matter
lies, as you are masters of your selves, potent and beloved with the Nobles,
and powerable with all her people, you are able to perform what is to be
done; as you are merciful, you must take compassion; as justice belongs to
your place, you can not make denial. The matter it self, all circumstaunces
of persons, places, and time, bid me be secure, you will hear my petition.
The matter is, the cause of God, and his highest reverence: your Honorable
persons may not be unmerciful, the persons of our greatest persecutours be
impious, the persons of us your poor suppliants are your most duetifull,
religious, and unjustly afflicted Countrymen, of your flesh and blood; for
place, of that nation whereof you be chief members, and we little limbs, to
deny influence unto us, is to bereave your selves of life, being of the same
body: If I will plead by time, as Daniell did, Dan. c. 9.2. Esa. 1 Ierem.
25.29. Stowe histor. in He. 8. parl. H. 8. Leuit. c. 25.27. Numer. 36. Ios. 6.
we have suffered a long persecution, as he disputed with God, concerning his
promise of Redemption of the captives of Israel, Septuagesimus iam annus est,
it is (or almost is) the seauentieth year of our desolation, since King Henry
the eight began to impose this heavy burden upon us. The time bids me
go forward, for the year of Iubile centesimus annus is begun, when all
exiles were to return, old privileges to be enjoyed, all favors and graces
to be granted. This is the time when all christian Countries in the world,
but we, and such as depend of us, are at peace among themselves. Your Honors
know better than I can inform, Articul. and Coud. pacis 1598. proaem articul.
artic. 1, 2, 3. ait. 31.32.
what a general amity and friendship Clement the eight POPE that now is,
has concluded among them, wherein are comprehended the POPE himself, the
Emperor, Electors, all Kings, Princes, Dukes, Commonweals, States, Rulers
and Regiments of the Popedom, Empire, Bohemia, Spain, France, Germany,
Polland, Sweede, Scotland, Denmark, Venice, Lorraine, Thuscane, Genoa, Luca,
Parma, Playsance, Austria, Mantua, Vrbine, Salamoneta, Monaco, Fynall, Massa,
Plombin, Sola, Carolino, Pallatine, Brandenburge, Wittenbergh, Hessen,
Hamsbach, East Freesland, Cantons of Switzerland and many others. Noble
Patrones, your office is to seek for peace, and maintain it, the estate of
our Princes, and all her people is to wish it, that favor I entreat, is the
way to perfect peace, to peace with heaven, to peace with earth, with all
others, with our selves. All things desire peace, and seek for rest, and your
wisdoms are not, will not, cannot be against it. And to know the way of
peace, there is a ground in Arts, upon which all knowledge is grounded; Quae
conueniunt vnitertio, conueniunt inter se, etc. Those things that agree in a
third thing, agree among themselves, and such as disagree in a third, disagree
among themselves. For if things agree, they must needs agree in something, if
they agree not in that wherein they should agree, of necessity they must be at
variance; and at greater difference, by how much their difference is greater,
in that wherein they should consent; this is evident in all communities and
agreements. That which makes peace and unity with God and man, is true
Religion, that binds them together. That which unites Christians, is the one
certain rule and promulgation of that faith; that which concordeth man with
himself, and the inferior appetites to reason, is the grace which that
Religion gives, and by how much we differ most in these things, by so much
our disagreement with God, with men, with our selves is greater. The Kingdoms,
and Countries, Kings and Rulers of Spain, France, Italy, Polonia, Sueuia,
Transiluania, Bohemia, Austria, Bauaria, Sauoy, Lorraine, Brittanie, Burgundy,
and other Countries agree in these things, and they are at perfect unity and
peace; and until they did agree therein, they were not. And all other
Countries and Kingdoms agree more or less, as they agree herein; there is no
Religion wherein England can agree with any, because the Religion thereof is
different from all; neither can any two Protestant Nations have this peace
together, because no two of them be of one Religion. If we will agree in
this point with Catholic Nations, we shall agree with God, because true
Religion is our union with him, we shall agree with Angels, for the same is
approved with them, we shall agree with all glorious souls in Heaven, for
this is necessary to the communion and communication of Saints; we shall be
at concord with the happy patient Christians in Purgatory, we shall have
peace with our selves, with all Catholic Christians in the world, that be,
that ever were before us, or shall be after. We shall agree with all, with
whom atonement must and ought to be made, and disagree with none, but with
Diuelles, damned spirits, and such as do, will, and can agree with none, and
with whom no good man, in conscience, can agree in such things. And our
agreement shall be perfect, indssoluble, general, and for ever, because the
e^fect and union of Religion is not for one famili^ country, city, time, and
place, as the combinations and carnal unions of kindred, country and such
temporal conjunctions are, but forever, and all, and so is the greatest that
can be. If it be in your powers to procure this atonement, if you perform
it, you shall effect the most honorable and renowned thing our age has seen,
and they which so much desire it, and justly deserve it, will not, can not be
ungrateful in their lives and words, and in their writings, will make you
honorable to all posterities. If you can perform it, and neglect it, although
you be no formal persecutours, yet because you suffer others to do it, and
leave it in their power, when you may amend it, you will be in the degree of
dishonor both with God and man, as those enemies which I remembered before, and
except you recall your minds, like to taste of the same vengeance they have
done; it is the cause of God, which is powerable to punish, that is, just, and
will take reuengement. What is best to be done, your Honors know, and no man
can be ignorant; what you will do, I commit to your honorable and prudent
consideration, and your Honors to Gods protection. And crave leave to give my
lawful charge upon these impious and irreligious enemies of Christ, and
rebellious traitors to his holy Catholic Church, and euer-during Inheritance.
25. Mar. 1601.

Your Honors poor afflicted Catholic Countryman. R. B.

IHS



At Antuerpe Printed by Arnold Coninx 1601.


