AN ABRIDGMENT OF MEDITATIONS of the Life, Passion, Death, and Resurrection of
our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST.

Written in Italian by the R. Father Vincentius Bruno of the Society of JESUS.

And translated into English by R G. of the same Society.

Whereunto is premised a brief Method for Instruction and Practice of
Meditation.

Permissu Superiorum, 1614.

TO THE VIRTUOUS AND RELIGIOUS GENTLE-WOMEN MISTRESS MARY WARD, AND THE REST
OF HER DEVOVT COMPANY IN S. OMERS.
MVCH HONORED AND RESPECTED GENTLE-VVOMEN,
FOR three or four Reasons (commonly) are men moved to dedicate their labors
unto others. Either for their Honorable Descents in Blood; or for their
eminent Places in Dignity; or for their Virtuous Example of life; or lastly for
some respect of Desert due to their Persons. And although in your Humility you
will not acknowledge any of these Titles in your selves: yet do I so clearly
see them, either all, or the most part thereof summed, as it were, and compact
together in your devout Congregation, that I have made choice to present this
little Treatise of Meditations unto your pious Reading and Considerations; in
regard, that you aim at nothing more the^ true Perfection in your selves, by
procuring the spiritual good of others, as a most special means to arrive
thereunto: which through your industrious labor and diligence, you have already
begun with no less laudable, then successful profit in the education of
young Gentlewomen of our Nation, in Piety, Virtue, and other excellent
Qualities beseeming your sex.

In this Book shall you behold (as in a most clear and crystal Mirror)
the virtues of our Blessed Savior lively propounded unto you for speculation.
Herein shall you learn to imitate His, and his Blessed Mothers Humility. Here
shall you spiritually taste of the fruit it self, which from these devout
Meditations and practical applications thereof either to your selves or
others, may be gathered. And therefore I seriously commend the same unto your
diligent Perusal, for that the most easy, and readiest way in your more
fruitful progress, is (in my opinion) not only to have a bare knowledge, but
also a practical exercise of the Heroical Virtues of your Lord and Master
Christ Jesus, the most exact and perfect Model of all Perfection whatsoever.

Accept then (Worthy Gentlewomen) this little Diamond (as I may so term it) or
rather inestimable Treasure (in regard of the heavenly food of Souls it
conteyneth) so much the more proper to your Vocation, and to the course of life
by you chosen; by how much the means, and profit thereby likely to ensue, are
answerable to your intended purpose and desire. My labor heerin has been the
least, but your profit shall be my Comfort, and my poor prayers your Attenda^ts,
ever ready to assist you for the purchasing, and increase of such virtues, as
are principally requisite to the performance of so pious, and worthy a work.
This 30 of September 1614.

Yours ever I. W. P.

THE PRACTICAL METHOD OF MEDITATION.
MEDITATION which we treat of, is nothing else but a dilligent and forcible
application of the understanding, to seek, and know, and as it were to taste
some divine matter; from whence does arise in our affectionate powers good
motions, inclinations, and purposes which stir us up to the love and exercise
of virtue, and the hatred and avoiding of sin: it is the shortest and almost
the only way to attain to Christian perfection: it is the path which all holy
men (of what estate soever) have trodden. Wherefore let those, who desire to
enjoy their company, follow their example.

2. And surely it seems a thing, even impossible, to arrive unto any notable
degree of perfection without this so necessary a means. For perfection being
nothing else, but the rooting out, of vices, and planting of virtues in our
souls: unless we withdraw our affections from earthly objects, and settle the^
on heavenly, we shall never perform the one, nor attain to the other. And
seeing that our affectionate part imbraceth nothing, unless our understanding
both know it, and judge of it, neither can it find out fit objects for heavenly
affections unless it discourse on them, nor move therewith the will, except it
consider the goodness which often lies hidden in them; it follows evidently,
that without meditation no man can attain to any height of Perfection.

3. Besides, it is the most excellent manner of praising God, employing every
power of our soul, in showing forth the excellencies of their Creator, which
is the chiefest end of our creation: neither does it rest here, but brings a
man to heaven (that so I may say) before his time, making him enjoy (after a
sort) eue^ in this life the blessedness of the life to come: which being nothing
else but the seeing, loving, and enjoying of Gods divine Majesty, we giving our
selves by meditation to the most perfect knowledge, to the straitest band of
love, and the sweetest fruition of God which this wretched life affoards, we
participate in the best manner which our estate will permit us, of the happiness
of the Blessed in heaven.

4. True it is, that through the unhappy estate of this troublesome world, man
being distracted by other thoughts, and surprised by other affections, cannot
continually, nor without some little violence, especially at the first, enjoy
this so great a happiness: yet may he, joining his own diligence to Gods help,
so unite himself to his Creator by this exercise, that at least for some
determinate time, he may enjoy him with some familiarity.

5. It will therefore be good for those, who intend to reap the fruit of this
heavenly emploiment, to appointe unto themselves, by the counsel of some one
skillful in matters of spirit, the time they mean to spend every day therein,
and that with so steadfast a resolution, that they make conscience to omit it
without urgent occasion; which omission (although necessary) let them supply at
some other time of the day, if it be possible. And let them be but diligent and
constant at the beginning, and it will prove an exercise most full of
spiritual profit and delight, which will abundantly counteruaile the pains
bestowed therein.

6. And let those who think Meditation to belong only to Religious persons,
and that secular ought not or need not busy themselves therewith, be fully
persuaded, that they are in an error very pernicious. For as secular men have
more distractions by reason of their diverse worldly employments, then
Religious, more temptations by the continual presence of many alluring
objects, more imperfections, sins, and ill habits to conquer: so have they
more need to retire themselves by this holy recollectio^, to propose unto
themselves the highest objects most worthy of love, affection, and prosecution,
to exercise themselves in the acts of the noblest verues; all which is
performed by meditation. And if religious persons being Gods sworn souldiars,
use these weapons, as things belonging to their estate and dignity, secular
people must put them on also, at least for their necessary defense; and of
these many do make great change of life and happy progress in virtue by this
exercise, even in this cold age of ours. And although they are more frequent in
other Countries, which enjoy the happy freedom of the service of God, without
fears or contradictions: yet there want not such (and that of both sexes) even
amongst us, who ouercomming the tumults of the world, and the terrors of
persecution, do bestow daily a good part of their time in this importa^t
business, and continually reap the ple^tifull fruit of their happy labors;
which number if it may be increased by this my poor endeavor, I shall think
it happily bestowed.

7. And although the holy Ghost be the chief Master of this doctrine, yet it
shall not be amiss to set down some brief method of practice, taken out of
approved Authors and experience, that so those who have a will to employ
themselves therein, be not deprived (at least of a great part) of the profit,
for want of instructions.

8. We shall here omit diverse divisions which might be made of meditation, and
divide it only into Spiritual and Historical, which distinction is taken from
the diversity of the matter whereon we meditate. Spiritual meditation is that,
wherein the matter is spiritual, in that sense, as we oppose spiritual to
corporal, for that it contains for the most part no corporal actions: such
are the Meditations of the end of man, of sins, death, judgment, hell,
heaven, the benefits of God, his infinite perfections, and the like.
Historical Meditation is that, where the matter is some History, as the
meditations of the life and passion of our B. Savior, of the virtuous actions
of his B. Mother, or some other Saint Of both which kinds of matter, many
spiritual books are full, so that we may easily take our choice, with the
counsel of our spiritual Father: and the fittest of all, will be the holy
Gospel, especially having helped our selves at the beginning with some larger
discourses.

9. For the better order, and more profit, we must begin with the end wherefore
man was created, with the iugdments of God exercised on sinners, with the
multitude and greatness of our own sins, with death, iugdment, bell, and the
like: which will help much to the rooting out of vices. Then may we meditate on
the life, and passion of Christ, from whose virtues we shall receive glorious
light, to frame the like, with his grace, in our selves. And lastly we may
contemplate the glorious mysteries of our Saviors Resurrection, Apparitions,
Ascension, and the coming of the Holy Ghost, his excessive love toward us,
his manifould benefits, and the abundant reward prepared for his friends in
heaven.

The preparation for Meditation.. 1.
FOR the more fruitful meditating on the divine mysteries, there is required
such purity of Conscience, that we feel not remorse of any great sin; and
finding our selves guilty, we must seek to clear our souls, by those
remedies which God has appointed for that purpose.

2. We must endeavor so to co^pose our passions, and affections in a mean,
that they be neither too weak, nor too strong.

3. We must so recollect our powers and senses, that willingly we neither
think on, see, hear, nor admit any thing, which may breed distraction.
Briefly we must so dispose our selves before our meditation, as we wish to be,
when we shall meditate

4. The fittest time for Meditation (according to the example of the Prophet
David) is the morning, when the powers of our soul are free from other
objects. To be therefore better prepared, we must the night before read over
that part of the book, or writing twice, or thrice, whence we take our matter:
then divide it into three parts or points, more or fewer as we please: after
that propose unto our selves that which we mean to make the especial end of
our Meditation. As if we meditate on the sins of others, our end may be
shame, and confusion, behoulding Gods judgments excercised on them for fewer,
and lesser offenses then we find in our selves: if we meditate upon our own
sins, we may propose for our end Sorrow and Amendment: if on the pains of
hell, fear and horror: if on the joys of heaven, joyful hope and
consolation: if on the life of Christ, imitation of his virtues: if on his
Passion, sorrow, and compassion: if on his Resurrection, joy and
congratulation: and thus according unto the diversity of the matter, the end
or scop^ of our meditation must be different, which with a little diligence we
may easily find out: and upon this end must our intention be especially fixed
at the time of meditation.

5. We must also determine with our selves what Preludiums, as they are termed,
or preambles we must make (of which we shall speak in their due place.) And
lastly we must mark well what persons, words, and works are contained in each
point, if our matter be historical. But if it be spiritual we must call to
mind the chief things occurring therein. All which must be done by a slight
passage only, to open the way for our meditation; and we may find out all the
persons, words, and works, which are expressed, as also all those, which the
decency of the history does show unto us; esp^cially the persons, words, and
works of God, the angels, and devils, which we may find in every history fit
for meditation, with no small spiritual profit: God, and the holy Angels
moving and furthering all good things, and the wicked spirits prou^king to
evil, and hindering in what they can all good.

6. Being in bed, before we betake our selves to sleep, we must think on the
hour we mean to rise at, and call to mind briefly the points of our
meditation: and the same we may do so often as we chance to awake.

7. When we awake in the morning, castinge off all other thoughts, we must
briefly, but with great a^fectio^, give God due thanks for all his benefits,
and for those in particular received that night, and offer up our selves, and
all our actions of the day following, to his honor and glory, proposing
effectually, with help of his holy Grace, to avoid sin, and imperfection
that day, and especially that which we endeavor most to overcome, by
particular examine and care. After this we may begin to take some taste of our
meditation, and stir up in our souls sometimes grief, shame, confusion, or
fear, otherwhiles desire to know with some clearenes the mysteries of the life
and passion of our Savior, so to imitate him diligently, and love him
fervently; sometimes sorrow and heaviness, so to be compartners with Christ,
suffering so many pains for us; sometimes also joy and comfort, to co^gratulate
our Lords glory, and felicity; and at other times other affections agreeable
unto each meditation: Which we may perform more easily, if we keep in our mind
some similitude answering to the affection we would have; or if we repeat some
verse of the psalms, or other Scripture, or Father, which may be to that
purpose, so we do it with attention and affection. And if we meditate more then
once in one day, in that quarter of an hour going before our time appointed,
we must read over diligently the matter of our meditation, divide it, and
settle it in our mind, thinking what we are to do, before whom to appear, and
with whom to talk, and making such preparation, as we appointed for our
mornings meditation.

The performance of Meditation.. 2.
THE hour of meditation being come, we may imagine our selves to be invited by
our good Angel, or by some other Saint to whom we are particulerly devoted,
to appear in the presence of God: wherefore having made the sign of the holy
Cross, and sprinkled our selves with holy water, we may go presently, with a a
kind of spiritual hunger, to the place where we mean to make our meditation,
and standing from thence a pace or two, briefly lift up our mind to Almighty
God, imagining him to be so present with us (as truly he is) that he behouldeth
what we are to do, and does show unto us in that very place his most venerable
and glorious countenance.

2. The presence of God is best framed of our Understanding, by making an act
of faith, whereby we believe Almighty God to be so present there, that he
compasses us round on every side, as the water compasses the fish, and yet is
also within us, and the things before us (as he is in all things) somewhat like
the water which is entered into a sponge, and this by his divine essence,
presence, and power, which penetrate the nature of every creature, and give
them needful help for their operations.

3. It helps much our attentio^ to conceive the presence of God after the
liueliest manner we can, and to fix our meditation as much as human frailty
will permit, continually in the sight of God, persuading our selves, that he is
much pleased to see us proceed with diligence in this spiritual affair, and
much dislikes if we perform it negligently, and in this point we must force
our selves at little at the first, until exercise produce facility.

4. Having conceived God thus present, we must next look upon our own
unworthiness, and with great reverence say, with the Patriarch Abraham, Loquar
ad Dominum meum, cum sim pultuis and cinis, I will speak to my Lord, being
dust and ashes, and with internal adoration, bending the knees of our hare,
kneel down before our Lord, professing the presence of the Blessed Trinity,
with some words fitting that purpose, as Benedictus^^ Sancto and Indiuidua
Trinitas: Blessed be the holy, and (...) divided Trinity, or, Gloria Patri, and
Filio, and Spiritui Sancto: Glory to the Father, to the Son, and to the holy
Ghost, or, Sanctus, Sanctu^, Sanctus, Dominus Deus omnipotens, qui erat, qui
est, and qui venturus est: Holy, holy, holy, Lord God omnipotent, who was, who
is, and who is to come, or the like. But if through indisposition or weakness of
body we find our selves unapt to kneel, we may, having entered into our
meditation, either stand, sit or walk, or use such situation of body as we
shall find fittest for our infirmity. And although we should have our body
well disposed to kneel, yet if we find not in our meditation the comfort we
expect, we may change sometime the position we were in, as from kneeling to
sitting, standing, walking, prostrating our selves upon our face at our
Saviors feet etc.

5. And in travel either on foot or otherwise, we may meditate (...) we go on
our journey, but ordinarily, if we be not otherways hindered, kneling is the
fittest positio^ to procure reverence, and devotion.

6. Being on our knees, or otherways ready to begin our meditation, let us
acknowledge our selves sinners with as much inward feeling of heart as we can,
asking humbly pardon of Gods divine Majesty, saying with diuotion the four
first verses of the Miserere Psalm, the Confiteor, or some other prayer to
that purpose.

7. Then encouraging our selves with hope of pardon, we may behold the majesty
of God there present, and acknowleging the great band we have to employ our
selves wholly in his service, make with feeling devotion the preparatiue Prayer;
which is nothing else but a short petition, wherein we ask help of God, that
all our powers and actions, and that in particular we now go about, may be
sincerely directed, and performed to the honor of God, and the benefit of our
own soul.

8. Then must we proceed to the prea^bles or Preludiums, which are three if the
matter be historical, but if it be not of some history, they are only two.

9. The first Preludium or Preamble (which is proper only to the meditation,
made upon some history) is a breife calling to mind of the mystery we are to
meditate, no otherways then if we should tell it to another, without any
discourse thereon at all.

10. The second is common to all Meditations, and is an imagination of seeing
the places where the things we meditate on were wrought, by imagining our
selves to be really present at those places; which we must endeavor to
represent so lively, as though we saw them indeed, with our corporal eyes;
which to perform well, it will help us much to behold before-hande some,
Image wherein ^^at mystery is well represented, and to have read or heard what
good Authors write of those places, and to have noted well the distance from
one place to another, the height of the hills, and the situation of the towns
and villages. And the diligence we employ herein is not lost; for on the well
making of this Preludium depends both the understanding of the mystery, and
attention in our meditation.

11. If our meditation be of some spiritual matter of which we spoke before
which affordes no history, we must frame our second Preludium according
thereunto: as If we meditate on sins, we may imagine our soul to be cast
out of Paradise, and to be held prisoner in this body of ours, fettered with
the chains of disordinate Passions, and affections, and clogged with the
burden of our own flesh. If on Hell, we may behold with our imagination the
length, breadth, and depth of that horrible place. If on Heaven, the spati^^^
plesantnes of that celestial Country, the glorious company of Angels and
Saints. If on Gods judgment which must pass upon us, our Savior sitting on
his Judgment Seat, and we before him expecting the final Sentence: if on
death, our selves laid on our bed, forsaken of the Physicians, compassed about
with our weeping friends, and expecting our last agony. Thus our second
Preludium in these Meditations which are spiritual (as we call them) must be
some similitude, answerable to the matter.

12. The third Preludium in all Meditations is a short, but earnest prayer to
God for that thing which we have proposed, as the scope, and end of our
Meditation, of which we have already spoken. Having finished these Preludiums,
we must begin the first point of our Meditation, exercising thereon the three
powers of our Soul, Memory, Vnderstaning, and Will. With our memory we must
(as it were) rehearse unto our selves in order, that which is contained in the
first point of the matter we prepared, calling to mind also such things as we
have read in the holy Scripture, and other good Authors, or heard of discreet
and devout persons, if it make for the matter we have in hand; and lay open to
the view of our understanding the persons, words, and works contained in the
first point, if it contain any, if none, at least the most notable matters
therein.

13. Then we must exercise our understanding upon that which the memory has
proposed, and search out diligently, what may be considered about that present
object, inferring one thing from another, framing from thence true, pious, and
spiritual co^ceipts, fit to move our Will to virtuous affections. Lastly for
that the will is naturally inclined and moved to affect tho^^ things which the
understanding proposes, we must procure with all diligence to stir up in our
selves those affections which the operations of our understanding going before,
incline us unto.

14. And having thus exercised the three powers of our soul upon the first
point, we must pass on to the next. But finding our selves employed with
spiritual profit about that we have in hand, we must not be follicitous to
pass on further, although by our long stay in one point, we should not have
leisure to go over them all, within our determined time, But it will be best to
satisfy our selves fully where we find spiritual comfort, and reserve the rest
for an other time of Meditation We must also know, that the exercise of our
Memory and Understanding in Meditation, is ordained to the motion of our will,
and must therefore be used with such moderation as may serve for the moving
thereof, and no more, that so our Meditation may be full of pious and good
affections, not vain and filled with curiosities.

15 We may frame our concei^es upon diverse heads, which our matter will yielde
us: as if it be historical, we may consider in the persons there represented,
who they be, their thoughts, and affections, their inward virtues, and out
ward carriage, with other circumstances. In the words we may consider their
first and proper sense, as also the figurative and translated signification, if
there be any, and the end wherefore they are spoken. In the works are to be
considered their nature, what they are, with their circumstances, comprehended
in this verse usual amongst those who treat of moral actions, Quis, Quid,
Vbi, Quibus a^uilijs, Cur, Quomodo, Quando, wayghing well what person that is,
by whom the action is done, examining what he speaks, and does, where, with
what help, or assistance, for what end, in what manner, and at what time.

16. But if our matter be spiritual and affoard no persons, with their words
and works, we must endeavor to conceive the matter thoroughly in our
understanding, and to find out the true sense and meaning of the words, which
represent the matter unto us, and the right nature of the things therein
represented, and we may help our selves much to the framing of spiritual
conceits, if we apply unto our matter familiar similitudes, drawn from our
ordinary actions, and this as well in historical, as spiritual meditations.

17. The affections which we ought to procure by these conceits are many, and
diuerses; nor can it be assigned, which we should always procure, they chiefly
depending on the gift of the holy Ghost. Yet whilst we attended especially ^o
the roo^ing out of vices, which (...) termed by the Masters of spirit via.
purgatiua, the purgative way, we ought to labor first for great grief, with
shame and confusion for our sins, for our negligence, and couldnes in Gods
service, for carelesnes and sloth in seeking perfection. Secondly a fear of
offending God, of loosing his grace, of not fulfilling our obligation in
answering to his heavenly voice and inspirations, and of severe punishment for
ou^ sins. Thirdly, a perfect hatred of all sin, coldness, and negligence in
spirit, of all earthly things which with-hould us from God, and of our own
pleasures and contentments.

18. Fourthly, a desire of mortification of our body, our senses passions, and
inclinations to honor and estimation, submitting our selves to the lowest
persons, accompting our selves the base^^ (...) all others, and desiring that
others should esteem us so. Likewise when we principally endeauou^ to plant
virtues in our soule^, which is termed via illuminatiua, the illuminatiue way,
we must sti^ up first a love and desire of all virtues, as also a desire to
know the person and actions of our E. Savior, so to imitate him the better.
Secondly a hope to please God with the help of his holy grace to persevere in
his service, to free our selves from coldness, and defects, to attain
perfection in this life, and ^ternal happiness in the life to come.

19. Thirdly, sorrow and co^pass^o^, for the suffering of our Saui^ur, for the
blindness and ingratitude of those who offend him so often, and greiuously. And
whilst we chiefly seek to unite our souls to God, which is called ^i^
vnitiua, the unitive way, we must stir up in our selves, first an exceeding
love of God: Secondly a spiritual reioycin^ in his infinite riches and
perfections, as also in the glory and happiness of our Savior risen from
death, and received into heaven with trumph and majesty. Thirdly, a grateful
joy for the charity he has showed to mankind, and our selves in particular,
and for so many and great benefits bestowed upon his friends. Fourthly, a
vehement desire, that Gods name be known and sanctified, that he may reign
our all souls without resistance, and that his holy will may be fulfilled in
all places: and many more such like affections as we have here set down, the
Holy Ghost will teach us, in all these ways, if we dispose our selves with a
great desire of them, and humility, (altogether necessary for the receiving of
this divine influence) yet not omitting our own diligence.

20. We may move and strenghthen these affections, by earnest demanding them
of God, either with words of the holy Scrip^^^e or some devout saying of our
own. By obsecration, instantly asking them of God for his infinite love,
Goodness, and mercies sake^ for the most grateful merits of his beloved son,
for the sanctity and purity of his Blessed Mother. By gratitude, giving
thanks to God for so many benefits, so many bountiful and assured promises
(descending into particulers.) By oblation, offering our selves to God,
prepared and ready to do whatsoever he has taught us, to imitate our Savior
so near as we can, to suffer whatsoever for his sake, and to seek all means
to please his divine majesty. By good purposes, intending most firmly in the
sight of the whole Court of heaven to do all that we know, or shall know to
appertain to the glory of God, to make good use of his grace, and heavenly
succors, to observe perfectly his Commandments, and fulfill his holy
inspirations. By praises, extolling to the highest degree of our power Gods
mercy, bounty, patience, charity etc. celebrating his divine greatness, his
infinite wisdom, his unmeasurable goodness, his unspeakable power. By
reprehending our selves, as slothful, undevout, hard, ungrateful, and that
after so many benefits and helps, so many illuminations and incitations to
goodness. By admiration, wondering at the goodness, patience, and charity of God,
at our own negligence, and coldness in spirit, at the contempt showed by us, of
so many favors, and graces, so many and clear inspirations. By framing unto
our selves some person, imagining sometimes that God complains and reprehendes
them, that he exhorts and promises us help, sometimes imagining that some
Saint, most notable in some one virtue, laments that he is no more imitated,
and sometime that the Diue^^ rejoices and triumphs, that he is more followed
then God, and knows so well the means, to bring us to sin, coldness, and
carelessness of our perfection and salvation, sometimes also faygning the very
virtues in some venerable shape bewayling their neglect, and contempt: and many
more ways may we find by the help of the holy spirit, the chiefest Master of
this heavenly doctrine of Prayer. Of these ways we may use more, or less,
answerable unto the affections we mean to procure, and according unto our own
necessity. And in the exercise of them we may very profitably repeat in our
understanding, some affectionate words of the holy Scripture, or Fathers, or
some other that are full of devotion.

21. In exercising that which we have hitherto set down, we must use such
moderation, that we hurt not our head, or breast, with overmuch force: for
beside^ those corporal harms that aris^ from thence, no small spiritual^
evils follow, as a certain languishing and slacknes in meditation, for fear
of hurting our selves, a ne^ coldness and weakness in our affections, small
disposition to receiu^ the seeds of divine inspirations, and influences,
facility in leauin^ of our meditations either of ou^ own accord, or by the
counsel o^ our Ghostly Father, which euil^ may be easily avoided, if we use n^
violence unto our selves in the act^ of meditation. As if we strain no^ our
breast, if we seek not t^ wringe out tears, if we be not to^ intentive in the
actions of ou^ soul, but use so much diligenc^ in our meditation, as we would
use in talking with some person ^ much respect, which will be suffici^ if God,
who disposes all things sweetly, do not call us extraordinarily to a more
forcible application

22. At the end of our meditation we must make with our understanding some
affectionate speech or Colloquium to God, and sometimes also to some Saints
which may be either one or more, according to our devotion, being the
conclusion of our whole meditation, and a reverent departure from the great
Lord of whom we have had so gracious audience, giving him thanks, offering
our selves and ours to him, and demanding grace and succor for our selves, our
friends, and benefactors, and for whom soever we have obligation to pray,
which three things we may ordinarily use at the end of every meditation. We
may sometimes also accuse our selves, and ask pardon, as also impart unto him
our affairs, and those of our friends entreating counsel and help for their
good performance, extolling his infinite mercy and love, still following the
affection we shall the^ feel.

23. In these speeches we may talk with God as a seruan^ with his Master, as
a son with h^^ Father, as one friend with another, as a spouse with her
beloved bridgrome, or as a guilty prisoner wit^ his Judge, or in any other
manne^ which the holy Ghost shall teach v^

24. Having ended this ou^ speech, we may add some vocal prayer, if we will,
as the Pater noster, if we speak to God the Father, the prayer Anima Christi
if to the Son, the Hymn V^^ Creator, if to the holy Ghost, Au^ Maria, or Aue
maris stella, if to the B. Virgin, or some other devout prayer, in which we
find devotion and comfort.

25. We may make such manner of speeches in other places of our meditation, and
it will be best, and almost needful so to do, but at the end we must never
omit them, and then only use the vocal prayer to conclude them with all.

26. Departing from the place of Meditation, we may make an internal and
external reverence to God, whose conversation we shall then leave of, with an
intent to renew often in the day the remembrance of that which passed in our
Meditation.

What is to be done after Meditation.. 3.
HAVING ended our Prayer, we may either sitting, standing, or walking examine
the preparation to our Meditation, the conceyuing the presence of God, the
making our Preparatiue prayer, and Preludiums, the exercise of our memory,
vnder^tanding, will, imagination, and ap^etits, and the whole progress of ^ur
meditation, with our speech ^t the end, that so finding our meditation to have
succeeded well, we may proceed in like manner afterward, if ill, we may ^eeke
out the faults and amend them.

2. We may examine the distractions we have suffered, and the remedies we have
used to reclaim our selves, which is best done, by settling our attention a
new to the matter we have in hand, so soon as we perceive the distraction, or
by humbling our selves before God, with repre^he^sion of our negligence, or by
calling for help against the violence we endure.

3. We may examine the consolations we have felt, seeking the occasions of
them, and thanking God for them. These consolations consist in internal light
of Gods grace, whereby we know something a new belonging to our salvation, or
perfections, or else apprehend more clearly and fully such things already
known. They consist also in certain inward motions, which incline us to love
nothing but for the love of God In tears also springing from love, or grief,
or any other cause belonging to the honor and glory of God. In the increase
of faith, hope, and charity, and in joyful comfort which kin^les in us the
desire of perfe^tion.

4 We may examine the de^olations if we have had any, sear^hing out their
causes, being sor^owfull for the fault which we may have committed with
purpose of amendment. Under the name ^f desolations are comprehended that which
spreades it self like ^ veil before the eyes of our soul, ^indring us from
the things apper^ayning to the glory of God, and ^ur own perfections; That
which ^roubles and prouokes as to seek ^or earthly and external things: That
which breeds in us distrust ^f obtaining perfection, of praying ^ell, knowing
the will of God, and of perseverance in any good ^ourse begone: That which
weakens ^ope, obscures faith, and cooles ^harity. That, which bringes our soul
to spiritual coldness, slacknes, ^eauines, and wearines.

5. We may consider whethe^ we have had abundance of ma^ter for our discourse
or scarcity, e^deauoring to find the causes o^ both, proposing amendment o^ the
fautles therein committed W^ may examine what affections w^ have felt,
considering how the^ have been stirred up, how long and in what manner they
hau endured, that we may use the lik good means another time, and avoid all
defects we may have fallen into. We may also examine what and how many good
purposes w^ have made, from whence they hau^ proceeded, how steadfast and
effectual they have been, renewin^ them again with new fervor.

6. We may note in some little book those things which hau^ passed in our
Meditation, or some part of them, if we think the^ wort^ the pains, and thank
Almight^ God for the performance thereon procuring so to live, as we hau^
learned the^ of his divine Wisdom^

THE PRACTICAL Method of Application of our five S^nses, by way of imagination
to the divine Mysteries.
HAVING finished the practice of Meditation, which is principally performed by
the operations of our Memory, Understanding, and Will, it shall be good to
join unto it the manner of Application of our senses, by way of imaginati^n to
the same objects which w^ make matter for meditation; and this the rather, for
that it is a branch of meditation, and an exercise also of no small profit, and
will yield us more variety to avoid tediousnes, as being a thing more easy to
perfor^e then meditation, serving for those who either want skill or ability to
perform the other.

The preparation to the application of our Senses.. 1.
BESIDES the things set down in the former practice, which after their manner
must be used also in this, if we have ability and knowledge, the best
prepararion will be to meditate according unto the directions given upon the
same matter taht we mean to apply our senses unto; but for defect of either,
we must read or hear attentively once, or oftener the matter, observing the
number and quality of persons, words, and works, and other objects of our
senses, that so we may be fully possessed of the^ all.

1. It will be expedient also to recollect our selves, f^r the space of a
quarter of an hour, or not much less before we begin, in such sort, that our
senses be not distracted, nor imploved (but upon necessity) in any other
object, so to be more ready and prepared to admit the matter that shall be
proposed unto them.

3. In this same time also we may procure to stir up in our souls some
affections answerable unto our matter, as we advised in our former practice, as
desire, love, joy, sorrow, and the like, considering also whither we are to go
what to do, and with whom to speak.

The actual application of our Senses.. 2.
THOSE things set down in our former practice, to be done before the
consideration of the points, are here also to be used; where we must note,
that being to apply our senses to two or more mysteries at once (which is often
used) it will be best to join the Preludiums together, as to make of two
historis one continued, so likewise of two compositions of places we must make
one by imagining our selves successively present to the^ both, acco^payning the
persons from one place to another, as also to put two petitio^s into one, and
ask both things in one prayer.

2. The exercise of this application is, to propose the object of some one
sense, as of the sight (which as commonly first begone withal) as though we
truly saw it: the^ to make thereon a brief discourse, collecting thence some
spiritual co^ceipts, with the motion of our wills; as beholding our B. Savior
on the Cross, having seen him with our imagination fastened with nails,
crowned with thrones, and clothed with wounds, we may say thus with our
understanding: It wa^^^ my Saviors hands to suffer this for my sake or not,
and none indures pain for another but he loves him excessiuely; he therefore
enduring these grievous pains for me, has testified his abundant charity,
with the most certain proof of suffering for my sake. What do I then? how do
I repay this infinite love of my dear Lord? Why love I not him above all? why
serve I not him faithfully, by fulfilling his commandments? why endure I not
patiently the Crosses he sends me etc? we may the^ stre^gthen our affections
with good purposes and resolutions, in this manner: I will therefore seek by
all means possible to love so loving a Lord: I will employ my self wholly in
his service, and undertake the hardest difficulties for his sake, and most
willingly be nailed with him to the cross, nor will I by offending him
again make his pains more gri^uous: so descending to more particular
affections and purpos^, as we shall find our conscience to have need. And
having thus viewed one object, we may embrace another, until we have passed
over the^ all, making thereon the like discourses, with the motion of our
affection, to which and we may make use of the ways set down in our former
practice.

3. To have suff^ciency of matter in this application of Senses, it will be
needful to know the principal objects of each Sense.

4. The sight be boulds color, light, figure, quantity, number, motion, rest,
distance, situation or position, and such other qualities.

5. The hearing perceiues the voice, sighs, groans, laughter, noise, sound,
number, motion, and the rest.

6. Objects of the taste are meats, and drinks, and the diversity thereof.

7. The Sense of smelling is employed about smells, and distinguishes their
quantity, quality, number and diversity.

8. The touching is exercised upon bodies, perceiving their quantity, quality,
weight, figure, number, motion, rest, distance, situation.

9. Some of these material objects of our senses are sometimes not to be found
in mysteries we meditate upon, especially the object of tasting and smelling;
we may then apply our senses figuratively upon spiritual objects, with a
certain proportion and relation to corporal. As if we would exercise our
Senses upon the speech of our Savior, we may imagine our selves to see the
words of Christ proceeding out of his divine mouth, like a beam of light,
reaching unto the ears and very hearts of the auditors, to hear their heavenly
sound, which no sooner touches the hearers hearts, but finding them stony or
hard, does mollify and divide them.

10. We need not in this application bind our selves to so strict an order as
to begin with the sight, or any other of the senses, and so to apply that first
to all the objects thereof, but we may begin where we please, and where the
objects are most appare^t: and if one object may be apprehended by diverse
senses, it shall be well to apply it to them all, and then afterward make one
short discourse thereon, for so shall we find our understanding better
satisfied, and our affection more forceably moved.

11. We may also apprehe^d not only those things which are expressed in the
mystery we have in hand, but also those which may occur, according to the fit
dece^cy of the history.

12. Having ended this exercise we may make one or m^re Coloquiums, according
to the disposition of our aff ction even as we make the^ at the end of our
meditation, which we shall do the better if we maintain or renew some of
those liu^l^ imaginations, in which we found most spiritual comfort.

What we ought to do after the application of our Senses.. 3.
WE must do all those things which are set down in our former practice, to be
done after meditation, so far forth as they appertain to this exercise.

2. We may examine in particular how we have apprehended the objects of the
senses with our imagination, whether with ease or difficulty, with right, or
vvrong, clear or doubtful apprehensions, as we said before of Meditation,
purposing to avoid afterward that which has proved ill, and to continue
that which has succeeded well.

THE FIRST PART OF THE EVANGELICALL HISTORY, Containing those things, that
concern the Infancy and Childhood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
I. MEDITATION. Of the Council held in Heaven, touching the Incarnation of the
Son of God.
1. REPRESENT unto your self the whole face of the earth with all the
diversity of people upon the same; and then consider the most Holy Trinity, who
from the highest heavens does view and behold all things.

2. Give ear to the speeches and discourses that men do make, every one about
his own affairs: hearken how some do forswear themselves, others do curse
and blaspheme; some take pleasure in lying, others in using evil language; and
now and then listen to the Council that the divine Persons do hold concerning
the Redemption of mankind

3. Together with this take notice of the actions and works o^ men, of the
murders, thefts and other sins that were committed, whilst the most Holy
Trinity di^ resolve to help mankind by the Incarnation of the Divine Word.

Let us learn,
1. How profitable the meditation of heavenly things is.

2. How wary and circumspec^ we must be in all our actions, seein^ than the
revenging eye of Gods justice is always watchful over us.

3. To render a million of thanks to God the Father for the Incarnation of his
Son, Savior of the world.

II. MEDITATION How the Angel Gabriel did foretell to Zachary the birth of S,
John Baptist. Luke 1.11.
GOD used such mercy toward Zachary, who prayed for himself and his wife, as
well as for the people of Israel, that he did not only grant his request, but
also sent him an Angel, who did tell him even the name of the son, that
should be borne unto him.

2. Zachary much astonished at these news, yea saltring as it were betwixt
fear and hope, and not forthwith giving credit to the Angels words, was made
dumb vn^ill his sons nativity.

3. Elizabeth having conceived, was so afraid at these news, that she durst
make no mention thereof, until the fifth month was past.

Let us learn,
1. To pray with attention and reverence if we desire to be heard, and receive
the fruit of our demau^ds by the ministry of Angels that do enuiron us.

2. Not to give credit lightly to every spirit, but to try and prove those that
be of God.

3. To acknowledge the benefits of Almighty God, before we do diuulge them.

III. MEDITATION. Of the Annunciation. Luke 1.26,
1. CONSIDER how our B. Lady being in prayer the Angel Gabriel came to
advertise her, that she should conceive in her womb, and become Mother of the
Son of God, and Savior of the world.

2. The Virgin was much amazed at these tydinges: nevertheless being certified
by the Angel that all should be done by virtue of the holy Ghost, without
prejudice of her virginity, she was wonderfully comforted, and rendered thanks
to God.

3. Consider the singular virtues that our B. Lady did show, when she received
this embassage, to the end that you may imitate them.

Let us learn,
1. Her wisdom, when she began to ponder with her self, what the Angel would
say, whence he came, and what this salutation meant?

2. The zeal of her purity, when she said, How shall this be done, seeing I
have promised and vowed unto God perpetual Chastity?

3. Her obedience and humility, when being instructed by the Angel, she gave
her consent and said: Behold here the handmaid of our Lord.

IIII. MEDITATION. Of the Visitation. Luke 1.39.
1. CONSIDER how the Mother of God, understanding by report of the Angel, that
her cosen Elizabeth, who long time had been barren, had now miraculously
conceived in her old age, went humbly to visit her, so to serve and assist her
in all her necessities.

2. Elizabeth saluted by the Virgin was replenished with the holy Ghost, and
with so great consolation, that even the little infant she did bear in her
womb, did leap for joy.

3. The Virgin Mother hearing how Elizabeth did call her mother of God and
Blessed among women, praised and magnified her Creator, acknowledging and
confessing him to be the author of all her good.

Let us learn,
1. To be careful and diligent to exercise the works of charity, and willingly
to serve and assist those that need our help.

2. To seek the means to be visited by our B. Lady, by rendering our selves
wholly devoted unto her.

3. To attribute and refer always all good and praise to God the Creator,
if we will be exempted from ingratitude and pride.

V. MEDITATION. Of the Nativity and Circumcision of S. John Bapt. Luke 1.59.
1. CONSIDER how not only the kinsfolk and allies, but also the neighbors
reioiced to see Elizabeth, that was barren, bring forth a fair son in her
old age.

2. Not without divine inspiration, did the Father and Mother, contrary to the advice of all their kinsfolk, call the child John, which name was foretold
them by Gods commandment.

3. S. John being circumcised the tongue of his Father Zachary was
miraculously loosed, to the end that he, whom we read not to have done any
other miracle all the rest of his life, should at leastwise in the beginning
thereof, give proof and argument of his future holiness.

Let us learn,
1. To be glad of our neighbors good,

2. To follow divine inspirations.

3. To bless and praise God continually with Zachary, for the benefits
received at his hands.

VI. MEDITATION. Of the advertisement S. Joseph received, when he did
deliberate to dismiss his espouse. Mat. 1.18.
1. CONSIDER how S. Joseph perceiving that the Virgin, when she returned from
Zachary his house, was great with child: and being a just man would not charge
her with any thing, much less complain or accuse her to the Judge, but
determined with himself to dismiss her secretly.

2. How whilst he was in this deliberation the Angel appeared unto him in
sleep, and did free him from so great care as troubled him, recommending unto
him affectuously both the mother and the child that should be borne of her.

3. Think with what joy this devout person was surprised, when he received
this vision, and by means of it did come to know the integrity of his espouse,
and the divinity of the infant that she was to bring forth.

Let us learn,
1. How holy persons are somtymes tossed and vexed with tentations, masked with
the veil of some good thing.

2. That God does never suffer us to be tempted above our forces.

3. That we ought to bear singular devotion to S. Joseph spouse of the Blessed
Virgin, who is of great authority with our Savior and his blessed mother.

VII. MEDITATION. How the Blessed Virgin when her time grew near, went to
Bethleem. Luke 2.1.
CONSIDER how the Emperor having published an Edict, by which it was enjoined
that every one should repair to the chief City of the Quarter where he did
reside and dwell, there to be enrolled and registered; the B. Virgin in company
only of her husband Joseph departed toward Bethleem, indurirg many
discommodities through roughnes of the winter.

2. How being entered into Bethleem and going through the whole City to find a
lodging, she was shamefully refused of many, and skorned of others; and finally
could get no house nor Inn where to harbor.

3. How being at the length constrained to withdraw her self from the press
of people, she retired into the suburbs and lodged in an old stable, a place
more fit for beasts then for men, where she passed over all that night.

Let us learn,
1. To obey the secular Magistrate and worldly power.

2. To have pity and compassion of the succourlesse estate of Pilgrims.

3. To bear patiently the discommodities of poverty and want, when occasion is
presented.

VIII. MEDITATION. Of the Nativity of Christ. Luke 2.6.
1. BEHOLD how the Son of God has humbled himself to exalt us, and in what
poverty he would be borne to enrich us. Consider also how so soon as he was
borne he began to suffer for us.

2. How the holy mother is forced to lay her son in a crib or ma^ger of
beasts, and with what reverence she adored him, and wrapped him up in poor
swaddling clothes.

3. Contemplate what joy the Angels received, and what feast they made at our
Saviors nativity, albeit they knew right well that he came into the world to
exalt humane nature above theirs.

Let us learn,
1. To be humble, and never to contemn poverty.

2. To bear great reverence and respect to so high and potent a Lord that is
borne in so great humility and poverty.

3. To rejoice evermore at the good of our neighbors.

IX. MEDITATION. Of the Sheepheards watching over their flock. Luke 2.8.
1. CONSIDER how our Lord and sovereign Shepherd being borne, vouchsafed to
manifest himself not to great Princes and Lords, but to poor and humble
sheepheards that did watch for the good of their flock in the same country
where he was borne.

2. Consider how the sheepheards, seeing the Angel and the brightness wherewith
he was environed, had great fear; but yet they received greater consolation,
when they heard that the Messiah, Savior of the world, was borne.

3. Mark the signs which the Angel gave them to find out and know our
Savior. You shall find (quoth he) the infant swadled in clothes, and laid in a
manger. Here are to be noted the conditions of those by whom God does suffer
himself to be found.

Let us learn,
1. That he is found by those that love Simplicity, signified by his chilhood
or infancy.

2. By the Poor, noted by the swaddling clothes in which he was wrapped.

3. By the Humble, base, and contemned of the world, represented by the manger,
in which he was la^d.

X. MEDITATION. Of the Circumcision of Christ. Luke 2.21,
1. CONSIDER how the son of God not content to have obeyed his eternal
Father becoming man in his incarnation, would also submit himself to the Law
of Moses by his Circumcision, as if he had been a sinner.

2. Consider the pain which his so tender body did feel; when he was
circumcised with a knife of stone: as also the compassion that his sweet mother
had of him.

3. Consider how being circumcised he was called JESUS, that is to say Savior,
and was afterward restored to his mother all bloody as he remained.

Let us learn,
1. Humility by our Saviors example, in that he took upon him the mark and
sign of a sinner.

2. Not to care much whatsoever men do say of us: for if our Savior being most
innocent was put in the rank of sinners, we may well comfort our selves to be
held and esteemed for such.

3. To have a special devotion to the name of JESUS, who does promise us
salvation and life everlasting.

XI. MEDITATION. Of the coming of the three Kings. Matthew. 2.1.
1. CONSIDER the great affection and devotion which these good Kings had to see
and adore our Savior newly borne, when to come and find him they left their
goods, howses, countries, families, and all that they had.

2. How being arrived in Jerusalem they did boldly demand where he was, that
was borne King of the Jews? notwithstanding that they might easily perceive
the fear and dread that these news brought as well to king Herod, as to all
the people.

3. How having received intelligence that he whom they sought for, should be
borne in Bethleem, they departed thither, and finding him in very poor estate,
they did notwithstanding adore him, and present him with the most precious
gifts they had: and by commandment of God which the Angel declared unto them,
they returned home by another way.

Let us learn,
1. Not to spare any thing to find and serve our Creator and Saui^ur.

2. Not to fear any man living ^e he never so great and potent, when does
concern the honor of God.

3. To reverence and honor our Savior in the B^ Sacrament of the Altar,
albeit he seem to our corporal senses not to be there with the greatness and
magnificence convenient to so high a Majesty.

XII. MEDITATION. Of the Purification of our B. Lady, Luke 2.22.
1. CONSIDER how our B. Lady went up to Jerusalem to present her son
according to the law, although he were not bound thereunto.

2. How the contentment and joy which old Simeon felt, taking our Savior in
his arms, was such and so great, that desyring nothin^ else in this life, with
incredible devotion he requested to die in peace.

3. Cast your eyes upon our B. Lad^ and behold with what reverence she does
offer her Son unto God the Father: and think how the Son himself for our
love and salvation does also present himself to the eternal Father.

Let us learn,
1. To be obedient to the Law of God, and to the ordinances of our Superiors.

2. Not to desire any other thing in this life but JESUS Christ, to the end we
may dye content.

3. To offer our selves often and with all our hearts to God, and not ^o be
ungrateful for the benefits be^towed upon us.

XIII. MEDITATION. Of Christ his flight into Egypt. Matthew. 2.23.
WE must consider how good Joseph, being ^y night admoni^hed by the Angel take
the little infant JESUS and his mother, and to retire into ^gypt, obeyed
promptly, not exc^sing himself that it was winter ^ a bad time to tr^uaile in,
or that h^ knew not the way, or that the people of Egypt were idolatours an^
infidels.

2. How our Lord the King o^ Kings does fly the cruelty and tyranny of an
earthly King: and how even from his tender age he begins to suffer
persecution for our i^struction and salvation.

3. How the holy mother did bea^ her beloved babe in her arms, being more
molested in mind for compassion of the cold and discommodit^ that her little
Son endured, the for the pain that she her self took for him in so long and
tedious a vo^ age, which led them into a stra^^ country, where they were
constr^ned to earne their living with their hand-worke.

Let us learn,
1. To obey promptly even secr^ admonitions by S. Joseph's example.

2. To suffer willingly with our Blessed Lady.

3. Not to care in what place we ^ine, so it be to the greater glory of God.

XIV. MEDITATION. Of the Killing of the Innocents. Matthew. 2.16.
1. CONSIDER the fury and rage of Herod, who having understood how the three
Kings were returned to their country by another way, and being advertised ^f
that which passed in the Temple ^he day of the Purification, did command, that
all the little men-chil^ren in Bethleem, and in all the ^orders thereof, from
two years ^ld and under, should be killed.

2. Consider the grief which ^ur Lord did feel even then, seeing, ^s he did
well know all things, so many little infants to be so cruell^ slain for his
sake.

3. Consider the cruelty of thos^ barbarous souldiars, which hauin^ no regard
neither of age, nor of sex, nor of the doleful mothers, did cover the streets
with bodies of the dead infants.

Let us learn,
1. How hurtful pride and ambition are, which make a man t^ band himself
against God, as H^rod did.

2. How we ought not to fear the force of tyrants who have no power but upon
the body.

3. That it imports not when or where we dye, so it be in God grace, and for
his honor and glory.

XV. MEDITATION. Of our Saviors return out of Egypt. Matthew. 2.19.
1. CONSIDER how after that our Savior had remained in Egypt seven years, the
Angel appeared again to S^ Joseph notifying unto him King Herod's death, and
commanding him in Gods behalf to return into Jury with the infant JESUS,
and his Mother.

2. How the return was much more cumbersom and painful then the flight,
because our Savior being now grown somewhat great, our B. Lady could not bear
him so commodiously: and on the other side he was to young to walk by him self
a foot.

3. How S. Joseph being arrived ^n Palestine, and understanding that Archelaus
had succeeded his Father Herod in the Kingdom of Jury, durst not go thither,
but being warned in sleep retired into Nazareth.

Let us learn,
1. That God does never wholly forget those that suffer for him, although he
permit them to be a while afflicted for his sake.

2. To obey readily such as have commandment over us in Gods place, whether
it be to go or return^ from any one place to another.

3 Never to trust to our own forces, nor to expose our selves to the danger
of temptation, or any other evil.

XVI. MEDITATION. How our Lord was found in the Te^pl^ Luke 2.41.
1. CONSIDER how our Lo^ remaining in Jerusalem w^ to the Temple, as to his
Father house, there with prayer to honor God, and with his doctrine to give
some light of salvation to the doctors of the law.

2. Consider what sorrow our B. Lady felt not finding her dear beloved son
neither with her spouse nor kinsfolks, and how many tears she shed, and with
what diligence she returned the morning following to seek him in Jerusalem.

3. Consider what joy our B Lady did feel having found her dear son in the
Temple sitting in the midst of the doctors hearing and asking them.

Let us learn,
1. To make more accoumpt of Gods honor and service, then of wordly parents
and friends.

2. If the Virgin Mother did so ^itterly lament because the lost our ^auiour
without any fault of her ^art, what ought he to do that ca^eth him of by
sinning?

^. If we desire to find our Savior ^e must seek him with sorrow.

XVII. MEDITATION. Of our Saviors life from twelve years, until he was
thirty years old. Luke 2.51.
1. CONSIDER that which the Evangelist says, to wit, that our Savior the King
of Kings, and Emperor of Heaven and Earth, was subject to his parents.

2. Consider how our Savior all that while kept himself retired, yet was not
he idle, but employed the time well and profitably in visiting often the
Temple, in attending to prayer, in shunning the conversation of men, and in
helping his Mothe^ and his Father Joseph, as S. Mark does recount chap. 6.^.

3. How that which the Euangeli^^ says that our Savior daily grew i^ wisdom
and in grace with God an^ men, does sufficiently show vnt^ us, that he did much
more then the which is recorded in the Ghospel, and that although he was
retired, yet did he never cease to profit.

Let us learn,
1. To obey, even the very least, being taught so to do by our Saviors example.

2. To be more delighted with silence the^ with speech and conversation.

3. To recollect and retire our selves as much as is possible, for it is a
singular means to obtain grace in the sight both of God and men,

THE SECOND PART OF THE EVANGELICAL HISTORY, Containing the Acts of our
Savior, from his Baptism, until the second Easter.
XVIII. MEDITATION. Of S. John Baptist his preaching. Matthew. 3.1. Mark 1.4.
Luke. 3.2.
1. CONSIDER how our Savior, desirous to publish himself so to accomplish
that, for which he wa^ sent into this world, made S. John Baptist go before
him, being man very austere, as well in his di^ as in his apparel, and manner
also of preaching, to make men see with their eyes, that which he did announce
by word of mouth.

2. We must endeavor to understand well the sum of S. John's preaching, which
is contained in these words; Do penance, for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand:
and also consider the great good that we get by penance, which makes us
capable to receive Gods grace.

3. Consider S. John's humility, who being the greatest of all the Prophets,
and of all the children of men, yea in such opinion with the Jews, that they
were ready to receive him for their Messiah, did nevertheless care nothing for
these honors, but did praise and magnify him whose forerunner he was.

Let us learn,
1. To love austerity as much as our manner of life does permit us.

2. To do voluntary penance.

3. Always to praise others, but never to commend our selves.

XIX. MEDITATION. Of our Saviors Baptism. Matthew. 3.13. Mark. 1.9. Luke 3.21.
1. CONSIDER how our Savior took leave of his Mother to go toward the river
of Jordan, where S. John was, and there put himself amongst publicans and other
sinners to be baptized.

2. Consider how much S. John did admire, and was amazed, seeing the Savior of
the world come unto him, as if he had been the most abject creature upon the
earth. And we may piouslie think that he did prostrate himself at our Saviors
feet, saying unto him the words recorded in the ghospel, I ought to be
baptized of thee.

3. Consider how after that our Savior was baptized, the heavens were opened,
the holy Ghost descended, and there was a vo^ce heard from heaven, which said,
Thou art my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.

Let us learn,
1. To humble our selves more and more, moved by our Saviors example.

2. Never to desire to seem singular in any thing, but to follow the order and
usage of others in all things that be good and holy.

3. To purge and cleanse our conscience well, if we desire to have our prayers
heard for our Savior praying after his baptism, was incontinently heard of
his celestial Father.

XX. MEDITATION. How our Savior was tempted in the desert. Matthew. 4. Mark
1.12. Luke 4.1.
1. CONSIDER how after that our Savior had been honored by his heavenly
Fathers (...) and received the Holy Ghost which descended visiblie upon him, he
retired into the willdernes, where he remained forty days without house, bed,
or victuals, extenuating and afflicting his body.

2. Consider that whosoever shall sound the reasons well, which moved our Lord
God, who nourishes all creatures that be on the earth, thus to suffer hunger,
and permit the devil to come and tempt him, he I say will never refuse to be
tempted, and to abide hunger and thirst for JESUS Christ his sake, seeing that
our Savior himself has overcome all these difficulties.

3 Consider the diligence, with which the Angels did serve our Savior, and the
modesty that he kept albeit he were hungry.

Let us learn,
1. To separate and withdraw our selves from the world, not only with our body
but also with all our affection and will

2. To strive manfully against temptations, and never to suffer them to
surmount us.

3. To serve God in the person of our neighbors, with as great diligence as
the Angels did use in serving our Lord himself.

XXI. MEDITATION. Of the calling of the five first Disciples. John 1.35.
1. CONSIDER the piety and devotion with which S. John Baptist did pronounce
these words: Behold the Lamb of God, the immaculate Lamb whose blood must
blot out all the sins of the world.

2. Consider with what diligence S. John's two disciples did follow our Savior,
and mark his lodging where he made his abode, so to bring unto him other
disciples.

3. Consider Nathanaels simplicity, and how our Savior brought him to know
the truth, and to confess that he was the son of God.

Let us learn,
1. To endeavor what lies in us to help and assist our neighbors, showing
them JESUS Christ whom they ought to follow.

2. To follow promptly our selves, the good inspirations that God does send us.

3. To have always before our eyes our Lord God, who sees and knows all
things, as he made Nathanael plainly perceive.

XXII. MEDITATION. Of our Saviors first Miracle done at the wedding. John 2.1.
1. CONSIDER how our Savior, for the love he did bear unto men, was pleased
to abase himself so much, as to go to their banquets, and honor their tables
with his presence, not so to fill his body, but to feed their souls.

2. Consider the care that our Blessed Lady had of the temporal good and
reputation even of those that had invited her* which care she showed in
representing their necessity and want unto her son, at whose hands she
expected speedy redress of the same.

3. Consider the admiration and as it were amazing with which the bridegroom
was surprised, understanding that there yet remained such quantity of
exquisite wine.

Let us learn,
1. Never to disdain any honest company, nor poor men's tables.

2. To have great compassion of the need and necessity temporal of poor
folks, whosoever they be.

3. Never to make show of the best that may be in us at the beginning, but to
reserve it for the end, seeing it is this, that must crown out work.

XXIII. MEDITATION. How our Lord did cast out of the Temple the buyers and
sellers. John 2.13.
1. WE must consider, how careful our Lord was to keep and solemnize the
feast days, and so he was amongst the rest of the Jews, and not without great
travail went a foot to Jerusalem.

2. Consider how our Savior entering into Jerusalem, went forthwith to the
Temple there to pray and adore his Father, with the other Jews.

3. Consider how he that is goodness it self, cannot endure the wrong which he
sees done unto the Temple, a holy place, and a place of prayer, which the
avarice and covetousness of men had turned into a place of traffic and
merchandise, but he casts out the buyers and fellers.

Let us learn,
1. To sanctify the holy days.

2. To pray willingly in every place, but chiefly in the Church.

3. To be zealous of Gods honor in cleanenes and sanctifying of those places
and things, that are dedicated unto him.

XXIV. MEDITATION. Of our Saviors conference with Nicodemus, John 3.1.
1. CONSIDER how Nicodemus having heard a report of the Miracles which our
Savior had wrought, came unto him by night to be instructed of the way that he
was to hold to arrive to the port of salvation.

2. Consider how our Savior having proposed unto him the doctrine of the
regeneration of our souls, caused by the Sacrament of Baptism, did reprehend
him sharply, for that he understood not a similitude taken from earthly things,
and said unto him; Thou art a master in Isra^l, and art thou ignorant of these
things?

3. Consider how Christ did afterward discourse unto him very amply of his
past on, and of the death he was to suffer upon the altar o^ the Cross,
showing him principally in this point the grea^nes of God love toward man kind.

Let us learn,
1. To seek with great care ar^ diligence such things as may forward us to our
salvation.

2. To render incessant than^ unto almighty God for the benef^ of Baptism
received at his hands.

3. To have always our S^uiours passion in our remembranc^

XXV. MEDITATION. Of S. John Baptist his imprisonment. Matthew. 14.1. Mark 6.14.
1. CONSIDER how S. John Baptist leaving now the desert into which he was
retired from his tender age, went oftentimes to the Court to exhort and
admonish King Herod, who did reform himself in some things that S. John had
told him.

2. Consider how after some space of time he did reprehend him more eagerly
then he was accustomed to do, because the matter did so require, for so much as
he kept his brothers wife, he being yet alive, contrary to all right and reason.

3. Consider how Herodias being much grieved at S. John's words, did ^oue the
King in such sort, that ^orthwith he commanded him to ^e apprehended and
committed to prison.

Let us learn,
1. That we must some times for some space and upon some occasions leave the
sweet repose of contemplation, especially when the salvation of our neighbors
souls does require it.

2. To reprehend bouldly and constantly the vices of Princes and great noble
men, when the affair does demand it, yet so, that it be done with wisdom
and discretion.

3. To endure not only bands and imprisonment when it shall be requisite, but
also death it self for the word of God and testimony of the Truth.

XXVI. MEDITATION. How our Savior did talk with the Samaritane woman. John 4.5.
1. CONSIDER how our Savior went from one town^ to another to convert sinners:
and although he was weary both by reason of the difficulties of the ways and
also by the discommodities which he endured through his poverty, yet did he not
therefore omit to draw as many as he could to the knowledge, and great love of
God his Father.

2. Ponder well the first words that our Savior spoke to this Samaritane
woman, and how he demanding water of her to drink, she refused to give him,
for that he was of another religion then hers.

3. Consider how our Savior promised to give her of the water which does
quench the thirst in such manner, that who drinks of it, needs no more to
go to the fountain.

Let us learn,
1. Never to omit nor neglect the occasion of well doing, when it is offered
us.

2. Not to be ashamed to ask alms for our selves or others when necess^ty
does require it.

3. How we ought to live amongst worldlings very warily for helping them,
taking occasion thereof from temporal things.

XXVII. MEDITATION. How our Savior converted the Samaritane woman. John 4.16.
1. CONSIDER how this woman understanding the o^fer that our Savior made her
of water, far better and more sovereign then that which was draw^ out of this
fountain, was not ash^med to demand him some of it, a^beit she before had
denied to gi^^ him any of hers.

2. Consider how our Savior di^ not answer her directly to the pu^pose, but
to bring her to a mo^^ clear knowledge of her sins, sai^ unto her, that she
should go c^ her husband, as if he should say, when he is come I will give to
you both.

3. Consider how this woman leaving her vessel at the well, went to the town
to publish the wonder that she had understood: and our Savior remained so
comforted at her conversion, that he forgot to eat and drink of that which
his Disciples presented unto him.

Let us learn,
1. Never to be ashamed to ask that others teach and instruct us in things
that appertain to our salvation and perfection.

2. To discover our selves wil^ingly to our ghostly Fathers, and to acknowledge
our faults, forasmuch as God does not communicate himself but to those that
acknowledge and confess their own in perfectio^s.

3. To abandone all to help those that do employ themselves in Gods service for
the weal and con^ersion of souls.

XXVIII. MEDITATION. How our Savior did cure a certain Lords son. John 4.46.
1. CONSIDER how this Lord moved as well with his sons desire as with the
renown of our Saviors Miracles which he wrought, departed from his lodging to
find him, and desired him humbly that he would vouchsafe to come down to his
house at Capharnaum to heal his son.

2. Consider how our Sauiou^ did sharply reprehend his incredulity, and the
little faith of the Jews that would not believe but by force of Miracles:
nevertheless tha^ Lord desisted not to continue hi^ request unto our Savior,
saying; ^ pray you, Master, come down before that my son die.

3. Consider how our Savior di^ reward that Lords perseueranc^ with saying
unto him; Go thy son lives; and he giving credit unto this simple word,
found by report of his servants that his son was wholly recovered at the very
same hour, in which our Savior spoke unto him.

Let us learn,
1. To have recourse to almighty God for redress and confort in all our
diseases, tentations and other accidents that may befall us.

2. To persevere humbly in our prayers.

3. To have a firm and steadfast hope in God, that we shall receive the effect
of all his promises.

XXIX. MEDITATION. How our Savior began his preaching. Matthew 4.12. Mark
1.14. Luke 4.14.
1. CONSIDER how our Savior having one only time disputed with the Doctors in
the twelfth year of his age, did after keep silence for eighteen years
together.

2. Consider how being thirty years old or therabout he began his Sermons
with penance, which was also the subject or matter of S. John Baptists Sermons,
thereby to approve the doctrine of his forerunner, and also to show how it is
penance that can lead us back to heaven from whence sin does expel us.

3. Consider how our Savior like a skillful physician goes to seek them who
through weakness and disease are not able to come to him, and cures them
without any grief or pain.

Let us learn,
1. Not to leave of easily the enterprises that serve for our profit and
forwardnes.

2. To embrace very willingly fasting and such other mortifications of the
flesh which lead us to heaven.

3. To succor with all readiness the sick and diseased.

XXX. MEDITATION. Of the miraculous fisshing of S. Peter at our Saviors
commandment. Luke 5.4.
1. CONSIDER how Christ our Lord seeing himself thronged with the multitude of
people that followed him continually, entered into S. Peter's bark, desyring him,
as the Evangelist says, to put it back a little from the land, and sitting
therein did preach from thence to the people

2. Consider how after the Sermon ended, our Lord said to S. Peter that he
should launch forth into the deep, and cast his nets to make a draught; who
after he had somewhat excused himself, did nevertheless obey and begin to fish.

3. Consider how the fir^^ draught of fish was so fair and great that S. Peter
altogether amazed di^ cast himself down at our Sauiou^ feet, humbly
desyring him to retire out of his poor Bark to some place more worthy of his
excellen^ and puissance.

Let us learn,
1. Never to be weary of doin^ good, be it by land or by sea, in da^ or in
night.

2. To obey promptly without making reply or excuse to those th^^ have
authority to command us.

3. Humbly to acknowledg^ the benefits that God has imparte unto us, be it in
prosperity or in adversity.

XXXI. MEDITATION. How our Savior cured S. Peter's motherinlawe. Matthew 8.14.
mark. 1.29. Luke 4.38.
1. CONSIDER how our Savior going out of the Synagogue entered into S. Peter's
house to take his repose: and here think what great contentment the Apostles
all received, considering how he vouchsafed to converse so familiarly with them.

2. Consider how although our Savior went ordinarily seeking those that were
sick and diseased to heal them, and knew right well that S. Peter's mother
inlaw had an ^gue, yet he did expect that the Apostles should pray and make
in^ercession unto him for her curing.

3. Consider how having heard their request he approached to the ^atients bed,
commanded the ^euer to leave her, and taking her by the hand, did render her
in an instant so whole that forth with she arose and served him at the table.

Let us learn,
1. To employ our selves willingly for the poor and diseased, and other
persons that be in necess^tie, as here we see that the Apostles did.

2. To obey those promptly and speedily which do command us in the place of
Almighty God, to whom even the things insensible d^ obey, as here the fever
did.

3. To use well the favors an^ graces that our Lord bestowet^ upon us, as this
good woman did

XXXII. MEDITATION. How our Savior did appease the tempest on the sea. Matthew
8.23. Mark 4.36. Luke 8.22.
1. CONSIDER how o^ Savior having best^wed all the night in prayer accoding to
his holy wonted manner, and being entered the day following into a bark to pass
a certain lake, was surprised with sleep and sleeping in the puppe, did
permit a great tempest to arise on the water.

2. Consider how the disciples perceauing the wind to increase more and more
and the waves to grow higher, and the water to enter into the bark in great
quantity, had recourse to our Savior and rai^ed him saying; Lord save us, we
perish.

3. Consider how Christ our Lord rising up reprehended them that they had so
little faith, and then commanded the winds and the water, which forthwith
became calm.

Let us learn,
1. That we cannot live in this ^orld without many adversities and ^emptations,
the which our Lord ^oth permit to befall us for our grea^r good and profit.

2. To make recourse unto our Savior as often as we feel any trouble in our
soul.

. Never to loose courage seeing that our Lord can set us at peace with one only
little word.

XXXIII. MEDITATION. How our Savior healed him that was sick of the palsy.
Matthew. 9.1. Mark. 2.3. Luk 5.18.
1. CONSIDER the faith prudence and charity of those that brought this sick man
of the palsy: for seeing they could not enter into the place where Christ was,
by reason of the throng of people, they went up upon the roof, and through the
tiles did let him down before JESUS.

2. Consider how our Lord did not reprehend the importunity o^ these men, that
in so doing did interrupt and hinder his sermon, bu^ considering their devotion
he gave the sick man more then he demanded.

3. Consider how Christ perceauing that the Jews did murmur of this, that he
showed himself powerable to forgive sins, teaches them that there is
required as much power to heal suddenly one that is diseased, as to forgive
him his sins, and presently commands the sick-man to take up his bed and
walk.

Let us learn,
1. Not to be sparing of our selves in ought that we may do, for such as are
needy in sickness.

2. To bear with the infirmities and imperfections of others, rendering
evermore to the^ more good then they do us harm.

3. Never to leave off, the good works that we have undertaken and begun;
albeit men mock or murmur at us for doing of them.

XXXIV. MEDITATION. How our Savior called his Apostles the second time. Matthew.
4.18. Mark. 1.16. Luke 5.10.
1. CONSIDER how S. Peter and S. Andrew, although they had been once before
called by our Savior, yet notwithstanding they returned again to their old
trade of fishing, and fished so much that they were forced to mend their nets,
with intention to make a greater draught of fish.

2. Consider how our Savior took the pain to go find out the^, who in all
reason ought to have come unto him, and although he seemed but to recreate
himself, and to walk by that seacoast, yet were his thoughts pitched on
higher things.

3. Consider how the Disciples at our Saviors bare word aba^doned their nets,
bark and father, to follow our Lord God who called them.

Let us learn,
1. That whosoever desires sincerely to follow Christ our Savior, must leave
all the occasions of sin, by which; as in a net, he may be entangled.

2. He must leave his ship, that is, the possession of temporal things.

3. He must abandon all carnal affection toward his parents, which he ought
to turn into spiritual love and charity.

XXXV. MEDITATION. How S. Matthew was called to the Apostleship. Matthew. 9.9.
Mark. 2.14. Luke 5.27.
1. CONSIDER how after that our Savior had called and chosen for his service
certain poor fishermen which were rude and simple people, he will have
moreover a public sinner to show unto the world that he was come for such sort
of persons.

2. Consider how S. Matthew did presently and wholly abandon all his treasures
to follow our Savior: whereupon we are to mark the efficacy and force of
Gods word, which in so short speech works so great effects.

3. Consider how our Lord did suffer himself to be lead to that banquet, thereby
to find occasion to instruct the Publicans and Customers: and when the Scribes
and others murmured thereat, he answered saying; They that are whole, need not
the Phisician.

Le us learn,
1. To acknowledge the great grace that God does unto us, when it pleases him
to call us unto him, we being rude, ignorant and wicked.

2. To make great account of, and to chearish holy inspirations and interior
vocation, which it pleases God to send us daily.

3. To shun murmuring of others.

XXXVI. MEDITATION. How our Savior did raise the Prince of the Sinagogue his
daughter. Matt. 9.18.23. Mark. 5.22.35, Luke 8.41.4^.
1. CONSIDER how this good Iairus in presence of all the multitude that
followed our Savior, did humbly cast himself down at his feet, praying him
very affectuously to come unto his house, to touch and heal his daughter that
was grievously sick.

2. Consider how our Lord breaking off the discourse which he had begun, went
forthwith to satisfy the will of this Archsynagogue, and although his servant
which they met by the way, reported that his daughter was deceased, and that
they needed not to take any more pain for her, yet did our Savior both
comfort the doleful father and continue on his way.

3. Consider how when our Savior was come to Iairus house he put forth the
minstrels that were about the dead body, stretched forth his hand, took that
of the dead, and commanded her to rise which she presently did.

Let us learn,
1. To present our prayers unto almighty God with all humility, fervor, and
great confidence.

2. To assist our neighbors speedily when we are requested so to do.

3. To reject far from us all cogitation and remembrance of vain things, if we
be desirous that our Lord speak unto our soul, and make her awake out of the
sleep of her imperfections.

XXXVII. MEDITATION. How our Savior did heal the woman that had an issue of
blood. Matthew. 9.20. Mark. 5.25. Luke 8.43.
1. CONSIDER the faith, hope and charity of this good woman, who was content to
touch, not the body or apparel of our Savior, but even the hemme of his
garment.

2. Consider how although our Lord, to whom nothing is hidden, knew right well
who it was that had touched him, yet did he turn to behold her and said, that
he felt the virtue that proceeded from him, thereby to manifest the faith of
this woman and the health she had received.

^. Consider how this good woman fearing to be punished, and to fall again
into her wonted disease did prostrate her self at the feet o^ our Savior, who
commended her faith, and dismissed her whol^ ^ecouered of her infirmity.

Let us learn,
1. With what faith and reverence we ought to receive the precious Body of our
Savior.

2. Not to do any thing that we would not have manifest and known to the whole
world, seeing God does know it, and can make it open.

3. To acknowledge all the good that we have as coming from Gods liberal
hand, and to render him oftentimes thanks for the same.

THE THIRD PART OF THE EVANGELICAL HISTORY, Comprehending that which our
Savior did in the second year of his preaching.
XXXVIII. MEDITATION. How our Savior cured a bedred m^^ at the miraculous
pond. John 5.1.
1. CONSIDER how our Lord JESUS Christ to solemnize the holy day the better,
went to visit the hospital of incurable sick folks, which was built near a
great pond that was in Jerusalem.

2. Consider how albeit our Savior had compassion of all the sick folks that
were within the five porches or rooms of that hospital, notwithstanding he
did choose one only who had la^guished there thirty eight years, of whom
also he demanded whether he would be cured.

3. Consider how the poor sick man being commanded by our Savior did arise,
take his bed, and return home to his house whole and joyful.

Let us learn,
1. To visit hospitalls and other sick houses willingly.

2 To support patiently the infirmities that God lays upon us, as much and as
long as it shall please him.

3. To aid our selves with those humane helps that God has sent us, and to
endeavor to march forward every day making some progress in virtue.

XXXIX. MEDITATION. Of the Sermon that our Lord made upon the mountain. Matthew.
5.1. Luke 6.17.
1. CONSIDER how our Savior desiring to instruct his disciples of things much
important for their salvation, departed from the town and went up to a
mountain; and although many others did follow him, yet did he cast his eyes
principally upon his disciples, as upon those that were more capable of his
doctrine, by reason of their simplicity and goodness.

2. Consider and weigh well the words of the first beatitude; Blessed are the
poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

^. Consider and ruminate the second beatitude; Blessed are the meek for they
shall possess the Land.

Let us learn,
1. That to reap profit by hearing Gods word we must free our selves from the
care of all earthly things.

2. That if the reward of the poor be everlasting life, as our Savior has
said; then those that love riches over much ought justly to fear, that they
shall never enter into heaven.

3. That if the poor in spirit, which be such as are humble, have heaven for
their recompense, and the meek, the land, then for the proud and choleric
there remains but hell.

XL. MEDITATION. Of the six last beatitudes. Matthew 5.5.
1. CONSIDER that we mu^^ take these beatitudes one by one, weigh well the
words o^ ^^ch of them, and endeavor to ^^ape some spiritual fruit out o^
^^em. The beatitudes upon which we are to make this meditation are these.

The 3. Blessed are they that mourn for they shall be comforted.

2. The 4. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after justice, for they
shall have their fill.

The 5. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

The 6. Blessed are the clean of heart, for they shall see God.

3. The 7. Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children
of God.

The 8. Blessed are they that suffer persecution for justice, for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven.

Let us learn,
1. That if they which do mourn in this world shall be comforted in the other,
what may those expect, that do nothing else but laugh and rejoice in this world?
but that ^hey shall weep and lament for ever in the world to come.

2. That it is not sufficient (...) to love justice, but we must al^ have
hunger and thirst thereof, (...) desire that these things daily increas^ in us.

3. That we must willingly fo^giue those which do offend us, (...) we will
obtain pardon and merc^ of those, whom we our selves ha^ so often offended.

4. To love purity of heart. An so to take some profit of the rest.

XLI. MEDITATION. How our Savior did c^re a Lepe Matthew 8.1. Mark 1.40. Luke
5.12.
1. CONSIDER the faith this Leper which mo^ him to come toward our Saui^ to be
healed; the devotion wh^ he showed in kneeling and adori him; and the manner
that he ob^^ed in demanding his health, ^^bmitting himself wholly to the will
and good pleasure of our Sa^iour.

2. Consider how our Lord did touch him notwithstanding that the Jews did so
abhorall kind of leprosy, that they did cast out of their Cities even those
that were troubled with the itch, disdaining as much as to look upon lepers.

2. Consider how our Savior sent him to the Priest, and did forbid him to tell
any body of his cure: which commandment notwithstanding he did not obey,
esteeming himself more bound to render thanks to his benefactor, then by
silence to favor his humility.

Let us learn,
1. To imitate the devotion of ^his poor Leper.

2. Never to s^unne nor refuse ^o touch the diseased persons, be their evils
never so horrible and ^wle.

3. To fly vaineglorie and not desire to be spoken of, yea though we wrought
miracles.

XLII. MEDITATION. How our Savior cured the Centurious servant. Matthew. 8.5.
Luke 7.1.
1. CONSIDER the affection that this good Centurion did bear to his servant,
which was cause that he did n^ only labor himself for his health but also
employed, the assistance o^ his friends to go and solicit ou^ Savior.

2. Consider the great reverence that he did bea^e to our Lord not daring
himself to go unto him, and causing him to be prayed not (...) take the pain
to come unto the sicke-man, but only to commaun^ from the place where then he
was in which action this Centurion di^ show a most excellent faith, and such as
deserved to be praised by our Saviors own mouth.

3. Consider how our Lord granted unto the Centurion all that he had demanded,
and although he was absent, yet cured his man, sick of the palsy.

Let us learn,
1. Not to contemn any man, be he a poor servant or whosoever.

2. To interpose the Saints to pray God for us, as this Centurion did use the
means of those grave Seniours and aged men.

3. To acknowledge our selves both with heart and tongue, as most unworthy to
receive any favor at Gods hands, and much more to receive himself.

XLIII. MEDITATION. How our Savior did raise the widows son from death
near the town of Naim. Luke. 7.11.
1. CONSIDER on the one side this good widow very sorrowful an^ afflicted,
first for the loss of her husband, and next of her only son; and on the
other side behold our Lord, who seeing her affliction was moved to pittye and
compassion, and did comfort her.

2. Consider how our Savior drawing near to the hearse, those that carried
the dead corpse stood still, and he commanded the young man that was dead to
arise.

3. Consider how the young man remained astonished seeing himsel recalled from
the darkness where h^ was, to light, and the Mother greatl^ comforted having
recovered he child and hearing him speak, and ^he whole company that was
present wonderfully admired at the greatness of the miracle.

Let us learn,
^. To approach near willingly unto the afflicted, to comfort and aid them as
much as we may.

^. To be ready always for death, ^ince we see that the young do dye ^s well
as the aged and full of years.

^. To arise and leave our faults and imperfections, when our Lord ^od does
move us so to do by his ^oly inspirations.

XLIV. MEDITATION. Of Marie Magdalens conversion. Luke 7.36.
CONSIDER how our Savior sitting at the table ^th the Pharisie that had
invited ^n, Mary Magdalen surprised with a bitter repentance of her sin^ came
behind him to cast her self his feet, to wash them with tears, and wipe th^^
with (...) hair.

2. Consider how all those the were bid to the banquet were mu^ astonished at
this manner of pro^ding, but above all others the Ph^risie murmuring in himself
at thi^ that our Savior would endure (...) be touched by this woman, as if
(...) were no Prophet, nor knew not h^ to be such a one as she was taken f^ of
the whole city.

3. Consider how our Lord m^king no account of the iniu^ which the Pharisie did
unto hi^ took the penitent woman's pa^ and having condemned his ho^ by his own
words, dismissed Man Magdalen in peace.

Let us learn,
1. Not to be ashamed of the wo^^ when we are to do any plublick ^^tification
or penance.

2. Never to judge what is within a man by the exterior show, seeing that he
may be changed in an instant.

3. Not to make any reckoning of the opinions and judgments of men, provided
that our conscience do not reprehend us before God.

XLV. MEDITATION. How our Lord did cure one that was deaf and dumb. Mark 7.31.
1. CONSIDER on the one side the faith, charity, and devotion of certain good
people, who brought unto our Lord this dumb and deaf man, humbly entreating
him, that he would touch him: and on the other side think of our Saviors
goodness, who did ^ncontinently grant them that which they demanded for this
poor man.

2. Consider how our Lord did ^ake this patient aside, touch his ears and
tongue, lift up his eyes to heaven, and after that he had given forth a great
figh, even from the bottom of his heart, he commanded the instruments of his
senses to open themselves, and perform their ordinary functions.

3. Consider how after that our Savior had restored this poor man to health:
he forbad him to speak thereof unto any, which he notwithstanding obeyed not
as the Evangelist notes.

Let us learn,
1. To pray God as devoutly for our neighbors necessities as for ou^ own.

2. To lament and bewail^ our sins, seeing that our Lord di^ sigh so
profoundly to cure our corporal infirmities and diseases.

3. To render thanks unto Go^ and praise him highly for the go^ he bestows
upon us.

XLVI. MEDITATION. Of the woman that praised our Savior. Luke 11.27.
1. CONSIDER how our Savior having healed a man possessed of the devil that
was deaf and dumb, although the Jews did reprehend and calumniate him,
demanding a sign from heaven, yet did he not therefore omit to instruct and
teach the people.

2. Consider how a good woman that was amongst the rest of the people, seeing
this, surprised with a certain great love of God, cried out saying; Blessed is
the womb that bare thee, and the breasts that gave thee suck.

3. Consider how our Lord did answer her, That they were more happy which did
not only hear Gods word, but also did practice it, living according to the
same.

Let us learn,
1. Never to omit well doing, although the wicked do carpe at us, and despise
us therefore.

2. To praise God in all things, and in all places.

3. To make our benefit of his holy word, when we read or hear it in Sermons,
Exhortations, or familiar discourses.

XLVII. MEDITATION. How those of Nazareth would have thrown our Savior down
headlong from the top of a hill. Matt. 13.53. Mark 6.1. Luke 4.16.
1. CONSIDER, how our Savior continuing to perform that, for which (...) was
sent, to wit, to preach unto the people, and teach them went to Nazareth, and
taught i^ the synagogue the coming of the Messiah whom they expected, taking
his theme out of Isay the Prophet.

2. Consider how some did profit by our Saviors words, some others were
scandalized in hearing him, and called him the Carpenters son, desiring more
to see his miracles, then to hear his discourses.

3. Consider how our Lord much grieved at the hardness of their hearts, said,
that it was no wonder to see that those of his own country did not hear him
willingly, and so beginning to show unto them their obstinacy, he was in
danger to have been thrown down headlong by them in their fury.

Let us learn,
1. To speak very modestly of that which touches our selves as our Savior
did in explicating the place of Isay.

2. To content our selves with their only words whom we know do seek in every
thing our good, without demanding so many wi^nesses.

3. To take in good part the reprehensions and admonitions of those that tell
us of our faults, and to love them more entirely.

XLVIII. MEDITATION. How our Savior did choose the twelu^ Apostles, and sent
them abroad to preach through Iewrie. Matt. 10.1. Mark. 6.7. Luke 6.12.
1. CONSIDER how when our Savior had spent a whole night in praying to God his
Father, he made all his disciple^ come before him, and out of seaue^ty or
fourscore that they were, h^ did choose only twelve which he called Apostles.

2. Consider how sending them abroad to preach pe^^^nce, and to gather the
fruits that the Patriarchs and Prophets had sown, he did forbid them to carry
any thing that was superfluous, were it apparel, money, or other like
provision, to the end that they should put all their hope in him that sent them.

3. Consider how he did advertise them to be simple as doves, and wise as
serpents, and above all to beware of men.

Let us learn,
1. Not to begin or undertake any work without commending it first to Almighty
God by prayer.

2. Wholly to rely and hope in God without seeking after so many commodities in
temporal things.

3. Not to trust easily those persons that we have never tried nor known.

XLIX. MEDITATION. How our Savior filled five thousand men with five loaves
and two fishes. Matthew. 14.15. Mark. 6.34. Luke 9.12. John. 6.2.
1. CONSIDER how our Savior casting his eyes upon the multitude which had
forsaken all to follow him, took great compassion upon them, seeing them like
sheep without a shepherd, and so began to instruct the^ of things
appertaining to their salvation.

2. Consider how on the other side the Apostles considering that it grew late,
and that all those people had not wherwithall to live in a desert place,
interrupted our Saviors discourse, desiring him to dismiss the assembly, that
every one might go to provide himself of lodging and victuals.

3. Consider how our Lord answered them, that they themselves should give them
to eat, and when he had taken the five loaves and the two fishes, he blessed
them, and made the Apostles distribute the^ amongst the people, so that they
were all sat^ fied and filled.

Let us learn,
1. To content our selves with little, since the twelve Apostles carried with
the^ but five barley loaves for all their provision.

2. To take our refection with due acknowledging and thanksgiving.

3. To give alms freely when we have means, for our substance shall never be
diminished.

L. MEDITATION. How our Savior did walk upon the sea. Matt. 14.22. Mark. 6.46.
John 6.16.
1. CONSIDER how the Apostles being embarked without our Savior, to pass over
the sea of Tiberias, were surprised with a great tempest which did toss them
terribly all the night long, not without great danger to be cast away.

2. Consider how about the break of day, our Lord walking upon the the sea
passed by them, and feigned to go further, but they cried out, and knowing him
by his voice, S. Peter demanded leave to go unto him, and having obtained it
was in danger to be drowned by force of the tempest.

3. Consider how our Sauiou^ being entered into the boat the tempest ceased, and
the bark was presently on the shore, which they could not come unto in all the
night.

Let us learn,
1. Never to withdraw our selves from the use of prayer and holy Sacraments, by
which we are united and joined with God.

2. To resist courageously the tentations that do befall us, if we have a
desire that God shall assist us.

3. To hope always for our Lords aid and favor, whose only presence is able
to do much more then all our labor and industry, be it never so great.

THE FOVRTH PART OF THE EVANGELICAL HISTORY, Containing the memorable acts of
our Savior from the beginning of the third year of his preaching, until the
raising of Lazarus from death.
LI. MEDITATION. How our Savior cured the Chanaan woman's daughter. Matt.
15.21. Mark 7.24.
1. CONSIDER how this woman, though she were a Paynim and Infidel, came unto
ou^ Lord, and confessing him to be God and Man, requested him to have mercy
upon her.

2. Consider, how although our Savior would not hear her, no^^^^ much as
look upon her at the first, yet did she notwithstanding continue to cry after
him, and pray the Apostles to be intercessors and speak for her.

3. Consider how she in the end did prostrate her self at our Saviors feet,
and confessed that she was worthy to be called a dog; yea showing her self
to be content with the crummes, that is, with the least favor he would bestow
upon her, she obtained the perfect recovery of her daughter.

Let us learn,
1. To make our prayers with great faith, hope, and humility.

2. To have oftentimes recourse to the Saints, demanding their aid and favor
for us before God.

3. To persevere ^o prayer until we be heard, and obtain what is necessary
for us.

LII. MEDITATION. How S. Peter confessed the divinity of Christ. Matthew. 16.13.
Mark. 8.27. Luke 9.18.
1. CONSIDER, how our Savior demanded of his Apostles what opinion men had of
him, not thereby to understand his own praises, or to vau^t himself, or to
learn any thing that he knew not already; but only to instruct them, and give
them occasion to merit by a holy confessing him to be God.

2. Consider how that after he had understood what the common people thought of
him, he would also know what the Apostles themselves did esteem him to be; and
so he gave occasion to S. Peter to confess him to be God and man, the Son of
the living God.

3. Consider how our Lord approving their faith, under the confession that S.
Peter had made in name of them all, he called him therefore Happy and Blessed,
because he had received such a revelation from God, and made him head of the
universal Church.

Let us learn,
1. To hear willingly what others say of us, thereby to amend our faults.

2. To be ever ready to confess the faith of Christ, even with the loss of
our life, when it should be requisite.

3. To praise men modestly, acknowledging the good that we see in them, to come
more of God then of themselves.

LIII. MEDITATION. Of the transfiguration of our Savior. Matthew. 17.1. Mark.
9.1. Luke 9.28.
1. CONSIDER how our Savior desirous to show a sparkle of his glory, did only
choose three of his Apostles and lead them into a high mountain.

2. Consider, how praying with them he was in an instant so changed, that his
face did shine like the sun; and his garments did become as white as snow.

3. Consider how S. Peter behoulding Moses and Elias that did talk with our
Savior, was surprised with so great joy, that he cried out saying It is good
for us to be here; let v^ make three Tabernacles for thee, and for these two
Prophets.

Let us learn,
1. Not to be too careful to do our good works before men, contenting our
selves that God does know the^.

2. To make great account of prayer and meditation, seeing it is of so great
force and virtue, as to change even the very body.

^. Not to desire repose before we have labored; nor glory before ignominy;
nor recompense before pain; nor pay before we have ended our task of work
appointed.

LIVE. MEDITATION. How our Lord cured a young man possessed with a Devil.
Matthew. 17.14. Mark. 9.14. Luke 9.37.
^. CONSIDER how our Savior descending from the ^ountaine whereon he was
transfiured, and perceauing that there as some stir amongst the multi^de that
environed his disciples, ^as desirous to know the cause ^erof.

2. Consider how one of the number answering that he had brough his son
grieuoufly sick, and that the Apostles could not cure him, our Lord commanded
that they should bring the patient before him, where when he was come, whiles^
his father recounted the manner o^ his disease, the devil did torme^ him
horribly, throwing him to the ground.

3. Consider how our Lord commanded the evil spirit to depart out (...) that
body, and never to retur^ thereunto; and then took the you^ by the hand, and
raised him (...) wholly cured.

Let us learn,
1. To be ready to interrupt so^times our devotions to assist tho^ that do want
our help.

2. That the devil does tempt (...) vex those most that approach nee^ unto our
Savior.

3. That we may easily fall (...) offend of our selves, but to arise (...)
necessary that God le^d his helping hand, and assist us with his holy grace.

LV. MEDITATION. Of our Angels that keep us. Matthew. 18.10.
1. CONSIDER how there is no place so holy, nor company so well ordered where
the devil does not sometimes slip in, seeing he made the very Apostles
themselves so curious and ambitious as to demand of our Lord, who should be
the greater in the Kingdom of heaven.

^. Consider how our Savior cal^ing unto him a little child answered them, that
if they did not endeavor to be like unto him in Purity, Simplicity, Obedience,
and Humility, ^hey should not enter at any time unto heaven.

3. Thirdly how he admonished them to beware very carefully (...) despising the
least of these infants Because, quoth he, their Angel^ do continually behold
the face (...) my Father which is in Heaven.

Let us learn,
1. To respect in every one o^ our neighbors his good Angel.

2. Never to do, say, or thin^ any thing, which we would n^ that all Angels
and men should see know, and understand.

3. So to employ our selves i^ things behoofefull and necessar^ for this life,
that thereby we be n^ hindered from the service of almighty God, by example of
the Angels who always endeavor (...) succor and defend men, and ye^ are
nevertheless always in Gods pr^sence.

LVI. MEDITATION. How our Savior did cure ten Lepers. Luke 17.11.
1. CONSIDER how grateful the humility of these ^epers was to our Blessed
Savior, ^ho having heard them cry a far ^ff, JESUS master have mercy on us,
^e said to them incontinently, Go ^ew your selves to the Priests.

2. Consider the force of the ver^e of Obedience: for those, as ^one as they
showed themselves ^eadie to do what was commaun^ed them, were healed, yea
before ^ey came to the place to which ^ey were sent.

3. How much we ought to detest ^e vice of Ingratitude, which our lord did
reproach unto the nine ^epers, as a great sin.

Let us learn,
1. To demand with great reverence of Almighty God, the which we know to be
necessary f^ us.

2. To obey with great readin^ all those, that in Gods place are appointed to
govern us.

3. Never to cease from yieldin^ thanks unto Almighty God, in, an^ for every
thing.

LVII. MEDITATION. Of the blind man that our Savior cured. John 9.1.
1. CONSIDER how our Lo^^ having preached long ti^^ to the Jews, to illuminate
the hearts, without any profit or frui^ nay rather with danger to be ^^ned to
death, departed out of (...) Temple, and found a poor (...) blind from his
birth, for whose (...) ^ing he did three things.

1. He beheld him.

2. Making with his spitle on the ground a little clay, he spread it on ^is eyes.

3. He sent him to wash in the poole of Siloe.

Let us learn three things necessary for the true conversion of a sinner.
1. That our Lord look upon him, and prevent him with his ho^y grace.

2. That he have contrition and compunction of heart, which is cau^ed by due
consideration of the fil^hines and loathsomnes of sin.

3. That by Confession he wash and ^leanse his soul.

LVIII. MEDITATION. Of the inquiry the Jews made about the blind man John 9.8.
1. CONSIDER how the Jews being of diverse opinions amongst themselves touching
this man that was borne blind, some saying that he was the same, others denying
that he was the man, but one like unto him; he nevertheless always constantly
confessed that he was cured by our Savior JESUS Christ.

2. That although the Jews who demanded him, did threaten him exceedingly,
and greatly iniure him: yet he did not therefore defend nor justify himself,
but when soever they spoke any thing against our Savior, he took his part and
defended him.

3. How he was so firm and constant in maintaining the honor o^ God, although
his parents did therefore abandone him, that he wa^ cast out of the Temple, and
excommunicated by the Jews, but received and cherished by our Savior.

Let us learn,
1. To acknowledge and extol the benefits and favors that God has bestowed
upon us.

2. To make no account of private injuries done to our selves, but with all our
force to withstand and hinder those that be done against God.

3. To persuade our selves that the world is always contrary, and an enemy to
those that be resolved to serve God.

LIX. MEDITATION. How S. Martha received our Savior into her house. Luke.
10.38.
1. CONSIDER how our Savior being received into Martha's house, began to sow
spiritual instructions in those, that furnisshed his corporal wants, in so
much that Mary Magdalene did sit at his feet to hear him.

2. How Martha, although she was busied in putting all things in order to
entertain our Savior, seeing nevertheless that her sister did not anywise
assist her, manifestly accused her to our Lord, desiring him to command her to
come and help her in her work.

3. How our Savior did not reprehe^d Martha, nor her good zeal and duty, but
only taking Magdalens part, he said, That she had chose^ the best part, which
should not be taken from her.

Let us learn,
1. To edify with good speeches those that do receive us into their company,
or do us any good turn.

2. Not to esteem much the scoffs and calumniations of worldlings, which do
make account of devout and religious persons, as if they were good for nothing.

3, That albeit we ought now and then to employ our selves willingly and
courageously for the bodily aid of our neighbors, and in those things that do
pertain to Active life, yet we must not therefore neglect the contemplative
life, which is to be much more accounted of.

LX. MEDITATION. How our Savior taught the Apostles to pray. Matthew. 6.9. Luke
11.2.
1. CONSIDER, how our Savior although he did not reject vocal prayer, yet he
did make much more account of mental prayer and meditation, reprehending the
opinion of the Ethnicks touching this point.

2. Consider how he taught them in few words, in what sort they might demand
of God all that which was necessary for them.

3. Consider and weigh the first words of the prayer that our Savior taught
us, to the end we may say it with more fruit and devotion.

Let us learn,
1. To esteem much of mental prayer and meditation.

2. To say oftentimes, and with great reverence the prayer which our Lord
vouchsafed to teach us with his own mouth.

3. That since we call God our Father, we are to love and obey him in all
things, and in all places, to show thereby that we are indeed his true children.

LXI. MEDITATION. Of our Lords Prayer, or Pater noster. Matthew. 6.9. Luke 11.2.
1. CONSIDER upon these words of our Lords prayer, Hallowed be thy name, what
we demand in them, saying, We demand:

1. That we be sanctified, to the end that we may inuoke him holily, and by
virtue thereof obtain of him whatsoever we need.

2. That we may always praise our God, and in all things and every where seek
his greater glory.

3. That we always speak of almighty God with great reverence and respect.

4. That all men may praise and honor his holy name, with heart and mouth.

Thy kingdom come; we demand:

1. That the holy faith and Gospel of Christ be preached throughout the whole
world, and received of all nations, that all may know their true King, God and
Creator.

2. That our Lord affoarding us his holy grace, do so possess our souls, that
neither temptation of the devil, nor affliction of the world, of the flesh, or
any other sin may find place in our souls.

3. That in the end it will please him to receive us into his glory, which is
his true kingdom.

Thy will be done; that is, be accomplished perfectly:

1. In my self, as well in my body as in my soul, so that I neither will nor
desire any thing, but that which my Lord God wills and desires of me.

2. In all my neighbors, and all men that live in the world, to the end they
may willingly fulfill all that which God has commanded them to do.

Give us this day our daily bread; to wit:

1. Thy holy word, which is the food of our souls, whether we hear it in
Sermons, Exhortations, Reading, or Prayer.

2. Thy holy body, which is the true bread of life.

3 The nuriture necessary for our bodies, without superfluity or daintiness.

And forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtours, that is:

1. The sins we have committed against thy divine majesty; whether they be
Mortal, to the pains of which we are yet obliged; or Venial into which we
daily fall.

And lead us not into temptation; which is to say:

2. Permit or suffer not, o Lord, that we fall into those sins and offenses
unto which we are daily solicited and provoked by the world the flesh, and the
devil, who does continually watch to ruin and destroy us.

But deliver us from evil; that is:

3. From all temporal evil, that in this world may befall and oppress us, as
plague, war, famine, sickness, and other calamities, which through our sins
we have oftentimes deserved. Free from all dangers, O our good Father, Lord,
and Savior. So be it.

LXII. MEDITATION. Of the life of poor Lazarus and the wicked Richman. Luke.
16.19.
1. CONSIDER how our Savior recounting this history, vouchsafed not to name
this Richman, and yet named the poor Lazarus, thereby to show us that it is not
riches that makes men great before God, but virtue; and to teach us how we
ought to co^ceale and keep close the names of those whose imperfectio^s we are
forced to discover.

2. How the Gospel never makes mention that our Savior spoke of riches, but
condemning and despising them, or threatening and cursing rich men; thereby to
teach us, how hard a thing it is to be saved amongst riches, and contrariewise
how blessed are the poor.

3. Behold on the one side this Richman well apparelled, stately lodged, and
delicately fed; and on the other side poor Lazarus all naked, lying on the
ground, desyring the crumbs of bred that fell from the Rich-mans table, and
receiving more consolation of dogs then of men.

Let us learn,
That the prosperities and riches of this world do so blind men, that they
make them become more hard and unmerciful, then brute beasts.

LXIII. MEDITATION Of Lazarus, and the rich Gluttons end. Luke 16.22.
1. CONSIDER how poor Lazarus died, and was carried by the Angels into
Abraham's bosom, being a place of repose; but that the Rich man dying was
buried in hell.

2. How the rich Glutton was not only tormented by the devils who afflicted
him, but also by the remembrance of his sins commit^ed, and of the danger
wherein he saw his brethren were, who yet lived.

3. How Abraham answered him, that there was now no more time to do good,
refusing to give him a little drop of water, which he demanded to assuage his
torments.

Let us learn,
1. That the evils, vexations, and anguishes which we suffer in this world
shall soon have an end, but that the pains of hell shall endure for ever and
ever.

2. How great and excessive are the torments of the damned, seeing they have not
any consolation at all.

3. To do good whilst we can, for the time will come in which we will wish, we
had done it, but then we shall have no more means.

LXIIII. MEDITATION. Of the young man that damaunded of our Lord what he might
do to be saved. Matthew. 18.16. Mark. 10.17. Luke 18.18.
1. CONSIDER with what devotion this young man was moved to go and present
himself so humbly before our Savior, and to ask him the means how he might
^e saved.

2. How although our Lord seemed not to take in good port to be called Good of
him, that did not esteem him for such; yet did he answer to his question, and
teach him the things most necessary for his salvation, to wit, the
Commandments of God.

3. How having understood of this young man, that he had always carefully
observed and kept them, our Lord loved him so much the more, and said, that it
was sufficient in^ugh to be saved; but that if he would be great and excellent
in heaven, he should leave all that he had, and follow Evangelical perfection.

Let us learn,
1. To seek incessantly that which may further us to our salvation.

2. To exercise our selves in works of charity toward our neighbour^, by
means of which we shall be more and more united with God.

3. To condemn the riches and commodities of this world, seeing that they
hinder us to go forwards, and grow in perfection.

LXV. MEDITATION. Of the reward our Savior promised unto his Apostles. Matthew.
18.27. Mark. 10.28 Luke 18.28.
1. CONSIDER how the Apostles, having noted the sudden change which was
wrought in this young man, as soon as our Lord spoke unto him of leaving his
riches and wealth (and how he departed discontented) were much astonished,
especially when they heard our Lord, who said unto them three times, that it
was a very hard thing for a Richman to be saved.

2. How S. Peter as chief and head of the Apostolical College (although he
had not forsaken much substance for Christ his sake, yet thinking that he had
left something and done that which our Savior requested at the hands of this
young man) did demand very confidently what recompense they were to have, who
had left all things to follow him;

3. How our Savior promised unto his Apostles rest and repose for their
labor, authority to judge others for the reproaches and dishonours they were
to endure for him, and to all those that would leave whatsoever to follow him,
a hundred fold so much in this world, and in the other, life everlasting.

Let us learn,
1. To be wise by other folks harms, and to shun those things which we know
to have been the ruin and overthrow of others.

2. How great assurance they have of their salvation in the eyes of God, who
have forsaken all things to follow him.

3. To have often before our eyes on the one side the reward which our Savior
has promised us, and on the other the poor recompense that the world
affoardeth his followers.

LXVI. MEDITATION. How our Lord received news of Lazarus sickness. John. 11.1.
1. CONSIDER how Lazarus sisters did not importune, nor urge our Savior to
come to Bethania to heal their brother, but were content to make him
understand his disease, writing to him these only words: Lord, behold, he whom
thou love is stick.

2. How our Lord answered that, that disease would not prove mortal to him,
but that it should rather be to the greater glory of God: nevertheless three or
four days after that he had been advertised of this, he said to his Apostles,
that Lazarus was dead, and went to raise him.

3. How the Apostles told him, that is was not expedient for him to go into
Iewry, where before he was like to have been stoned; nevertheless they followed
him, ready to die with him according to the courageous resolution which S.
Thomas had made.

Let us learn,
1. That it is enough to propose briefly unto our Savior our corporal
necessities.

2. That he oftentimes does permit that those whom he loves best, endure much
in this world, for their own greater good, and his divine glory.

3. That we ought not to fear any travail, no nor death it selt, if we do
that which God does appoint us by our lawful Superiors.

LXVII. MEDITATION. How our Savior did raise Lazarus. John. 11.28.
1. CONSIDER, how Martha having heard of our Saviors coming, went out of her
house to meet him and told him how all had passed, and got a promise that her
brother should rise again to life, with other documents.

2. How Marie Magdalen being come to our Lord, and casting her self down at
his seete to tell him with many tears the heavy news of her brothers death
with the Jews that were also present to accompany and comfort her; he groaned
in spirit, troubled himself, and demanding where the dead body was laid, he
also wept.

3 How coming near to the grave, he commanded the stone to be taken away,
that covered the corpse, and having made his prayer to God his father, he called
Lazarus with a loud voice, who forthwith came out alive.

Let us learn,
1. Not to expect till our Lord come to chastise us for our faults, but, as we
are bound, to prevent his justice by sorrow and penance.

2. So to bewail our own sins, as with compassion, we would lament other
men's miseries.

3. To remove all the stones, and to cut off all occasions which hold us buried
in our imperfections, thinking upon death, and the horror of the grave.

THE FIFTH PART OF THE EVANGELICAL HISTORY, Comprehending the Passion, Death,
Resurrection, and Ascension of our Savior JESUS Christ.
LXVIII. MEDITATION. Of the request that Zebedeus wife, Mother to the Apostles
S. James and S. John, made unto our Savior. Matthew 20.20. Mark. 10.35.
1. CONSIDER how the Apostles hearing our Savior speak of the sytting which
he promised them above the twelve tribes of Israel, and thinking that this was
to be accomplished here on earth, did seek all means they could to obtain
and get betimes these places and dignities, especially those two of whom the
Evangelist makes mention.

2. How although the mother had presented to our Savior her demand or request
for her children, he yet did not direct his answer to her, but to those who had
solicited her so to do, setting before them the chalice of his Passion, by
means of which he himself was to enter into his glory.

3. How the other Apostles and disciples were not scandalized when they saw
that S. Peter thought himself unworthy to receive our Savior into his boat;
but understanding of the ambition of S. James and S. John, they were much
offended therewith.

Let us learn,
1. To seek the glory which never shall be taken from us, which is everlasting.

2. To labor willingly for the getting of it.

3. To desire always the lowest place in this world, so to live quiet and in
peace with every one.

LXIX. MEDITATION. Of the blind man which our Lord cured near unto Jericho.
Matthew. 20.29. Mark. 10.46. Luke 18.35.
1. CONSIDER the poor and woeful case of this needy and blind Bartimaeus,
dwelling without Jerusalem near the town of Jericho, sitting by the way side,
and begging his living.

2. How hearing the noise that the troops made which followed our Savior,
and, it may be, understanding the blessings and praises that they gave him,
began to cry without ceasing, JESUS Son of David have mercy upon me.

3. How our Savior staying somewhat, called him, and demanded what he asked,
and having heard his request, did give him his sight.

Let us learn,
1. That the force of prayer made with fervor is so great, that it staieth our
Savior, and hinders his vengeance.

2. How we ought to go to our Savior with all speed and diligence when he
calls us, setting aside all color and pretext of excuse.

3. How we must not return to the place from whence we came, but rather
follow, praise, and imitate our Savior.

LXX. MEDITATION. How our Savior entered into Zacheus house. Luke 19.1.
1. CONSIDER how Zacheus, though he were the chief of the Publicans and
Customers, did nevertheless greatly desire to see our Savior, but two things
hindered him, the little body he had, and the multitude that were about our
Lord.

2. How he ran before to take up a place by the way where our Lord was to
pass; and not regarding what others might think or say of him, he climbed up
into a tree to see him more easily.

3. How our Savior did cast his eyes upon Zacheus, and calling him by his
name, commanded him to descend, inuiting himself to his house, where he was
well received and entertained.

Let us learn,
1. That to find our Savior, we must by the example of this good Zacheus
climb up into the tree of the Religious Cross, abandoning all affections of
earthly things.

2. To answer and cooperate promptly with Gods inspirations, which he sends
us.

3. To receive oftentimes our Blessed Savior in the holy Sacrament of the
Altar, and to harbor him in our soul with all humility, devotion, and
spiritual joy.

LXXI. MEDITATION. Of the supper made to our Lord in Simon the Lepers house.
Matthew. 26.6. Mark. 4.3. John. 12.1.
1. CONSIDER what joy and contentment this virtuous person felt in his heart,
seeing our Savior whom he held for a holy man and great Prophet, sit at his
table and eat of his bread.

2. With what fervor and devotion Marie Magdalene came throwing her self at
our Lords feet, washing them with her tears, wiping them with her hair, and
breaking the vessel of precious ointment which she had brought with her, she
powered it upon his head.

3. How even the Apostles grudging at this deed, and grieved at the loss of
that which might have been employed to the profit of poor folks (as they said)
our Savior defended Marie Magdalene, assuring the^, that for doing of this she
should be praised throughout the world.

Let us learn,
1. To rejoice when we are to go to the table of our Lord, and to receive him
in the Blessed Sacrament.

2. To employ our selves as willingly to serve the poor which be the feet of
our Lord, as to anoint the head himself.

3. To make no account of the scofs and reprehensions which worldlings form
against us, provided always that we serve God.

LXXII. MEDITATION. How our Lord did weep upon the City of Jerusalem,
foretelling the destruction thereof. Luke 19.41.
1. CONSIDER how our Savior viewing with his corporal eyes the City of
Jerusalem, and foreseeing the calamities and ruin that soon after should
befall unto it, did weep upon it.

2. How albeit that many of the inhabitants thereof did press to come before
him, and receive him as he deserved, yet he did not cease to lament the
misfortunes by which this poor City was to be destroyed in such sort as he
did foreknow.

3. How amongst other words that he spoke, we must ponder well these: O if thou
also had known, and that in this day, the things that pertain to thy peace!

Let us learn,
1. To bewail the dangers in which we our selves and all other men do live
in this world.

2. To have compassion not only of our friends, benefactors, and kinsfolks,
but also of those that wish, and do us harm.

3. Not to let the time ouerslip in vain, nor loose the occasions which we
have to do good.

LXXIII. MEDITATION. How our Savior entered into Jerusalem. Matthew. 21.1. Mark.
11.1. Luke 19.20. John. 12.15.
1. CONSIDER how our Savior set on toward Jerusalem, albeit he knew very well
on the one side the envy and rancor that the Jews did bear him, and on the
other, that the time of his death and Passion was at hand.

2. In what manner he would make his royal entry into the City, to wit,
riding upon an ass covered only with his disciples garments, and himself
accompanied and attended on by poor folks going a foot on each side of him.

3. With what devotion the Apostles did bestrew the ways with their apparel
and mantels, the people did cut down bows from the trees to that end, and all
did cry with a loud voice, Praise and Health to the son of David.

Let us learn,
1. To offer and present our selves willingly to labors and dangers even of
life, when it should be for Gods glory and our neighbors salvation.

2. To desire always the lowest offices, and to approach willingly unto those
of whom the world makes lest account.

3. To subdue and mortify our body, which serves as a garment for our soul,
to prepare the way for our Lord, who will enter and dwell in us.

LXXIIII. MEDITATION. How our Lord did curse a fig tree. Matthew. 21.18. Mark.
11.13.
1. CONSIDER, how our Lord having spent all the day, in which he entered into
Jerusalem, in preaching, curing of the sick, and in the exercise of other
charitable works, but finding none that would offer him lodging or inuit him
to their house, he returned very late toward Bethania.

2. How returning the next morning from Bethania to Jerusalem, he felt himself
oppressed with hunger, which is a sign that the evening before he had supped
with very little or nothing, and that according to his wonted manner he had
spent the night in prayer.

3. How perceauing a fig tree by the way well covered with leaves, he went
right unto it, and finding no fruit cursed it, which incontinent was withered.

Let us learn,
1. Not to trust to the pomp and fair shows of the world, which in the
evening seems not to know him, whom in the morning it did cherish and
flatter.

2. To converse amongst men in such sort, that yet more willingly we be
solitary.

3. To labor, that our hands be found always full of good works and fruit,
for fear that our Lord coming when we least think of it, and finding us
unprovided, do then curse us.

LXXV. MEDITATION. Of the Council and assembly which the Jews held against our
Savior, whom Judas sold unto them. Luk 22.1. John. 11.47.
1. CONSIDER, that when our Savior did vvatch and pray for the conversion of
the Jews, these obstinate fellows assembled themselves to find out the means
how to apprehend and put him to death.

2. How Judas burning with covetousness, went to present himself to this wicked
and damnable Council, and sold his good master for thirty pence. O
unfortunate merchant!

3. How our good Lord, though he knew right well what Judas had done, did not
therefore show him worse countenance, but rather did speak unto him, and let
him sit at his table, using toward him all the kindness and favor accustomed,
so to win him with sweetness, and bring him to acknowledge his fault.

Let us learn,
1. To beware of this vice of unthankfulness, which was cause of the Jews
overthrow.

2. Not to set our hearts too much on worldly goods, lest they make us forget
those goods that be everlasting.

3. Not to abuse the sweetenes which our Savior shows toward us, who does
inuit and expect us to perfect penance from day to day.

LXXVI. MEDITATION. How the Apostles made ready the place where our Savior was
to celebrate his last supper. Matthew 26.17. Mark 14.12. Luke 22.7.2.
1. CONSIDER how the Apostles knowing on the one side the good custom that
their master had to observe all that which was commanded by the law of
Moses, and on the other side that he had no house of his own, did therefore
demand of him, where it would please him that they should go to prepare all
that which was requisite for eating of the Paschall lamb.

2. How our Lord sent them to Jerusalem, giving them for a mark of the place
where he would make his supper, that there they should find a man carrying a
pitcher of water.

3. How they met this man, and followed him, and entering into the house, had
leave of the owner thereof to prepare in a great hall well appointed and
furnisshed, all that, which was necessary for them.

Let us learn,
1. To prevent as much as we may (if we be Religious) our Superiors, by doing
before time that which afterward we shall be commanded.

2. To obey promptly, and as they say with our eyes shut, at the least
direction of our Superior.

3. To prepare our heart for our Savior, enlarging it with a lively faith,
great hope, and ample charity, and hanging it with tapestrie of most chosen
virtues.

LXXVII. MEDITATION. Of the last supper that our Savior made with his
Apostles. Matt. 26.20. Mark. 14.17. Luke 22.14.
1. CONSIDER how toward the evening our Lord came to the house wherein his
Apostles had prepared for him to celebrate the Pasche, and whilst supper, was
a dressing, he continued to teach them, as he was wont to do.

2. How when it was time he sat down at the table, telling them that he had
an earnest desire to celebrate this feast with them before his passion, and
that this should be the last time in which he should eat before his death.

3. How after these words he did eat the Paschall lamb according to the
ceremonies used amongst the Jews.

Let us learn,
1. To eat the true Paschall lamb, that is, our Saviors body with azime or
unleavened bread, that is with a pure conscience and void of all malice or
affection to sin.

2. To eat the same with bitter lettice, which does denote unto us the
bitterness of Contrition, that we ought to feel for our sins.

3. To eat it being girt and shod, to wit, having all our senses and
affections well shut up, and sundred as much as is possible from worldly
affairs.

LXXVIII. MEDITATION. How our Lord did wash his Apostles feet. John 1^.3.
1. CONSIDER how our Lord rising from table and laying aside his garments,
took a towell, girded himself, and pouring water into a basen, came to wash
his Apostles feetes.

2. How going to begin, and kneeling before S. Peter, this holy Apostle told
him resolutely, that he would never suffer his Creator and Master to wash his
feet, but then understanding, that if he were not so washed, he could have no
part of eternal glory with his master, he let our Savior do what pleased
him, where we may well think how much the Apostles were astonished at this
example.

3. How this ceremony being ended, our Lord said unto them: I have given you
an example, that as I have done, you do also.

Let us learn,
1. To arise from the table, that is to leave and abandon all consolations and
commodities, thereby to assist and help our neigbours.

2. To humble our selves at all men's feet.

3. To wash the feet of our disciples, which are our disordered senses and
affections, thereby to serve God more sincerely.

LXXIX. MEDITATION. Of the institution of the most holy Sacrament of the Altar.
Matt. ^6.26. Mark 14.22. Luke 22.17. 1. Corinthians. 11.24.
1. CONSIDER, how our Savior having washed his Apostles feet, sat down
again to the table, took bread, and giving thanks to God his Father, did
bless and give it to his Apostles saying: Take and eat, this is my Body.

2. How he took afterward the Cup, and giving thanks blessed it, and gave it
to them, saying: This is my blood, do this in remembrance of me. Where we may
admire the goodness and clemency of our Lord, who not content to have become man
for our sakes, would also leave his most precious Body and Blood for our
sustenance.

3. Consider how greatly the Apostles were amazed to understand this new
mystery; and much more when they felt the consolation and abundance of grace,
which they got by receiving of this holy Sacrament.

Let us learn,
1. To be thankful, as the Apostles were, for so great a benefit.

2. To feel our selves, inwardly inflamed with a new fire of love

3 To dispose our selves as they also did, to bear all the Crosses and
adversities that may betide us, that so we may become worthy to enjoy daily so
precious a gift. And therefore we must force our selves to feel the same
spiritual affection as often as we frequent the holy Communion.

LXXX. MEDITATION. How our Savior discovered the treason plotted against him
by Judas. Mat. 26.21. Mark. 14.18. Luke 22.21 John 13.21.
1. CONSIDER how our Savior sitting yet at the table with his disciples, and
thinking upon the enormitie of the treason that Judas had plotted against him,
was greatly troubled for the loss of that wretched soul, and therefore told
them, that one of them should deliver him to his enemies.

2. How S. Peter understanding this heavy news, and desirous to know who this
might be, made S. John as a mean to learn it; who layning his head on our
Saviors lap, demanded of him, which of them was that treacherous wretch.

3. How our Lord having given the token of him to his beloved disciple, took
bread, dipped it, and gave to Judas, bidding him make have, to dispatch what he
had undertaken.

Let us learn,
1. How much we ought to make account of our souls, since our Savior was so
much troubled for the loss of this traitors soul.

2. How the purity of mind and body does make us familiar with almighty God,
and partakers of his secrets.

3. Not to do any thing in secret which we would not should be known both of
God and men, for fear least the Devil seduce us, as he did Judas.

LXXXI. MEDITATION. How our Lord did foretell S. Peter that he should deny him.
Mat. 26.33. Mark. 14.29. Luk 22.31. John. 13.36.
1. CONSIDER how our Savior continuing still to think on his Passion, and
forseeing that not only Judas should betray him, but that also all the rest
would abandone and forsake him, began to take his leave of them, and told them,
that he was to depart and go where none could follow him.

2. How S. Peter promised to follow him though it were to prison and death if
need required, which also the rest of them did promise to do.

3. How our Savior knowing right well what was to fall out, did foretell them
that they all should be scandalized in him that night, and said to S. Peter,
that before the Cock crew twice, he should thrice deny him.

Let us learn,
1. To think often on our end, that we may prepare our selves the better for it.

2. To be ready to suffer all that may befall us for Gods sake.

3. Not to trust overmuch to our own forces, seeing that the most able do
oftentimes break their promises in matters of life and death.

LXXXII. MEDITATION. How our Lord went to the garden of Gethsemani Matthew.
26.36. Mark. 14.32. Luke 22.39. John. 18.1.
1. CONSIDER, how it is now the time that the true lamb sets forth to go to
the place of sacrifice, not omitting nevertheless to comfort his disciples so
greatly afflicted for that they were to loose their master that night.

2. How when they had passed the brook Cedron, and drew toward the village of
Gethsemani, our Savior found himself so surprised with grief and sorrow, that
he said unto his disciples, My soul is sorrowful even unto death, which is as
much as to say, that the sorrow which he felt was sufficient to kill him.

3. How being entered into the garden be forthwith kneeled down with his
face to the ground, thereby as it were not to feel so great affliction and
heart-breach in beholding the sins of the world, for which he was so much
tormented.

Let us learn,
1. Never to loose courage for the desolations, griefs, or disgusts that may
happen to us in our spiritual exercises.

2. To despise all the pleasurs and contentments that we may enjoy in this
world, so to feel some grief with our Savior

3. To have recourse to prayer in all our occurences and necessities.

LXXXIII. MEDITATION Of the prayer which our Savior made in the garden of mont
Oliuet. Matt. 26.39. Mark 14.35. Luke 22.41.
1. CONSIDER how our Savior retiring himself a little from his disciples, did
pray very effectuously to be delivered from the Passion which he was to suffer,
submitting nevertheless his own will to that of his Father.

2. How coming to his disciples some little time after, and finding them
sleeping, he turned to S. Peter, reprehended his weakness in that he could not
watch with him one hour, and exhorted them all to watch and pray, that they
might not enter into tentation.

3. How he returned the second and third time to make the same prayer, which he
also brake off to visit his Apostles that slept.

Let us learn,
1. To present our demands to Almighty God in such sort that we always submit
them to his good pleasure.

2. Not to be so tied to our private devotions that we have no care of our
neighbors good.

3. To continue, yea and reiterate the same prayers until it please God to
hear us.

LXXXIIII. MEDITATION. Of the extreme grief which our Savior did feel
praying in the Garden. Luke 22.43.
1. CONSIDER how our Savior being returned the third time to pray, felt such
extreme grief and anguish that his Father sent him an Angel to comfort him.

2. How notwithstanding these his dolours he ceased not to pray so fervently,
that he sweat blood and water so abundantly that the earth a^out him was
bathed therewith.

3. O christian soul, considering thy Savior to suffer such anguishes for
thee, if thou can not sweat blood and water for his sake, yet at least let
fall a little tear of compassion.

Let us learn,
1. That albeit Almighty God do not always grant thee that which thou
desire and demaundest, yet will he not leave to comfort thee, if thou pray as
thou ought.

2. What is it that we ought not to do and suffer willingly for satisfaction of
our sins, through the only consideration of which our ^auiour was so
afflicted.

3. How, if our Savior thinking on his death, was surprised with so great
fear, we ought to think what we shall do, when we shall come to that last
passage, and what then we would vvish to have done.

LXXXV. MEDITATION. How Judas did betray our Lord and delivered him to the
Jews. Matt. 26.47. Mark 14.42 Luke 22.47. John 18.3.
1. CONSIDER how our Lord returning three times to his disciples and finding
them yet asleep did let them alone, vvhilest he in the mean time did vvatch
over them as a good pastor over his flock.

2. How perceauing the traitor to approach near, he avvaked them saying:
Arise, let us go, behold, he that shall betray me is at hand. And as he was
yet speaking, they discovered the troop of soldiers th^^ came to apprehend
him.

3. How Judas did set himself forvvard to kiss our Lord, and was received of
him with so incredible humanity and sweetness, that it ought even to break
the heart of those who through any occasion whatsoever do nourish their
choler against those that have done them any kind of vvrong.

Let us learn,
1. To bear with the infirmities and imperfections of our neighbors.

2. Never to use any kind of doublenes, or dissimulation.

3. Never to speak, not do any evil, no not even to those which have done us
any harm, but to call and hold them for our friends.

LXXXVI. MEDITATION. Of the endeavor that S. Peter did to hinder his masters
taking. Matt. 26 51. Mark 14.46. Luke 22.49. John. 18.10.
1. CONSIDER how our Savior having embraced Judas passed on to demand of
those whom he brought with him, who he was that they sought for? and they
answering, for Jesus of Nazareth, our Savior replied, I am he, with so great
courage that they all fell backward with fear.

2. How when they were risen up, our Savior asked them again as before, and
discovering himself unto them said; If you seek me, let these my Apostles go
their ways.

3. How S. Peter seeing what passed drew out his sword, and cut off his ear
that came first in his way.

Let us learn,
1. To offer our selves willingly to all dangers for the honor and glory of
God.

2. Never to disburden our selves of the difficulties that befall us thereby to
burden others, but rather to bear them for them.

3. That the weapons of Ecclesiastical and Religious men, be spiritual.

LXXXVII. MEDITATION. How our Savior was apprehended and bound. Matthew. 26.57.
John. 18.12.
1. CONSIDER the infinite goodness and mercy of our Savior who did cure even
him that came to take him, and commanded S. Peter to put up his sword which he
had drawn to defend him.

2. How turning to those which had laid hands on him, he showed them that in
vain they had taken the pains to come thither to apprehend him, for so much
as they had seen him every day teaching in the Temple.

3. How his disciples, when they saw that there was no more remedy to rescue
their master out of the Jews hands, abandoned him, and fled some one way,
some another, and then those executioners tied him fast to lead him the more
safely.

Let us learn.
1. Never to render evil for good.

2. To endure patiently whatsoever evil does befall us.

3. To make provision of Good works, for the greatest frindes that we have in
this world will forsake us at the hour of our death, but our works will
always accompany us.

LXXXVIII. MEDITATION. How our Savior was brought to Annas house. John 18.13.
1. CONSIDER how those cruel souldiars did make our Savior ha^ten his pace,
conducting him overthwart the fields to shorten the way, drawing, striking, and
haling him from side to side.

2. How being come to Annas house, as if they had gotten a great vi^^ory, they
began to triumph, and to use him worse then they had done in the way, all which
our Lord endured most patie^tly, without saying any thing unto them.

2. How two of his disciples did follow him to be eye witnesses of that which
should follow, and one being entered by means of the acquaintance he had in the
house, gave entrance afterward to S. Peter.

Let us learn.
1. To submit our selves always to the will of God, and not desire that he
accommodate himself to our will.

2. To imitate the patience of our Savior.

3. To use the acquaintance and friendship of others to our own good, and that
of our neighbors.

LXXXIX. MEDITATION. How Annas did question with our Lord. John 18.19.
1. CONSIDER the modest carriage of our Lord in Annas presence, hearing all
that it pleased him to demand touching his doctrine and disciples.

2. How he answered that touching his doctrine he might be informed of those
that had heard him preach publicly in the Temple; as concerning his Apostles
he would say nothing.

3. How one of Annas servants gave him a great blow, reprehe^ding him for that
he had spoken so confidently to the high Priest, which injury he patiently
endured.

Let us learn.
1. To beware that we do not buffet our Savior, which they do who omit to do
any good for fear of displeasure, or do commit any evil to please men.

2. That give not ear to godly inspirations.

3. That take not well the good counsels and aduises of those that govern them
in Gods place.

XC. MEDITATION. How our Savior was sent by Annas unto Caiphas. Matthew. 26.57.
Mark. 14.53. Luke 22.54. John. 18.24.
1. CONSIDER how our Savior, as it were now half condemned to death, was
misused by the cruelty of those that lead him; and how he was received of those
Elders and others assembled together in Caiphas house.

2. How being before Caiphas they brought forth against him many false
witnesses, which nevertheless could not agree amongst themselves to make him
guilty of death.

3. How Caiphas seeing this, demanded of our Savior why he defended not his
innocence against those witnesses: but sweet JESUS answered not a word.

Let us learn,
1. To hold our peace, when that which is demanded us deserves no answer.

2. When we perceive that whatsoever we should say shall be misconstrued.

3. When it is time to suffer, and not to excuse.

XCI. MEDITATION. How Cai^has adjured our Savior to tell if he were the
Messiah. Matt. 26.63. Mark. 14.62. Luke 22.67.
1. CONSIDER how Caiphas breaking into passion because he could find nothing to
lay against our Savior, did at last remember to adjure him in the name of God
to tell him if he were the Messiah.

2. How our Savior did then confess that he was truly the Messiah,
foretelling him moreover that they should hereafter see him sitting on the
right hand of God, and coming in the end to judge the world.

3. How Caiphas hearing these words rent his garments, crying with a l^ud
voice, that he had blasphemed, and that there needed no other testimonies
against him; wherevpo^ all that wicked troop adjudged him worthy of death.

Let us learn,
1. Never to make firm resolution of any thing so long as we are troubled with
passion.

2. To speak always the truth, principally when it concerns Gods honor.

3. Not to make great account of men's judgments, which cannot make us worse
then we are.

XCII. MEDITATION. Of the injuries done to our Savior in Caiphas house. Matt.
26.67. Mark 14.65. Luke 22.63.
1. CONSIDER how the souldiars and servants of the Jews, perceauing the spite
that Caiphas had against our Savior, to please him the more, began to
increase, much more then before they had done, their rage upon our Saviors
body, striking and vexing him on every side.

2. How others of them when they had blindfolded him, did buffet and strike him
on the face in diverse manners, and said; Prophesy unto us o Christ, who is he
that struck thee.

3. How diverse of them, contrary to all ciuility, did spit in his face.

Let us learn,
1. That many do now adays also spit on our Saviors face, as those which with
foul and filthy thoughts do defile their soul, made to the likeness, and
image of God

2. Those that do resist the holy inspirations, that God does send them.

3. Those which do receive the body of our Savior, not ha^ing well ^urged and
cleansed their souls before.

XCIII. MEDITATION. How S. Peter did thrice deny our Savior. Matt. 26.69.
Mark. 14 66. Luke 22.55. John. 18.17. and 26.
1. CONSIDER how S. Peter having abandoned his master, and warming himself
amongst the souldiars and servants of the Jews, was so astonished at the bare
word of a poor chambermaid, that fearing death, he denied the fountain of
life.

2. How not content to have simply denied him once, the second time he did
foresweare himself, saying, tha^ he knew him not, and the third time he denied
him with cursing and swearing.

3. How our Savior having sweetly looked back upon S. Peter he forthwith
called to mind his promise, acknowledged his fault, and presently departed out
of tear unhappy house, so to begin a course of wailing and penance, which he
did after continue as long as he lived.

Let us learn,
1. To avoid bad company.

2. To resist tentations in the beginning, lest they draw us from evil to
worse.

3. To imitate the penance of this holy Apostle.

XCIV. MEDITATION. Of the sorrow that our B. Lady felt the night that our
Savior was taken.
1. CONSIDER how our B. Lady when she had received the heavy news, that her
dear beloved son was taken prisoner, felt therefore extreme great sorrow and
grief, feeling then in her heart the sword of sorrow which old Simeon had
foretold her on the day of her Purification.

2. How albeit in this, as in what else soever, she did conform her will to the
eternal Father, yet she did pray him very effectuously, that it would please
him to make her feel the pains that the accursed Jews were to make her son
endure.

3. How departing from her house, she went to find out her son, that so she
might at the lest accompany him to his death, as indeed she did.

Let us learn,
1. Not to loose courage when we fall into any disgrace or tentation, seeing
that Gods chiefest favorites have past that way.

2. To pray for those that be tempted and afflicted.

3. To labor as much as lies in us to assist and comfort them.

XCV. MEDITATION. How the Jews judged our Savior guilty of death. Matt. 26.66
27.1. Mark. 14.64.
1. CONSIDER, how the souldiars having spent the night in mocking and gibing at
our Savior, making him endure diverse pains, the next morning very early the
chief Priests of Jerusalem sat in Council to determine what they should do
with him.

2. How when they had made him to appear before them, they demanded of him,
if he were the Son of God; to which he answered; If I say I am, you will not
believe me, but hereafter you shall see the son of man sitting at the right
hand of the Father

3. How at this answer they al exclaimed, saying, that he had blasphemed, and
did therefore judge him worthy of death; which Judas understanding brought back
the money they had given him for betraying of his master, and confessing his
offense he went and hanged himself.

Let us learn,
1. How the wicked are always diligent to do ill, and the good to do good.

2. How it little avails to preach to obstinate persons.

^. How sins do not seem so great when they are committed, but when we see
the evil that ensues of them, they oftentimes drive us even to despair.

XCVI. MEDITATION. How our Savior was accused before Pilate. Matthew. 27.11.
Mark. 15.1. Luke 23.1. John. 18.28.
1. CONSIDER, how our Savior was brought to Pilates palace, and presented to
that heathen President, who was constrained to go forth of his hall to hear
the Jews, which made more scruple to enter into his palace; then to accuse
the innocent JESUS wrongfully.

2. How Pilate asked of the Jews what informations they had against that man:
who answered him at the first instant, that if he had not been a malefactor,
they would not have given him over to the secular power.

3. How they afterward did accuse him of three crimes, to wit, that he seduced
the people, that he forbad to pay tribute to Caesar, and thought to make himself
a King.

Let us learn,
1. To submit our selves to every one for the love of God.

2. To bear patiently the evil done unto us, even by those to whom we have
done good.

3. Never to reprehend, nor accuse any other wrongfully.

XCVII. MEDITATION. How our Savior was examined by Pilate. Matt. 27.^1. Mark
15.2. Luke 23.3 John 18.33.
1. CONSIDER how good JESUS submits himself to a Judge, to whom he was no
way subject, answering from point to point, to all that which he demanded of
him.

2. How Pilate having performed his duty in examining of our Savior, and
finding nothing in him whereby he might judge him worthy of death, came out of
his Palace to tell the Jews thereof.

3. How those wreched Caitifes fearing lest the President should judge
according to truth and justice, did anew begin to accuse our Savior more
earnestly and eagerly then they had done before, saying that he was a seducer
of the people: unto all which sweet JESUS never answered one word, in so much
that Pilate did greatly marvel at his patience.

Let us learn,
1. To justify and clear our selves before those who are not well informed of
our innocence.

2. Rather to hold our peace before false and malicious accusers the^ to
disp^te and contend with them.

3. To imitate the patience of our Savior

XCVIII. MEDITATION. How Pilate sent our Savior to King Herod. Luke 23.6.
1. CONSIDER how Pilate, when he understood that our Savior was of the
country of Galilee, sent him to Herod who was King of those parts; and how
those that led him, did in the way torment and vex him more then ever, seeing
that his condemnation was so delaied.

2. How Herod was very glad to see our Savior, because he had hope either to
see him work some miracle, or to learn some new thing of him; and therefore
did demand of him many curious questions touching diverse things.

3. How our Lord would neither answer one word to him, nor to the Jews, who
did again accuse him before this King.

Let us learn,
1. That it suffiseth not to have a desire to see our Savior if we do not take
profit by his holy doctrine.

2. That we m^st not further nor soo^h the curiosity of wordlings, by telling
or teaching them such things as can no ways profit them.

3. That we ought not to s^ew nor communicate unto others the favors that God
has bestowed upon us, but to those to whom we know it may do good.

XCIX. MEDITATION. How our Lord by Herod and his Court was hel^ for a fool.
Luke 23.11.
1. CONSIDER how Herod both astonished and offended that he could not get as
much as one word from our Saviors mouth to that which he demanded, did mock
him, calling him fool, sensles, and void of wit, whom also in this uncivil
kind of dealing his whole Court followed.

2. How to scoff the more at our Savior they clad him with a white robe, and
sent him back to Pilates Palace.

3. How the off cers and souldiars led him back with great insolency through
the streets most inhabited, showing him unto all those whom they met, that
they might mock him as a fool.

Let us learn,
1. To rejoice when the world does scoff at us.

2. Not to be ashamed to wear poor and torn garments, so to conform our
selves to our Savior.

3. Never to mock or scoff at any one whosoever.

C. MEDITATION. How the Jews preferred Barabbas before our Savior. Matthew
27.15. Mark. 15.6. Luke 23.17.
1. CONSIDER, how Pilate proceeding according to justice and equity, and
finding no crime worthy of death in our Savior, sought to deliver him,
saying, that nether Herod had found him guilty, nor condemned him to death.

2. How he offered to show him favor, by releasing him according to the
cu^tome which he had to deliver every year unto the Jews one prisoner at
their request about the feast of Easter.

3. How these obstinate people did choose rather one Barabbas a notable thief,
and who had sl^ine many men, then our Savior who had raised from death to life
four dead folks.

Let us learn,
1. To defend always truth and innocence.

2. Never to yield to our sensuality, nor to the imperfections of others
against equity and justice.

3. Nor to esteem what opinion men have of us, albeit they take us to be worse
then those, whom they think to be most wicked men.

CI. MEDITATION. How our Lord was scourged. Mat. 27. 26 Mark 15.15. Luke
23.16.22. John 19.1.
1. CONSIDER how Pilate appointed that our Savior should be w^ipped, although
he knew him to be innocent, and wrongfully accused; all which our Savior
willingly accepted of, making more account of our good then of his own
torments.

2. How the cruel Jews without any respect of our Lords person, took off his
garments, and bound him like a slave unto a pillar, all which he suffered
patiently so to loose and break the bands of our sins.

3. Consider awhile the extreme pains that the most tender and delicate flesh
of our Savior did suffer being altogether torn and rent with so many lashes
and scourges, thereby to make satisfaction for our disordinate pleasures.

Let us learn,
1. To make no account of humane respects, if we will not commit many gross
errors.

2. Not to lament nor grudge when God does punish us for our sins, seeing
that when our Savior wa^ scourged he did not repine.

3. How we ought to deal with our rebellious flesh.

CII. MEDITATION. How our Savior was crowned with thorns. Matt. 27.29. Mark.
15.17. John 19.2.5.
1. CONSIDER the robes which these fellows bestowed upon the King of Heaven,
to wit, an old mantle of purple to breed laughter, a crown of thorns for his
Diadem, and a reed for his Royal Septer, and how our Savior received all
this at their hands that did mo^k him, without any contradiction.

2. Cast your eyes upon that venerable and Holy face of our Lord, and you shall
see it all covered with foul and filthy spittle, and disguised with buffets
that these wicked men did give him.

3. Consider with what patience our Savior did support and endure such
dishonours, and esteeming much to be mocked, that so he might abate our pride,
and pull down our ambitious desires.

Let us learn,
1. To be obedient, even in those things that be contrary to our lyking and to
the opinion of the world.

2. To support injuries though they be done by vile and base persons.

3. Not to labor to be greatly prized, since our Lord was so mocked and
contemned.

CIII. MEDITATION. How our Savior was in diverse manners mocked in Pilates
Palace. Matthew. 27.27. Mark 15.16. John 19.2.
1. CONSIDER how these cruel souldiars not content to have tormented our
Sauiou^ in such sort that they had already covered his whole body with woud^
from the sole of his foot even to the top of his head, did begin to afflict
his soul, by all such means as they could devise.

2. How putting a reed into his hand they would thereby signify (and it may be
they said so much unto him) that he had no more wit, then that reed had juice
or pith.

3. How kneling before him upon one knee on the ground, they saluted him King
of the Jews, and spit in his face, striking him on the Crown of thorns with
the reed, and buffeting him.

Let us learn,
1. To shun all hypocrisy, and to worship our Lord sincerely with soul and
body.

2. Not to lean too much to humane helps and means which be more frail then
reeds

3. Not to esteem much what the world says of v^, provided that our
^onscience be clear from all evil, and ^o not reprehend us.

CIIII. MEDITATION. How Pilate showed our Savior to the People. John 19.5.14.
1. CONSIDER how Pilate albeit he was a Paynim, yet desirous to deliver the
innocent, devised to show our Savior unto those fierce and furious people, in
that so piteous plight into which they by their cruelty had put him.

2. How therefore he brought him forth crowned with thorns, and covered only
with a poor robe of purple, which he lifted up a little to show unto the Jews
his body all disfigured and bloody, and said to them. B^hold the man.

3. How those obstinate people moved neither with pity nor compassion began to
cry with a furious voice, Crucify him.

Let us learn,
1. To defend evermore truth and innocence in whomsoever it be.

2. That the filthiness of sin is most grievous, seeing that our Savior has
been so greatly tormented to satisfy for the same.

3. To beware of all kind of choler and rancour which does blind those that
take not heed of it.

CV. MEDITATION. How the Jews made new instance with Pilate that he would
condemn our Savior, Luke 23.22. John 19.6.12.
1. CONSIDER how Pilate persisting in his desire to deliver our Lord, did his
best to give him over into the hands of the Jews, they might judge him
according to their Law; but they answered that according to their Law, he ought
to die, speaking in this, truer then they thought.

2. How Pilate did again demand of our Savior, whence he was? To which
question receiving no answer, when he vaunted himself of the power which he
had, our Lord then said unto him with most great wisdom, That his power was
given him from above, which was cause that Pilate desired much more to release
him.

3. How the Jews perceauing Pilates good will and inclination toward our
Savior, cried out aloud and boldly, that if he delivered him, he could not be
Cesars friend.

Let us learn,
1. To persevere in that good which we have once known and embraced.

2. To acknowledge that all authority comes from above.

3. Not to fear those which have power only over the body, but not over the
soul.

CVI. MEDITATION. How Pilate condemned our Savior. Matthew. 27.26. Mark 15.15.
Luke 23.23. John 19.
1. CONSIDER how Pilate seeing himself pressed more and more by the Jews, did
enter again into his Palace, where sitting to end our Saviors process, he
received a message from his wife who prayed him not to meddle in the affairs
of innocent Jesus.

2. How Pilate nevertheless perceauing the sedition to increase more and more,
and that the mutinous Jews did redouble their outcries, he coming out of his
Hall did wash his hands in presence of all the people, and protest, that he
would not be their compartner in so unjust an act.

3. How upon this all the people having received the whole fault upon
themselves and their posterity, Pilate pronunced the sentence of death against
our Savior, giving him up into the executioners hands, and delivering Barabbas.

Let us learn.
1. How innocence can never be oppressed, though the innocent do often suffer
wrongfully.

2. How little it avails to have the body clean, when the soul is defiled,
and laden with sin.

3. That we must suffer oftentimes thereby to have compas^ion of our Savior.

CVII. MEDITATION. How our Savior did bear his Cross. Mat. 27.31. Mark.
15.20. Luke 23.26. John 19.17.
1. CONSIDER the grief that our B. Lady felt when she heard that the sentence
of death was given against her dear beloved Son; and saw the guard on
horsback to lead him to the place of execution.

2. How the pitiless executioners did take off our Saviors purple robe, and
commanded him to put on his own garments, and by this means renewed his
wounds, which gushed out blood on every side.

2. How they did load his feeble shoulders with that huge burden of the
Cross, and hastened him to go on the way, albeit he was otherwise scarce able
to stand; but, alas, it was for the satisfaction of our sins that our Savior
was so ouercharged.

Let us learn,
1. To bear our Cross after him by laboring willingly in his holy service.

2. By mortifying our body, and sensual appetites.

3. By ouercomming all tentations and lets which the Devil and the world do
put in our way.

CVIII. MEDITATION. How our Savior di^ speak to the women that followed him.
Luke 23.27.
1. CONSIDER with what devotion those good women which had followed our Savior
in his life, did also accompany him in his death, making great lamentation
according to their nature.

2. How our Savior, when that he heard them bewail him so pitifully, did
turn back to them, exhorting them rather to weep upon themselves, and upon
their children who should be cruelly punished for the pains which they made
him now endure.

3. How those enraged Jews would not suffer him to speak on the way, but did
push him forward, having given him for companions two thieves that were also
lead to be executed.

Let us learn,
1. To have compassion of the pains which our Savior has endured for us.

2. To bewail our sins which were cause of his death.

3. To pray for the evils that be to ensue, to the end that God either turn
them away, or give us patience to support them.

CIX. MEDITATION. How Simon of Cyrene did help to bear our Saviors Cross.
Matthew. 27.32. Mark. 15.21. Luke 23.26.
1. CONSIDER, how our Savior altogether wearied with the pains and torments
which he had endured the night before, and ouercharged with the great weight of
his Cross, went soft and fair, marking all the way with the blood which
flowed from his precious wounds.

2. How the Jews perceauing his weakness, and seeing him fall oftentimes under
the burden, yea and fearing l^st ^e would dye ere he came to the place of
execution, were of opinion to make one Simon of Cyrene, whom they met
returning from the fields, to bear his Cross.

3. How they s^ld our Savior this little comfort very dearly, vpbraiding him
that he who had vaunted himself to be the son of God, was not able now to go,
and constrayning him also to go more speedily then he could.

Let us learn,
1. To bear our own Cross and not that of others.

2. To bear it willingly, and not perforce.

3. To carry it after our Savior following his pace, and not for praise of men.

CX. MEDITATION. How they gave our Savior wine mingled with gall to drink.
Matthew. 27.34.
1. CONSIDER how our Savior being arrived to mount Caluary so weary and tired
that his heart did fail, those cruel Jews did present him to drink wine
mingled with gall, that by so doing they might leave no part of his,
vntormented.

2. How our Lord being ready to suffer all pains for the love of us, did take
the cup, and when he had tasted thereof, he would not drink.

3. How great the sorrow of our Blessed Lady was, when she saw that mouth which
she had nourished with her precious milk, filled with that stinking licour.

Let us learn,
1. To present unto Almighty God our actions pure without any mixture of
sinister intention.

2. To contemn earthly consolations, seeing that they be always mingled with
gall.

3. Never to complain of the meat and drink that is set before us.

CXI. MEDITATION. How our Savior was nailed to the Cross. Matthew. 27.31. Mark.
15.21.24. Luk 23.33. John 19.18.
1. CONSIDER how those cruel torturers did take our Savior by the neck to draw
off his cloa^hes, and rent away with his garments part of his flesh and skin,
that stuck fast to them.

2. How our Blessed Lady seeing him stark naked, and exposed as well to the
cold, as to the derision of that uncivil multitude, did with invincible
courage and motherly affection, make have to cover some part of him with her
veyle, and afterward embraced him most tenderly.

3. How the Jews did presently hale him from her, to lay him upon the hard bed
of the Cross whereto they fastened his hands and feet with huge nails.

Let us learn,
1. To unclothe our selves of our worldly affections and customs, the better
to follow our Savior who is all naked.

2. To have compassion of the poor, whom oftentimes we see stark naked.

3. To esteem greatly those holy vows, which be the nails that fasten
religious folks to the Cross of religion, so to live and dye with our Savior.

CXII. MEDITATION. How our Savior was crucified between two th^eues. Matt. 27
^8. Mark 15 27. Luke 23.32. John 19.18.
1. CONSIDER how those barbarous executioners having hammered at their pleasure
on our Lords feet, did hoise up the Cross, and after let it fall at one push
into the hole where it should stand, which was cause that all his wounds were
opened a new.

2. How not to omit any thing that might increase our Saviors pain and
torment, they hanged two infamous thieves with him, one on each side.

3. Weigh well here, o Christian soul, that thou ought to aba^don the
earth, to join thy self to our Savior hanging for thee in the air.

Let us learn.
1. To crucify our spirit betwixt two thieves, the flesh, and the world.

2. To support patiently all that which may befall us against our reputation.

3. To converse amongst sinners, when it is necessary for their salvation, in
such sort, that thou do not communicate with their iniquities.

CXIII. MEDITATION. Of the title that Pil^te did put upon our Saui^^rs Cross
Matthew. 27.37. Mark. 15 26. Luke 23.38. John 19.19.
1. CONSIDER how that which the Jews and Pilate did for our Saviors
confusion, and greatest ignominy, turned notwithstanding to his great honor
and their shame.

2. How the high Priests and the rest perceauing this, desired Pilate to write
only, that our Savior called himself King of the Jews, which he would not
accord unto, no nor chaung what he had once written.

3. How we ^ught to weigh the words of this Title, JESUS being come to save us
as his name imports; being innocent as is signified by this word Nazareth;
and briefly being King he should not have been so traytourously put to death by
his own subjects.

Let us learn,
1. Not to care for the common reports that me^ make of us at their pleasure,
nor for the libels that they write.

2. To answer courageously and boldly to temptations of inco^stancy in saying,
That which is written, is written.

3. To cast all worldly honor and reputation behind our backs, and to set
labors and pains before our eyes, as our Savior did.

CXIV. MEDITATION. How our Saviors garments were divided amongst the
souldiars. Matt. 27.35. Mar. 15.24 Luke 23.24. John 19.23.
1. CONSIDER how our Savior being on the Cross laden with wounds, and as it
were beaten down with bodily pains, but more with sorrow proceeding of this,
that he saw so many persons whom his passion should benefit nothing at all, the
souldiars notwithstanding dreamed of naught else, but how to increase his
sorrows.

2. How therefore they took his apparel for spite, and scorning at the
baseness of the stuff of which they were made, divided the^ into four parts
for every soldier his, uttering in the mean time injuries the Scribes, and
Ancients of the people said one to another: He has saved others, and now he
cannot save himself. If he be king of Israel let him come down from the
Cross.

Let us learn,
1. To persevere until death in the virtuous way and life that we have once
undertaken.

2. Never to descend again to our imperfections, but to mount up still, and go
forward in virtue.

3. Not to speak when we are wronged.

CXVI. MEDITATION. Of the first word that our Lord did speak upon the Cross.
Luke 23.34.
1. CONSIDER how amongst other injuries which the Scribes did unto our Savior,
they did vpbraid him that he trusted much in his Father, who yet had not
delivered him from evil: and in doing this they blasphemed against the goodness
and power of Almighty God.

2. How our Savior understanding this their language, had presently recourse
to his heavenly Father, praying him not to have regard to their words, but to
forgive the^ as men that knew not what they said.

3. Weigh well the words that our Savior spoke, who made more account of his
Fathers honor then of those evils which himself endured, and excused the fault
of the Jews his enemies.

Let us learn,
1. To pardon, and pray for such as do us harm.

2. Rather to excuse and diminish their faults, then to increase and make them
greater.

3. Rather to be grieved for the offenses committed against God, then for the
evil done to our selves.

CXVII. MEDITATION. Of the second word that our Savior, spoke upon the Cross.
Luke 23.39.
1. CONSIDER how the Jews, Paynims, Soldiers, and others that assisted at
this cruel spectacle, and vexed our Savior with their ill speeches, did by
their example move the thief that hanged at his left hand to do the like.

2. How his companion defending our Lord, and taking his part, warned that
blasphemer to look to himself, and to have compass^on of that innocent, to
whom he commended him self, saying: Lord, remember me when thou shall come
into thy kingdom.

3. How our Savior answered him, This day thou shall be with me in paradise. O
sweet word! O happy thief, who have stolen eternal glory at the last hand.

Let us learn,
1. That we must never follow those that do ill, albeit they be many, and seem
to be men of great authority.

2. That we ought to excuse our neigbours, and defend them against backbiters.

3. To hope in Gods mercy and bounty even till death.

CXVIII. MEDITATION. Of the third word that Christ did speak on the Cross.
John 19.26.
1. CONSIDER how our B. Lady having followed her well-beloved son our Savior
from Pilates house unto Mount Caluary, and seen all the torments that those
barbarous people had made him suffer, did notwithstanding abide still by the
Cross, and participate of all the evils that our Lord endured.

2. How sweet JESUS beholding her, and on the other side casting his eyes upon
S. John, who was also present there, said to his Mother, Woman, behold thy
Son; and to S. John, Behold thy Mother.

3. Think what sorrow did surprise the heart of the glorious Virgin,
considering with herself, that this was the last farewell that her Son was to
give her, leaving her the disciple inst^ed of the master, the servant instead
of his Lord, and Zebedeus son, instead of the son of God.

Let us learn,
1. To persevere even until death near the Cross of our Savior.

2. To have compassion upon the afflicted.

3. To hold our B. Lady for our dear Mother, and to have reco^rse to her in
all our necessities.

CXIX. MEDITATION. Of the fourth word that our Savior spoke on the Cross.
John. 19.28
1. CONSIDER how our Savior having endured an infin^^e number of torments, all
the night before, and that day, without any consolation or ease from any o^e,
felt such strange alteration, that he was forced to cry and say, I thirst

2. How albeit h^ had just cause to be maruel^usly altered in body, yet was his
heart much more, for the desire that he had of the salvation of souls, for
which he would willingly have endured a hundred tho^sand times as much.

3. How those obstinate Jews instead to give him water, or some, good wine (as
reason and custom required) did offer him vinegar.

Let us learn,
1. To daunte our body with hunger, thirst, and other mortifications.

2. To imitate the desire that our Savior had of the salvation of souls.

3. Not to bestow the worst things that we have upon the poor, which do
represent unto us the person of our Savior.

CXX. MEDITATION. Of the fifth word our Savior spoke on the Cross. Matthew.
27.46. Mark 15.34.
1. CONSIDER how the Sun not able to support any longer the injuries that
were done to his God and Creator, was about midday eclipsed in a strange
manner, so that the whole earth was covered with darkness for the spac: of three
hours.

2. How our Savior, about three hours after midday, to show how much he
suffered, cried out with a loud voice, and said, my God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me?

3. How his sweet Mother understanding that he remained as abandoned of his
eternal Father, of whom only he could then receive any comfort, did thereby
feel new sorrow and grief.

Let us learn,
1. To turn away from our eyes the injuries done to our God.

2. To approach unto him in all our necessities, and so much the more boldly,
and fervently, by how much they are, or seem to be greater.

3. To pray often for a happy hour of our death, seeing that our Savior him
self has labored so much in the same.

CXXI. MEDITATION. Of the sixth word that our Savior spoke on the Cross Joan.
19.30.
1. CONSIDER how our Lord, although he was extremely af^l^cted, neu^^^heles
saying this word, It is co^summate, or all is accomplished, he felt exceeding
consolation, because he punctually followed the will of God the Father and
performed the work of our Redemption.

2. How he felt a vehement grief setting before his eyes, as in a book, all
that he had suffered from the house of his birth until then, to present them
unto his Father, seeing the hour of his death to draw so near.

3. How the doleful Mother hearing these words of her sweet child lifted up
her eyes to him, and said, It is then your pains, my dearest Love, it is your
pains and torments that shall have an end; but mine (alas) begin more now then
ever.

Let us learn,
1. To be glad when we do suffer any thing for Gods sake.

2. To offer our travels and pains to God.

3. To think oftentimes upon the hour of our death, so to be the better
provided for it.

CXXII. MEDITATION. Of our Saviors death, and the last word he spoke on ^he
Cross. Luke 28.46. John. 19 30.
1. CONSIDER how our Lord to show that he died willingly, and had yet some
force to resist, did exalt his voice as triumphing over death, and commended
his soul to God.

2. How afterward bending down his head to take leave of his Mother, he gave
up the ghost most sweetly to God his Father, who had sent a multitude of
Angels to assist his Son at his death.

3. Consider, o my soul, how great this last pain was, which the Son of God
felt, when his soul departed out of his body.

Let us learn,
1. To have evermore before our eyes this venerable head hanging toward the
ground, to teach us how grievous the burden was of our sins, which he did lay
on his own back.

2. To give us example of his wonderful Humility, Obedience, and Poverty.

3. To offer us the kiss of peace.

CXXIII. MEDITATION. Of that which passed after our Saviors death. Matthew
27.51. Mark. 15.18. Luke 23.47.
1. CONSIDER how after that our Savior had given up the ghost to God, the
insensible creatures were so grieved, that they all seemed desirous to end and
perish; the earth trembled, the rocks were rent, and the graves were opened.

2. How the Centurion who remained to see our Savior dye, was moved to
confess that indeed he was the son of God.

3. How others also that were present at this sight said the same, and knocking
their breasts in sign of pe^nance returned to Jerusalem.

Let us learn,
1. To be sorry at the death and passion of our Savior, if we will not be
thought to be more hard then the rocks, more insensible then the earth, and
more dead then death it self.

2 To confess the truth freely, when it is requisite for Gods honor and
glory.

3. To tame our body by doing penance and satisfaction for our sins.

CXXIV. MEDITATION. How our Saviors side was pierced with a spear after his
death. John 19.34.
1. CONSIDER how the rage of the Jews not being yet appeased with all those
torments which they made our Savior endure, they bethought them selves, that
it would not seem decent to leave those bodies hanging on the Cross in the
most solemn Sabbath day of the whole year.

2. How therefore they prayed Pilate, that their legs might be broken, to the
end they might dye the sooner, and their bodies be carried away: and so it was
done to the two thieves which were crucified with our Savior.

3. How when they came to our Lord JESUS to do the like, they found him dead;
whereat one of the horsemen of the guard, as it were grieved, did strike him with
a spear, which did even pierce him to the heart, whence presently gushed forth
blood and water.

Let us learn,
1. To mark the singular love of our Savior who would shed for us eue^ that
little blood that remained yet in his heart.

2. Who would satisfy with his very inward parts for the sins that the world
had committed by thought.

3. Who would witness unto us the great and invincible wound of charity, which
his heart had received for our sakes.

CXXV. MEDITATION. How our Savior was taken down from the Cross. Math 27.57.
Mark. 1^.42. Luk 23.50. John 19.38.
1. CONSIDER how our Blessed Lady who remained all this while by the Cross was
greatly afflicted in mind, because she had no means to take down our Saviors
body: when in the mean season Joseph of Arimathia inspired by our Savior,
went boldly to Pilate and demanded leave of him to take down the body.

2. How having obtained his request, he forthwith bought a most fine sheet, and
went toward mount Caluary to take him off from the Cross, which at length he
did with due reverence.

3. How the sweet Mother did affoard as much help as lay in her to take him
down, and after received him into her lap, to contemplate more nearly the
wounds of his precious body.

Let us learn,
1. To expose our selves willingly to all sorts of labor for the love of our
Savior.

2. To prepare our soul like a fair clean sheet as often as we be to receive
him.

3. To embrace him straightly, and to keep him in our heart after that we have
received him, by meditating upon his holy death, and Passion.

CXXVI. MEDITATION. How our Savior was buried. Mat. 27.59. Mark. 15.4^. Luke
23.53. John 19.39.
1. CONSIDER how whilst Joseph of Arimathia and others took down our
Saviors body from the Cross, Nicodemus prepared a hundred pounds of most
precious ointme^t, and came just in time to honor our Saviors burial.

2. How the disciples were much abashed at the matter, when they saw themselves
forced to demand their masters body of his Mother, who held it so straightly
embraced.

3. How she nevertheless giving it willingly into their hands, they buried it in
a fair new mo^ume^t hewed out of a rock that lay in the next garden, and
covered the same with a great stone of marble.

Let us learn,
1. That if we will have our Savior to dwell in our heart, it is requisite
that he find it first all new, by a new life.

2. That he find it constant and firm through a settled will always to do good.

3. That he find it free from all corruption of sensual thoughts and desires.

CXXVII. MEDITATION. Of the guard that was put to keep our Lords sepulcher.
Matthew. 27.62.
1. CONSIDER how our Blessed Lady, S. John, Joseph of Arimathia, Nicodemus and
others, who were present at the burial of our Savior returned toward the
evening each one to his own house very woeful, and sorry for our Saviors death.

2. How the last that departed were Mary Magdalene and Mary of Joseph, who did
mark the place very carefully where he was buried, with intention to return
and anoint him again.

3. How the Jews fearing lest our Lord would rise as he had foretold,
demanded souldiars of Pilate to keep the sepulcher, which they did also seal
with their own signet.

Let us learn.
1. Never to omit welldoing, but to reiterate twice, thrice, yea a hundred
times, if need be, the same service for Gods sake.

2. To be as diligent and careful to do good, as the Jews were to do ill.

3. To keep well the doors of our senses, for fear lest we loose our Savior
after we have received him.

CXXVIII. MEDITATION. How our Savior descended into Limbo.
1. CONSIDER how the souls of the Patriarchs and other holy persons of the
old Testament, detained in Abraham's bosom, expected from day to day the
coming of their Messiah, and this more earnestly, because they knew, that his
time was near at hand.

2. How the soul of our Savior, who might well have delivered them without
departing from the world, did daine notwithstanding through his infinite
goodness, to desce^d into those obscure dungeo^s to visit and comfort them, not
as his servants, but as his well beloved children.

3. How excessive and great the joy was that those Blessed souls received
beholding their Redeemer, and what dread did appall the infernal spirits when
they perceived themselves vanquished by him, whom they caused so ignominiously
to be put to death.

Let us learn.
1. Never to lose courage for any temptation that may befall us.

2. To descend and humble our selves if we desire to be exalted.

3. To visit willingly the sick, imprisoned, and other needy folks.

CXXIX. MEDITATION. Of our Savior his glorious Resurrection. Matthew. 16.1. Luke
28.1. Mark. 24.1. John. 29.1.
1. CONSIDER how the Glorious soul of our Savior having visited the Fathers
that were in Limbo; returned again on the Sunday morning very early to reunite
and join her self to the body, so to comfort the Apostles and Disciples.

2. How at the same time the three Mary's were on their way to anoint and
imbalme their masters body again; and going together they asked one of
another, who should open the monument unto them.

3. How coming to the sepulcher, they found the stone removed, and an Angel
who told them that Jesus was risen.

Let us learn,
1. To comfort the afflicted by the example of our Savior, who did hasten the
time of his Resurrection as much as he might, so to give heart and courage to
his Disciples.

2. To exercise the works of mercy, as these three Mary's did.

3. To forsake all our imperfections, that we may arise with our Savior.

CXXX. MEDITATION. How our Savior appeared to his B. Mother.
1. CONSIDER how after the friday at night that our Savior was buried, his
holy Mother was altogether disco^forted, having always in her heart and
before her eyes, the pains and torments that her dear Son had endured in
her sight.

2. How our Savior to acomplish the duty of a Good child, taking his body
again as soon as he could, went first to his Mothers house, to make her first
partaker of the joy of his Resurrection.

3. What most kind entertainment the Son made to his Mother, and the Mother
unto her Son, seeing him so gloriously risen from death.

Let us learn,
1. If we desire to be partakers of this joy, to endeavor to follow the
qualities of glorified bodies and first to shine by good example before our
neighbors.

2. To be prompt and nimble in Gods service.

3. To follow the purity of Angels which we get by mortification, of our
senses and passions.

CXXXI. MEDITATION. How our Savior appeared to S. Mary Magdalene. John 20.1.11.
1. CONSIDER how Mary Magdalene although she came to the sepulcher with the
other women, yet she would not go back with them so soon, but remaining there
wept, and went now and then to see, if she could find her masters body.

2. How she having spoken to the two Angels, that were within the sepulcher,
turning back, saw our Savior, and taking him to be the gardener of that place
(for she knew him not) she prayed him to tell her, if he had taken away her
masters body, and where he had put it.

3. How knowing him by his voice, she ran forthwith to prostrate her self at
his feet, and to adore him, and embrace him, which our Savior would not
permit her to do.

Let us learn,
1. To persevere if we desire to have any good.

2. To weep willingly, since by tears we may easily obtain of God that which
we desire.

3 Not to stay nor rest our selves too much in consolations, when it pleases
God to affoard us them.

CXXXII. MEDITATION. How our Savior appeared to the two disciples going to
Emaus. Mark. 16.12 Luke 24.13.
1. CONSIDER how these two disciples going on their way did intertaine and
comfort themselves with holy discourses, talking of those things that passed in
our Saviors death, which was cause that he approached near to the^ and put
himself in their company.

2 How demanding the cause of their sorrow, he taught them out of the
scriptures, how all had passed as it was long ago foretold, and afterward
feigned that he would go further.

3. How they constrained him to enter into their lodging and suppe with them;
where knowing him in the manner of breaking and blessing bread, their eyes were
opened, and they greatly comforted.

Let us learn,
1. To intertaine our selves willingly in virtuous discourses, if we desire to
have God present with us.

2. To instruct and teach the ignorant.

3. To exercise the works of mercy, and not to content our selves with only
speaking of them: for these two disciples were not illuminated until they had
received our Savior.

CXXXIII. MEDITATION. How our Savior appeared to all the Disciples being
together. Mark. 16.14. Luk 24.33. John 20.19
1. CONSIDER how our Savior not content to have showed himself in particular
to his Mother, to S. Peter, to the three Mary's, and to Ma. Magdalen, was
desirous to make all his disciples at one partakers of the joy of his
Resurrection.

2. How therefore entering into the place where they were gathered together for
fear of the Jews, he said unto them, Peace be to you, It is I, fear not.

3. How perceauing for all this that they were troubled and frighted, imagining
that they saw a spirit, he assured them that they had no cause to be afraid.

Let us learn,
1. How our Savior for greater proof of his Resurrection showed his disciples
his hands, to teach us to take pains, and to suffer.

2. He showed them his wounded side, to exercise us in his love.

3. He showed them his pierced feet, to teach us perseverance.

CXXXIV. MEDITATION. How our Savior did prove his Resurrection to his
disciples. Luke 24.38.
1. CONSIDER how the Apostles and disciples being much astonished at the
wonders that they saw, and scarce believing that which they did touch with their
fingers, our Savior did ask them, if they had any thing to eat, and did eat
in their presence.

2. How making afterward along discourse of the figures and prophesies of the
old testament, he gave them clearly to understand how all had been performed in
him, and so opened their understanding that they might easily see the truth of
the scriptures,

3. How seeing them now confirmed, assured, and full of comfort, he gave them
again the peace, and power to remit sins.

Let us learn,
1. To accommodate our selves to our neighbors infirmities, so to induce them
to goodness.

2 To desire almighty God that he never withdraw his light from us.

3. To yield him thanks for the power that he has left to the Apostles and
Priests to forgive sins, as not willing to make other judgment in heaven,
then that which by them is made on earth.

CXXXV. MEDITATION. How our Savior appeared to his disciples, S. Thomas being
present. John 20.26.
1. CONSIDER how S. Thomas by reason of his departure from the other Apostles,
was for the space of eight days deprived of our Saviors sight, and remained
so obstinate in his infidelity that he would not believe what the rest told him
of our Saviors resurection.

2. How our Savior notwithstanding, as well for the particular salvation of
this Infidel, as also for the greater assurance of all the rest, would appear
again the second time to all his Apostles, and in their presence give unto S.
Thomas such proof as he had desired of his Resurrection.

3. How S. Thomas astonished altogether at this, cried out: my Lord, my God,
not able to say any more for admiration.

Let us learn,
1. How good a thing it is to be in good and godly company, to be visited by
God amongst others.

2. That we must not always seek after sweetness and consolation in our
spiritual exercises.

3. That to stir up our selves and nourish our faith, we must exercise works
of charity.

CXXXVI. MEDITATION: How our Savior appeared to his Disciples that were
fishing. John. 21.1.
1. CONSIDER how S. Peter and his companions, though they were well assured of
our Saviors Resurrection, yet not daring to go abroad publicly before they
had received the holy Ghost, went forth a whole night to fish, but all in vain

2. How about the break of the day our Savior appeared to them, but was not
known, and commanded them to cast the net on the right hand, which they
speedily doing, took an hundred, fifty, and three great fishes.

3. How by this strange and unexpected draught they came to know our Lord, drew
the net to land, and found dinner ready, to which our Savior himself did
inuit them.

Let us learn,
1. To keep our selves always in the grace of God, that so we may merit.

2. To obey promptly and spedily.

3. To labor diligently, if we be desirous that God inuit us one day to his
holy repose.

CXXXVII. MEDITATION. How our Savior appeared to his disciples upon the mount
of Galilee. Matthew. 28.16
1. CONSIDER how our Savior having promised, and oftentimes signified even by
Angels to his Apostles and other Christians, that in Galilee they should see
him, many went thither and expected there his coming.

2. How the day appointed, our Savior appeared and showed some part of his
glory to the Apostles and five hundred other persons that believed in him, to
whom he largely declared the power that his Father had given him in heaven and
in earth, and discovered unto them diverse mysteries of the faith.

3. How for conclusion he promised never to withdraw his assistance and favor
from them.

Let us learn,
1. To keep our selves in the mountain of perfection and still to aspire to
the same, if we desire that our Savior show himself unto us.

2. To fear, and respect his power.

3 Not to loose heart in time of temptation, seeing that he is always present
with us.

CXXXVIII. MEDITATION. Of our Saviors glorious Ascension, Mark. 16.19. Luke
24.50. Act. 1.9.
1. CONSIDER how our Savior standing on mount Oliuet, after that he had taken
leave of his Mother, Apostles, disciples, and others there present, he gave
unto them all his holy blessing, and afterward ascended glorious into heaven,
accompanied with many squadrons of Angels, and holy Fathers which he had
delivered out of Limbo.

2. How coming to heaven he was there received by God the Father, and all the
celestial Court with great triumph and joy, as Conqueror of death, Hell, and
the world.

3. How the Disciples having lost the sight of their Lord and master, did all
do reverence to his glorious mother taking her for their mistress and guide.

Let us learn of our Lord,
1. The way to mount up to heaven, which is to humble our selves, and to
withdraw all our affection from earthly things.

2. That to deserve triumph we we must first overcome our passions.

3. That if we desire to have our B. Lady for our guide and mistress we must
imitate her virtues.

CXXXIX. MEDITATION. How our Savior did send the holy Ghost upon his Disciples
and Apostles. Act. 2.1.
1. CONSIDER how after that our Savior was ascended into heaven, the most B.
Virgin retired her self to Jerusalem, where more by her example then by words
she did instruct and comfort the Christians, expecting the coming of the holy
ghost which our Savior had promised to send.

2. How the most Blessed Virgin and all the Apostles being together in a great
room, and praying to almighty God, the holy Ghost came upon them, and appeared
upon every one of them in form of fiery tongues.

3 How the holy Ghost did so inflame the hearts of the Apostles, that they
preached the faith without any fear, seeking nothing more then the glory of
God.

Let us learn,
1. To help our neighbors more by giving good example, then by fair words.

2. That prayer is a singular means to obtain the holy Ghost.

3. That if we do in our actions seek only the glory of God, it is a sign
that the holy Ghost is in us.

CXL. MEDITATION. Of the Assumption of our Blessed Lady.
1. CONSIDER how the most Blessed Virgin, esteeming that her presence was no
more necessary for the Church of God, which was then very much increased, did
demand of God to depart this life, that she might be with her son in heaven.

2. How great joy and contentment she received, understanding by relation of an
Angel, that her son our Savior would fulfill her desire, and that he came
now to receive her soul

3. How her thrice happy soul three days after it was departed from the
body, returned to reunite it self with the same; and so our B. Lady accompanied
with Angels was, as some say, carried up into heaven.

Let us learn,
1. To live here on earth a celestial life, if we desire to gain heaven.

2. Not to make any designments in this life, and so we shall not be sorry, when
we shall hear of death.

3. To receive God in our hearts at this present; and he will afterward receive
us in heaven.

CXLI. MEDITATION. How our Blessed Lady was crowned in Heaven.
1. CONSIDER what feast the Blessed Saints of Paradise made beholding the
Queen of Angels, and the Mother of God to come into Heaven so glorious as she
did.

2. With what majesty and reverence she was led to the throne of the holy
Trinity, where she was most honorably received and crowned.

4. How she was seated on a beautiful thrown above all the Angels at the
right hand of her beloved Son, where she prays co^titually for her devoted
servants.

Let us learn,
1. To humble our selves here on earth by example of the glorious Virgin, if
we desire to appear glorious in Heaven.

2. That our Blessed Lady has merited to be crowned in Heaven, not simply
because that she was the Mother of God, but for that she was adorned and
enriched with millions of virtues.

3. That if we desire, that our B. Lady take care of us in heaven, we must be
devout to her on earth.

CXLII. MEDITATION. Of Death.
1. THINK that we must o^ce die, and yet we know not when, nor how; and that
dying we must leave all things of this world, which will afflict us at that
hour so much the more, as we have been affected to them in our life.

2. That then our soul shallbe so troubled and tormented by the Devils, and
our body so strongly seized with sickness, that we scarce shall know, whether we
be alive or dead.

3. How in that trance we shall be more grievously afflicted with the worm of
conscience which will not only gnawe us for the evil we have committed, but
also for the good we have omitted.

Let us learn,
1. To mark here three great follies committed by men, and first by those,
who are so much affected to these worldly things that once they must leave
and abandon.

2. Of those that defer and drive off their conversion until the hour of
death, which is a time so doubtful and uncertain.

3. Of those who do not now that which the^ they would have done, and let us
persuade our selves that he that lives ill, seldom or never dies well.

CXLIII. MEDITATION. Also of death
1. CONSIDER that as soon as the soul shall be out of the body, every one
will abandon the same as a thing most horrible. How afterward they will throw
the same into a filthy and stinking hole, to be gnawen and devoured of worms.
Behold how this body shall end, which we have cherished so much in this world,
and for whose sake we have so offended Almighty God.

2. Let us turn toward our soul, and we shall see it depart out of this
world loaded only with the works which she has done. The ill ones make her
tremble and quake; the good give her some small comfort, but above all she is
grieved that she lived not better.

3. Behold with what carriage and countenance she does present her self before
the throne of the divine justice, there to receive the sentence that her works
do deserve.

Let us learn,
1. How little accoumpt we ought to make of our body, seeing it is of so base
and vile condition.

2. To do always good, since this is it that must accompaine us in the other
world.

3. To live in such sort, that afterward we need not fear the last sentence
which shall be peremptory of our eternal good or ill.

CXLIV. MEDITATION. Of the General, and last Judgment.
1. CONSIDER what dread and fear men will have when presently after the
general Resurrection, they shall behold the sign of the Cross and other
arms of the Passion, which will appear in heaven borne before our Savior who
shall come with great majesty to judge the world.

2. How the judgment being begun every one shall be constrained to give account
even of his most hidden thoughts, in such sort that every ones life shall be
wholly known to all the rest

3. How great the confusion of hypocrites principally shall be, when their
malice and wicked thoughts will be discovered to the whole world.

Let us learn,
1. To resolve with our selves to love and serve God more carefully, to the end
we may be able to appear before him with more security.

2. To make up our accounts with the mercy that God does now present unto us,
and not to expect the time when he will use his justice.

3. For fear lest our sins should be known of all men at the day of judgment,
we must presently blot them out by a good confession, and by doing of penance.

CXLV. MEDITATION. Of the same general Judgment.
1. CONSIDER how that great Judge will recompense the justice of the just, and
will praise them for their good works, esteeming that he has received in his
own person whatsoever they have done to the poor.

2. How reproaching the obstinate of their sins with a dreadful countenance,
he will drive them out of his presence, sending them to hel-fire, and
delivering them into the hands and power of the devil.

3. How suddenly these unfortunate sinners shall find themselves environed and
all wrapped up in a terrible fire, and so blaspheming shall be thrown down
into the bottomless pit of hell; and contrariwise how the good praising and
thanking God, shallbe led to heaven, to reign there eternally with our Savior.

Let us learn.
1. To do good, and that for the love of God, if we will have recompense at the
day of judgment.

2. Not to cast God out of our souls, that in the day of judgment he drive us
not out of his sight.

3. To walk in the way of virtue, and then we need not fear that we shall be
sent to the house of vice, nor be made companions to the dwellers thereof.

CXLVI. MEDITATION. Of Hell.
1. SET before your eyes the horrible bottomless pit of Hell, established and
appointed by Gods justice to be the perpetual prison of rebellious and
ungrateful persons.

2. Consider the pains and torments that the damned do endure in that place,
beholding those hideous infernal monsters, hearing their cries and enormous
blasphemies, and feeling infinite and intolerable stink.

3. Think what excessive grief these miserable souls shall feel, when
enclosed in this dreadful prison they shall be told, that it must be for ever,
without any hope of departing thence.

Let us learn,
1. That if this lodging like us not, we follow not the way that leads us
unto it.

2. That to eschew those pains, we must keep our selves from sin that
makes us worthy of the^.

3. That this place is not prepared but for those, that make themselves the
slaves of sin.

CXLVII. MEDITATION. Of the same Hell.
1. CONSIDER that the great pain which the damned do suffer, is, that they see
themselves for ever banished out of heaven which was their own country, and
deprived of the enjoying of almighty God who is their only end and sovereign
good.

2. How they are tormented in all their senses with so horrible pains, that
they be never assuaged; whence it comes that they dye always, and yet never
end.

3. Consider that they were created and redeemed to enjoy celestial and
eternal felicity, which they lost for so light and small pleasure: and yet
having means to remedy their evils by doing penance, which they did not, they
are surprised with so great and vehement grief, that in a manner they burst
asunder.

Let us learn,
1. That he which does suffer himself to be carried away with sin, deserves
to be cast out of heaven.

2. That if here we will satisfy our se^sualities as we list, God will
afterward satisfy his justice as he ought to do.

3. That he is ill advised who does not amend himself, and become wise by other
men's harms.

CXLVIII. MEDITATION. Of Heaven.
1. CONSIDER how Heaven, which God has ordained for those that love him, is so
beautiful a place that there is nothing in this world to be compared unto it.
There is no danger of death, of sickness, of adversity, nor of any other misery
whatsoever.

2. How the inhabitants of heaven do live in highest peace and co^te^tment,
have never any sorrow nor disgust, but do love one another so entirely, that
each one is as glad at his neighbors good as at his own.

3. What joy and contentment the Blessed souls do receive, when after so great
labors and pains, they enter into that place replenished with all good and
delight, there to repose for all eternity.

Let us learn,
1. That if the place do please us, we must follow the way that leads
thither, though it seem unto us somewhat strait and rough.

2. That he is unwise, who for worldly pelf forgets heaven which is our
true country.

3. That those which in this world have suffered much for the love of God, do
receive great reward and recompense for the same in heaven.

CXLIX. MEDITATION. Again of Heaven.
1. CONSIDER how those Blessed souls beholding the infinite majesty of God,
are so replenished with joy and contentment, that they cannot desire any more,
nor any other thing.

2. That they are never wearied in blessing the time which they have employed
in their devotions, in frequenting of the holy Sacraments, and in the exercise
of the works of mercy, which they see to have been received and accepted of God,
as if they had been done to his own person.

3. How they do greatly rejoice because they are certain that their glory and
felicity shall never fail, and that it cannot be lost, taken away, or hindered
by any once.

Let us learn.
1. To please Almighty God here on earth, by serving him devoutly, and he
assuredly will give us all contentment in heaven.

2. How the world is grossly abused, making so little account of devotion, and
other spiritual exercises.

3. How men do deceive themselves, if they send not their goods and treasures
into their true countery, which is a place so assured.

CL. MEDITATION. Of the effects of deadly sin.
1. CONSIDER how deadly sin makes us loose the grace of God in this life.

2. How it does deprive us of all those consolations that God is accustomed to
give to his well-beloved children in this world.

3. How it does exclude us from the everlasting glory, for which we were
created and redeemed with the most precious blood of our Savior JESUS Christ.

4. How it does procure us in this life the emnity of God, who is our creator,
and ought to be our God.

5. How it brings unto us an infinite number of travails and miseries,
making us servants of our passions, and flause to the devil.

6. It is cause that our good works cannnot be meritorious of eternal life.

7. Consider how gross an absurdity and folly it is of a man, for a small
pleasure contrary to the law and will of God, to expose himself to the danger
to be thrown headlong into everlasting pains, where he shall be punished
perpetually without any hope to be ever delivered.

A PRAYER.
O MY God, I should indeed be senseles, yea and more then se^sles, if reuolting
against thy sacred Majesty, I would subject my self to the tyranny of sin and
of the devil. And what would it avail me to have my whole hearts desire in
this world, if I were deprived of thy grace? Alas, who could defend me from
those evils, unto which man's life is subject? who could help me at the hour of
my death? who could deliver me from hell, if through my own demerits thou
should become mine enemy? I had rather o my good God, I had rather (I say)
endure all the dangers and misfortunes that may befall me in this life, and
had rather die a thousand deaths, then to live eue^ one moment out of thy ^^^ce,
favor, and protection.

FINIS.

