AN ECCLESIASTICAL PROTESTANT HISTORY, OF THE HIGH PASTORAL and fatherly
chardge and care of the Popes of Rome, over the church of Britanie, from the
first planting of the christian faith there, by S. Peter the Apostle, and his
Disciples: continued in every age, and hundred of years, by holy Bishops, and
clergy men, sent hither and consecrated by them, his Successors in the Sea
Apostolic.

Evidently deduced and proved by historical narration, from the published and
privileged writings (to appease al protestants) of the most learned and
allowed English protestant pretended Bishops, Doctors, Antiquaries, and others
of that Religion.

Mementote praepositorum vestrorum, qui vobis locuti sunt verbum Dei. Obedite
praepositis vestris, and subiaceta eis, ipsi enim peruigilant, quasi rationem
pro animabus vestris reddituri.

Hebr. 13. With license. 1624.

THE GENERAL ARGVMENTS OF THE ENSVINGE HISTORY: SERVINGE ALSO FOR A PREFACE,
to the Reader, to declare the scope of the Author, and contents of the work.
THE Catholic Author well requainted with the proceedings of Protestants, in
these times, and the controversies of them, to accept and allow of nothing,
but what is liked and allowed by them selves; and yet to make the world
believe, they are Reuerencers of antiquity, and would willingly embrace, and
follow that, which was our first faith in any question delivered by the
Apostles, and thence continued from them: the greatest of all being that who
planted here first the holy faith, and since had chiefest commanding power in
such things: He sets historically down from the best Antiquaries, and
learned protestant writers of this contry, and other antiquities approved by
them, the means and manner of our first conversion unto Christ, and by what
spiritual chief ruling authority this nation has ever been governed in such
things, since then, until the conuersions of the Saxons by S. Augustine, and
his associats sent hither by Saint, and pope Gregory, the first, after which
time now above 1000. years, our protestants put it out of Question, and agree,
that the power of the popes of Rome absolutely ruled here in such matters.

Therefore this history of the first six hundred years, is divided into six
Centuries or ages, every one conteyninge one hundred years. In the first, he
shows from those protestant Authors, and Antiquaries, how S. Peter that
great Apostle of Christ, both immediately by himself, and mediately by his
holy disciples, first preached here, founded our church, consecrated for us
Bishops, priests, and other clergy men, and ordained all things thereto
belonging: and how from this first institution by him, we ever had a continued
succession of such consecrated parsons, unto the more general conversion by
pope Eleutherius in the days of king Lucius after which time there can be no
question of such a succession of Bishops here. And how after the death of S.
Peter unto the end of the first hundred years, spiritual matters were ordered
here by authority and direction from the sea of Rome, and successors of S.
Peter there.

In the second hundred of years, is proved by the same protestant authors, and
their antiquities, how from the beginning of that age, to the end thereof, all
spiritual things were likewise managed here, by that see Apostolic, more or
less, as the times then permitted. And in the general conversion of king
Lucius, and his kingdom, all ecclesiastical businesses were done, and settled
by jurisdiction of the popes of Rome, and their legates, directed hither by
their authority, exercising here as ample jurisdiction spiritual, to the
great honor of this kingdom, as any pope of Rome may claim.

Such was the estate of spiritual power, and proceedings here in the third,
fourth, fifth, and sixte age, or hundred of years also: in the later end
whereof, S. Augustine was sent hither to convert our ancestors the Saxons. In
all which ages, and Centenaries of years, both the Kings, Archbishops,
Bishops, and others, both Rulers, and Ruled in this kingdom, gave as much
privilege, and prerogative to the popes of Rome, as Catholics now may do, by
their catholic Roman Religion.

In which time also, among all those christians which then lived here, those
Bishops of Scotland, and Walls, who, as our protestants tell us, and commend
them for it, did only or most oppose against the pope, his legates, and
authority here, were those also, by the same protestants, which did much more
intermeddle in princes affairs, then any popes, their legates, or such as were
most obedient unto, or Ruled by them. Which proceedings the Author does in all
places leave to protestants relation, and medleth not with them otherwise at
all. But so much as with probability in history, he may, mitigateth such
matters, as some protestants, even with public allowance of the protestant
state of England, have boldly published to the world in that kind: freely and
before God protesting, as he never hitherto had any intermedlinge with the
temporal affairs of Princes, but ever to his uttermost, did yield and render
all duty unto them, praying for the safety, honor and preservation of his
Sovereign, and this kingdom, so he will ever continue the same most humble
and dutiful affection.

Other particular Questions in Religion depend upon this. Because whosoever in
any Religion has the chief chardge and cure, the particulars depend upon his
proceedings, whether it be Pope, Prince, Superintendents, Presbyteries, or
whatsoever, and so being proved that from the beginning of christianity in
this kingdom, the Pope of Rome ever had chief command and direction in
Religious things. It must needs follow, that which protestants name papistrie,
ever reigned here. But I understand there is a general controuersiall history
to be shortly published, of all such things in particular, from the first
preaching of the Gospel in this kingdom, which will give, full and ample
satisfaction, in all such Questions.

THE FIRST CENTVRIE OR HUNDRED OF YEARS.
THE I. CHAPTER. Wherein is briefly made demonstration by the best learned
protestant Antiquaries, and others of England, that Saint Peter the Apostle
first preached the faith, and founded the Church of Christ in this our Britanie.
TO bring us unto a more certain, and undoubted knowledge, of the first
preachers of christian Religion, in this kingdom, the best learned protestant
Antiquaries we have, prescribe certain Rules, and squares, to be directed by
to come unto them, in their judgment. Matthew. Parker. antiq. Britan. page 1.
Godw. Conuers. of Brit. Holinsh. hist. of Engl. Mason. l. 2. c. 2. page 51.
Theater of great Brit. l. 6. cap. 9. first they affirm, that the Britans
received the faith, soon after the Ascension of our blessed Savior, in the
time of Tiberius, Caius Caligula, or Claudius Emperor: and they build this
their assertion cheifely upon the words of S. Gildas. l. de Excid. and conq.
Britan. c. 5.6. Who speaking of things done here in Britanie, either in the
time of Caius, or Claudius, adds: Interea glaciali frigore rigent Insulae,
indulget sua praecepta Christus. In the mean time while these things were
doing, Christ does afford his precepts to this frozen Island. In which place,
he rather means the time of Claudius, then any other, as may easily appear,
to all judicial and equal readers of that ancient Author in the place
alleged, needles to be insisted upon, if we will be guided by our
protestant directors, because in their next Rules they shall make it evident.

It must needs in their opinion be so understood. For they deliver for a
second Maxim, that this nation embraced, and was taught the Religion of
Christ, by some one of the Apostles. So say their Archbishop Parker. in antiq.
Britan. Bal. in act. Pontif. Romans in Gregor. 1. Cambd. in Brit. Fulke Answ. to
a Romish. cath. page 40. Powel. annot. in l. 2. Giral. Cambr. Itiner. Cambr. c.
1. Holinsh. histor. of Eng. c. 21. page 102. Stowe histor. in Agricola. Stow.
supr. Godwyn supr. their Bishops Bale, Godwyn, their doctors and Antiquaries,
Cambden, Fulke, Powel, Holinshed. Stowe, the Theater writers and others,
inclining to this opinion, and some of them plainly teaching, with diverse of
the ancient fathers, that the 12. Apostles divided the world amongst them, to
preach the gospel in, assure us, that to speak in their words, The holy
Apostles being dispersed throughout the whole earth, did divide the provinces
amongst them, to preach the gospel in; and it is delivered plainly by sundry
ancient writers, that Britanie fell in division, amongst the Apostles.

The third and last general Rule which these men assign unto us, is, that
mention is not made of any Apostle in any antiquity to have preached here, but
only of S. Peter S. Paul, and S. Simon Zelotes, none of all these alleged
protestants or any other, I read does speak of any other, and among these
one a protestant Bishop and Antiquarie writes in these terms. Godwyn Conuers.
of Britanie. cap. 1. page 2. I find mention of three only of the Apostles to
have been in our Britanie, to wit, Peter and Paul, and Simon Chananaus, called
also Zelotes. For although some have written that S James preached in Ireland,
and S. Philip in this next adioyninge Gallia France (which I have at lardge
refuted in other places) yett noe one historian to my remembrance, and reading,
does teach, that either of those twoe, or any of the rest, except those three
before set down, were at any time in this Island.

These Rules of Protestants thus supposed, and allowed, it will with a small
labor, evidently appear unto us, by these men, and all antiquities, that the
most glorious Apostle Saint Peter was our first father, and teacher in Christ.
For first concerning S. Paul, he himself, and other scriptures, and these
protestants also confess, he was none of the 12. Apostles, by who^ the world
was so divided, and though miraculously called by god before, yett not
properly an Apostle until in the 13. chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, v.
2. he was so ordained: as our english protestants by their conference of the
first chapter and verse of S. Paul's Epistle to the Romans: Romans cap. 1. v. 1.
are Interpretors hereof, when the other Apostles had preached long before, and
otherwise also executed their Apostolic function

Secondly it is evident by the same holy scriptures. Romans 1. c. 1. act. cap.
27.28. many Antiquities, and these protestants themselves, so clearly
co^fessinge ( Theater of great Brit. lib. 6. Godw. Conuers. Parker. antiq.
Britan.) that S. Paul came not to Rome, nor any part near Britanie, or these
western nations, until many years after S. Peter was both come to Rome, and
this kingdom of Britanie had received the faith of Christ, at the latest in
the time of Claudius according to these protestants by some Apostle as before,
the first coming of S. Paul to any of these western Regions, being long
after in the time of Nero, to whom he appealed from the Jews, and Festus,
and so was brought prisoner to Rome and so continued two years, not going
from thence to any other place. Actor. c. 25. v. 10.11.12. cap. 27. and 28. v.
30.

That S. Simon Zelotes should be the first Apostle that preached here, or was
here at all, it is as improbable, or rather impossible by these protestants:
for first diverse of them disable him ever to have been here, Stowe and Howes
histor. in Agricola Holinsh. hist. of Engl. l. 4. c. 5. rather thinkinge, the
place Brita^nia, where some have thought he preached to be mistaken, and not
to be understood of this nation, or that Simon which is supposed to have been
here, was not S. Simo^ the Apostle, but some other of that name, as S. Simon
Leprosus, or Nathaniel, also by some named Simon, which preached in these
western parts, namely in France, and not improbably here.

Secondly these protestants which would have us think S. Simon the Apostle
preached here ( Menologie. Graec. in Nathan. Bar. in martyrol. Romans 28. october.
Guliel. Eisengr. centurie. 1. and alij.) refer his being here until the coming
of S. Joseph of Aramathia, coniecturinge that he came with him, who came not
hither until the year of Christ 63. when they grant that Britanie had
received the gospel by an Apostle so long before, as is already declared
from them. Parker Antiquit. page 3. Godwyn. Conuers. of Britanie page 10.
Thirdly (to make all sure) Such as have taught that one S. Simon did preach in
a place called Britannia; Doroth. in Synops. Maenolog. Graec. 6. Id. Maij. do
also affirm, that the same S. Simon suffered martyrdom, and was crucified in
the same place, and they keep the feast of his martyrdom upon the tenth day
of May. When concerning S. Simon Zelotes the Apostle; not only the whole
latin church, and all catholics in the world, but Protestants also, both of
England, and all other nations, in their most public service books, and
kalenders of their churches, received and allowed by their parlaments, and
highest Rules in their Religion, which all of them ar bownde to obey, and
follow, do celebrate the festiuitie of S. Simon Zelotes the Apostle, upon the
28. day of October, above five months after, and all jointly agree, in the
history of his life, and death, teaching he never preached in any part of
Europe, or near our Britanye, and was martyred in Persia, diverse thousands of
miles from hence. Martyrolog. Romans die 28. Octobr. Breuiar. and Miss. Romans eod.
die. Bed. in Martyr. eod. die. Vsuard. and Ado eod die. Protestant com. Book
and all their kalenders with their Bibles 28. of October.

Now there is noe other left to be our first Apostle and Father in Christ but
S. Peter, except some ignorant or wilful man, will allege S. Joseph of
Aramathia, who though he was noe Apostle, yett as some say, he was sent
hither out of France, by S. Philip one of the Apostles, and so mediately the
same S. Philip though never here in parson, might be our Apostle. I answer as
before, that we contend for the first Apostle, that either immediately by
himself, or mediatly by his disciples, preached here, and founded our church,
and not to exclude all Apostles in after times, from this kingdom, for I will
at least probably show, that S. Paul was here, a little before his death in an
other place; and there also give his due to S. Joseph, and his holy company,
in a far more honorable degree, then any protestant, or other one writer yet to
my reading has performed toward them; But S. Joseph from whomsoever he was
sent, cominge hither but in the 63. of Christ, almost twenty years (as before)
after this kingdom had received the faith of Christ, neither S. Joseph, nor
any of that holy fraternity could be the first preacher here.

And so far improbable or impossible it is, that by the Judgment of our
English protestants, or others, S. Philip the Apostle should be then in
France to send S. Joseph hither, that he was many yares before crucified, and
so dead by martyrdom in Phrygia at Hierapolis there, in Asia, as the common
consent of antiquities, the whole-church of God, and the protestants of
England, in the Rituall of their Religion, generally used and allowed by them,
and all other protestants do witness, and therefore keep his festiuitie
accordingly upon the first day of May, in or about the 54. or 55. year of
Christ, long before S. Joseph's cominge into this part of the world. Bre. Romans
1. Maij. Martyrolog. Romans Bed. Vsuard. Ado 1. Maij. Chrysostom. hom. de 12.
Apost. Abd. lib. 10. Metaphrastes 14. Nou. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 24. Niceph. lib. 1.
ca. 39. Pet. de Natal. l. 4. c. 107. Anto^. part. 1. tit. 6. ca. 11. Eisengr.
contra. 1. Prot. Com. Book and kalend. 1. Maij. Therefore of necessity, both
Catholics and protestants must needs acknowledge, that S. Peter the most
worthy and blessed Apostle, was our first most happy father and master in
Christ, which I have made lardge demonstration of in other places, and will for
particulars be more evident in the next chapter, and this whole history: an
historical truth so testified by many authors, that Sir William Cambden,
whom others therein follow, the best antiquary of this nation, writes in
many editions, Quid ni crederemus? why should we not believe them. Cambden in
Britania in diverse editionis Andree Chesnee l 3. hist. d' Angleterre. Budley
page 171. Making S. Peter's preachinge and foundinge the church of Christ here
in Britanie a thing so certain, that he meruayleth any man of Judgment can
make doubt thereof. Therefore I may boldly use these words (and affirm them
true) of a protestant Bishop in the name of the rest: We should account it a
great glory to derive the pedigree of our spiritual lineage, from so noble,
and excellent a father as Saint Peter. Godwyn Conuers. of Britanie page 6.

THE II. CHAPTER. Where both the former is more manifestly declared, and in
particular farther proved by these protestants, and antiquities by them
allowed, what highest spiritual offices the same glorious Apostle, and his
disciples performed here.
TO prove more amply what has been said of S. Peter's being and preachinge
here, and to show what he did for the first foundinge of our church: A
protestant Archbishop from diverse authorities writes: Whitgifts Answ. to the
Admonition page 65. sect. 1. and def. of the Answ. page 318. The Apostle Peter
did in every province appoint one Archbishop, whom all other Bishops of the
same province should obey. An other with great privilege says ( Sutcliffe
Subuers. page 3.) Peter preached in noe place, but he there ordained Bishops
and teachers and founded churches. And to show that all these and such benefits
came to us first from S. Peter and his holy see of Rome, among other Marcus
Antonius de Dominis, now by the great mercy of God a penitent in the
catholic church, when he was in profession a protestant in England ( Marcus
Anton, de Domin. de Repub. christian. l. 4. cap. 10. with public priuiledg in
England) and a chosen champion for that Religion against the Pope by chiefest
protestant authority in England, then testifies: Est caput Roma quatenus ab
ea diffusum est euangelium in reliquas totius occidentis ecclesias, and in
multas orientis, atque in barbaras etiam extra Romanum Imperium nationes. Rome
is the head of the church, in so much as from it the gospel was diffused into
the other churches of all the West, and into many of the East, and into
barbarous nations also without the Roman Empire. And our. Sovereign kings
speech in parlam. 1. publicly protested of this church of Rome: It is our
mother church: and consequently that it first brought us forth in spiritual
christian birth, as mothers do their natural children to the world and that
we, except we will turn bastardly unnatural and disobedient children, do
owe and must perform all duty and obedience unto it, our most holy mother in
Christ. And to further this our bounden duty, the protestants of England in
their Theater. of the Emp. of great Britanie page 203 l. 6. c 9. number. 5. will
help us foreward who write in this manner: That S. Peter the Apostle preached
the word of life, in this Island, as to other gentiles he did, for whom God
had chosen him, that from his mouth they might hear the gospel, as himself
alleges, and that he here founded churches, and ordained priests and
deacons, which is reported by Simon Metaphrastes out of the greek Antiquities,
and Gulielmus Eisingrenius in the first of his Centuries. Therefore this being
written by so learned and holy a man as S. Simon Metaphrastes was, and so
ancient above 700. years since, and out of such monuments and Authorities of
the Gretians, as in his time were honored with the Title of Antiquities, this
alone might content us in this matter, as it has already the best learned
protestant Antiquaries of this nation.

But because allowance is given to the authority which cannot be denied,
because it is the manner of Protestants to mynce authorities, I will cite that
holy ancient Father and Saint. S. Sim. Metaphr. 29. die Iunij. in his own
words which be these. Roman redijt, ex qua venit Mediolanum, and Photicen
quae sunt civitates in Continente. In quibns cum constituisset Episcopos and
Presbyteros, venit in Britanniam. Quo in loco cum longo tempore fuisset
moratus, and multas gentes non nominatas attraxisset ad fidem Christi,
angelicam aspexit visionem, quae dicebat: Petre, instat tempus tuae
resolutionis, and oportet te ire Romam: in qua cum mortem per crucem
sustinueris, recipies mercedem Iustitiae. Cum ergo propterea Deum
glorificasset, and egisset gratias, and apud Britannos mansisset dies aliquot,
and verbo gratiae multos illuminasset, and ecclesias constituisset,
episcoposque and presbyteros and diaconos ordinasset, duodecimo anno Caesaris
Neronis rursus Romam reuertitur. S. Peter by revelation came to Jerusalem, at
the death of the mother of God, then returning into Egypt, by Africa came
again to Rome. From whence he came to Milane and Photice, which be cities in
the contine^t: in which when he had constituted Bishops, and priests, he came
into Britanie, where when he had stayed a long time, and drawn many nations
not named, to the faith of Christ, he had an Angelical vision, which said: o
Peter, the time of thy Resolution is at hand, and thou must go to Rome, in
which when thou have suffered death by the cross, thou shall receive the
reward of Justice. Therefore when he had glorified God and given thanks for
it, and remained some days with the Britans, and illuminated many with the
word of grace, and founded churches, and ordained both Bishops, priests, and
deacons, he returned again to Rome in the twelueth year of the Emperor Nero.

Hitherto the very words of this learned Saint, so precisely and particularly
describeing the time and coming of that glorious Apostle into this Island, and
staying here, with his return to Rome again, that as noe man except an
infidel will or can deny it, no Author of antiquity or credit auouching half
so much for either S Paul or any other Apostle to have been here at all: so
except we of England will show our selves the most ungrateful, and disobedient
to that our first, and most glorious Pastor, and parent, of all nations in the
world except Jerusalem, Antioch and Rome, we ar most engaged to honor and
reverence this most glorious Apostle and his Successors in his holy See: for
neither Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, or Bythinia, which he himself
particularly remembers, 1. Pet. 1. v 1. nor any other kingdom or nation
mentioned in any Author of credit and Antiquity, and to be paralelled with
him whom I have cited, approved even in this point with all Catholics, and the
most judicious indifferently minded and best learned protestants, can
constantly affirm and prove, that they had received such benefits and
blessings from S. Peter, as this our Britanie, which to visitt he went so
far, stayed therein so long, and enritched as with so many and
vnansweareable graces and favors: continuinge them so long, until he was
admonished from heaven to return from hence to Rome, as before his cominge
thither, he also was as Metaphrastes, die 29. Iunij. S. Leo sermon. de Apostol.
with others write, directed to come help us in the west. And if we will
follow the Roman tradition. ( Baron. annotat. in 9. Maij in Pudente. that)
Domus Pudentis erat primum hospitium S. Petri Romae, the house of Pudens was
the first lodging of S Peter of Rome, we are more strictly bound to Rome and
Rome to us, that beeinge the house of our renowned christian contrywoman Lady
Claudia, as our protestant writers tell us. Matthew. Parker antiq. Britan. page
2.3. Godwyn Conuers. of Britanie. Cambd. in Britan. Theater of Brit. l. 6. Now
let us enquire and set down in particular, so near as such a desolation
and loss of Antiquities as England has often suffered, will give us leave, of
this Archbishop and Bishops in particular, which S. Peter consecrated for us,
to found and begin the first hierarchicall order and Succession in our
primative church of Britanie.

Many Authors both ancient and later writers and of these late times, both
catholics and protestants, ar witnesses that S. Aristobulus, one of the
seauentie and two disciples of Christ our Lord, was Bishop of this our kingdom
of Britanie Dorothaeus Bishop of Tyrus. ( Dorothaeus lib. de septuaginta duobus
discipulis in Aristobulo.) And the Maenologe of the Greeks are plainly of
this mind. The first in his book entitled de septuaginta duobus discipulis,
of the seauentie two disciples, writes: Aristobulus ab Apostolo ad Romanos
commemoratos Episcopus Britanniae factus est: Aristobulus one of the seauentie
two disciples, of whom S Paul speaks in his epistle to the Romans, was made
Bishop of Britanie. And to putt us out of doubt that he did not mistake,
naminge Britania for Bythinia, as a protestant writer would seem to expound
him, when he writes: Dorotheus says, Aristobulus, whom the Apostle to the
Romans remembers, was made a Bishop in Britanie, or Bithania. Stowe histor.
titul. the Romans. in Agricola. I think this man will hardly find any
Bythania in the world: we read of Bethania often in the Gospels, and S. John
says. cap. 11. v. 18. Bethany was nigh unto Jerusalem about fifteen farlongs
off, as our protestants translate and their note there upon is: that is about
towe miles protest. annot. marginal. in c. 11.11. Io. v. 18. Which was too
near to Jerusalem, to be a Bishops see, and the old provincial makes
mention of noe such. And if by Bythania, he meant the country Bythinia the
Region of lesser Asia, against Thracia, and next Troas, which was also sometime
called Bebrycia, after Mygdonia, and by S. Peter Bythinia in the Apostles time,
and after, it is evident that Dorothaeus meant it not, for in the next name
which is S. Tyticus, he says, that he was made. Bishop of Chalcedonia of
Bithynia. Tyticus meminit and huius Paulus, primus Episcopus Chalcedoniae fuit,
quae in Bithynia est. Doroth. supra in Tyticho. Therefore of necessity by this
Author and the rest so affirming it, without doubt, or any exception, S.
Aristobulus needs must be Bishop of this our kingdom of Britanie, noe other
place then of that name fit for a Bishop in the known World to apply it unto.

And thus testifies the ancient Maenologe of the greeks, with others, both
catholics and protestants of whom I have here noted some. Maenolog. Graecor.
die 15. martij: Baron. annot. in martyrol. Romans eod. die. Arnold. Mirman in
Theatr. Conuers. gent. Auth. of the Exam. of the Calend. praefat. and in the 3.
Conuers. Sir. Ed. Hoby counterf. page 48. Thom. Rogers upon the Articles of
Relig. articul. 36. page 197. Protest. Theater of Brit. l. 6. Cambden Belg.
That this holy Bishop was either consecrated here, or sent hither by S. Peter,
we may not question, being so generally confessed by protestants before,
that noe other Apostle did, or then could perform that office. And if the
Identitie of the name deceaueth us not, this our holy Bishop or Archbishop, was
Father in law to S. Peter, his wives Father, and Brother to S Barnabas the
Apostle, sent into these west parts by S. Peter: for as Simon Metaphrastes
writes. ( S. Simon Metaphr. die 26. Iunij.) Accepit Petrus filiam Aristobuli
fratris Barnabae Apostoli, ex ea genuit filium vnum and vnam filiam. Peter
married the daughter of Aristobulus Brother of Barnabas the Apostle, and had by
her one son, and one daughter. Martyrolog. Romans 15. Martij. Godw. And being
called in the Roman Martyrologe as a protestant Bishop truly tells.
Apostolorum discipulus the disciple of the Apostles. Conuers. of Brit. It wholly
disableth him from being disciple to S. Paul, who alone of the Apostles
besides S. Peter was in this kingdom, for the scriptures themselves are
wittnes. Actor. cap. 13. v. 2 3.4. that S. Paul was not an Apostle, until in
the 13. chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, before which time by the
protestants before, Britanie had received the faith, and probably S.
Aristobulus was then a Bishop, as many others of the 27. Disciples were. And
many ar called the disciples of the Apostles which were peculiarly the
disciples of S. Peter, the chief Apostle, as appears in diverse places of the
same Authority. S. Aristo. Arch. of this our Britanie.

And that this holy disciple of S. Peter, was not only our Bishop but
Archbishop also in Britanie, I have warrant both of Catholics and protestants
to auouche it; First if we examine either by Dorotheus or any whomsoever
writing of the reside^cies of the 72. disciples of Christ we shall hardly
find any among them, whicn had not the dignity of that high calling, yea he
relates S. Aristobulus as a chief amongst the^, and then being sent to this
kingdom of Britanie so great and ample. And where as in other such kingdoms
our protestants before assure us, S. Peter ordained an Archbishop, we cannot
doubt but in particular it was this his most worthy disciple, as also the
disciple of Christ, which first exercised by S. Peter's assignement that Archie,
and chief pontifical order in this Island.

Secondly, because we read it confide^tly written, and from more ancient
authority, that this holy disciple of S. Peter was not only our first Apostle,
but here began and first founded the hierarchical order, of our British
church, a thing proper to that highest spiritual calling. Arnold. mirac.
Theatro conuers. gentium in Britan. and Aristobulo. Brita^nia Straboni a
Britone Rege nuncupata, primum Aristobulum, five illu^ cuius meminit S. Paulus,
quod Dorothaeo probatur, sieve aliu^ vnu^ certe ex 72. discipulorum class
Apostolu^ est nata. Deinde Fugariu^ and Damianu^, qui ordinem Hierarchice
Ecclesiae istic fundatae ab illo inchoatum constituerunt sanxeruntque more
nimirum Apostolico. Britania so named by Strabo of King Brito or Brutus, had
for the first Apostle thereof Aristobulus, either him, whom S. Paul
reme^breth, which Dorotheus approves, or an other, surely one of the order of
the 72. disciples, after that Fugarius (Fugatius by others) and Damianus, who
constituted and confirmed by Apostolic manner the Hierarchical order begun by
him of the church founded there. Where we see S. Aristobulus, the first
founder of the Hierarchicall order in this church of Britanie: a thing which
as al protestants against the puritans, makes the peculiar office of an
Archbish. Whitgift answ. to the admonit. Bridges eccles. govern. Bilson against
the purit. Couel, Downam, Barlowe etc.

Thirdly, These protestants of England, especially the university of Cambridge
by their chosen champion Mr. Thomas Rogers for defense of their Articles of
Religion of Protestants, writing (to use his words) by the lawful authority
of the church of England, allowed to be public. Thom. Rogers book of the
faith of England page 1. do plainly say, that S. Aristobulus, was Archbishop
in this our Britanie. Thus he writes in the name of English protestants and
by their warrant. Rogers supra artic. 36. page Albeit the Terms and Titles of
Archbishops we find not, yet the superiority which they enjoy, and
authority which Bishops and Archbishops do exercise, in orderinge and
consecratinge of Bishops, and ecclesiastical ministers, is grounded upon the
word of God: for we find, that in the Apostles days, how themselves both
were in dignity above the Evangelists, and the 70. disciples, and for
authority both in and over the church, as twelve patriarchs, says Beza, and
also established an ecclesiastical heerarchie. Hence came it, that bishop was
of Jerusalem James; of Antioch Peter; of the Asian churches, John; of
Alexandria mark; of Ephesus and all Asia, Timothy: of all Creete, Titus; of
Philippos Epaphraditus; of Corinth and Achaia, Apollos; of Atheus Dionisius: of
France Crescens; of Britanie Aristobulus. Beza in act. Apost. 1.2. D.
Chrisosto. in Act. Homil. 33.2. Hieron. in Gal. Eusebius. D. Hieron. ad Euagr. D.
Hier. in 2. Tim. 1. Theod. arg. in epist. ad Tit. Theod. in epist. ad Phil.
Eusebius. lib. 2. Dorotheus in Apostol. Synops. Where we see S. Aristobulus not
only joined in rank, and dignity of spiritual preeminence, with the
Evangelists, and Apostles themselves, but with the general authority of the
protestant church of England plainly declared to be the first founder of
ecclesiastical hierarchy, and Archbishop of this our Britanie. And to give
evident testimony, that in their judgment this nation of the west, both
derived the succession of the Bishops thereof from S. Peter and Aristobulus,
and never wanted by such until these days, they thus conclude in this matter,
supra page 197.198. Finally from the Apostles days hitherto never wanted a
succession of Bishops neither in the East, nor Weste churches, so prouide^t
has the almighty been for the augmentation of his glory, and people, by
this kind, and calling of men. And thus much for the first Archbishop of
Britany ordained by Saint Peter.

Now to come to speak of the Bishops he consecrated and ordained for us,
although it is precisely proved before, that such there were: Episcopos
ordinauit. S. Peter ordained Bishops here in Britanie for us, and every
Archbishop which is chief of Bishops, such as S. Aristobulus was unto us, does
necessarily infer, and prove some Bishops subordinate, and under, else he
could not be the chief, and principal; for every Archbishop infers
necessarily some Bishops or Bishop under him their chief in that calling.
Diverse Antiquities of Glastenbury, apud Capgrau. in S. Joseph, affirm, that
one of the holy company of Saint Joseph of Aramathia, namly his son Iosephe
was a Bishop, which if so it was, he must needs be subordinate to S.
Aristobulus. And yett if I would set down uncertain things, I might place
our holy Bishop and marty S. Angulus, in or near this time, with much more
probability then some without any authority I can find, referr him to the
days of Diocletian his persecution: or say that S. Martine, to whom the
christian Romans, builded and dedicated the church at Canterbury, was a British
Bishop, and in this time; for that such a S. Martyne a Bishop there was about
those days, there be many testimonies, and that he was consecrated by Roman
authority; and so aunciently to prove it probable, he was a Britanie, that
the ancient Manuscript of Radulphus de Diceto deane of London, or whosoever
Author of Abbreuiatio chronicorum, says, that it was builded in the time of
king Lucius, for speaking of the time of that our first christian king, he
affirms* ( Abbreuiatio chronicorum in Lucio. M.S) Tunc constructa est extra
Cantuariam ecclesia Sancti Martini: then the church without Canterbury
dedicated to S. Martyne, was builded. As diverse also were to S. Peter, our
most glorious Apostle. One I find consecrated by S. Peter or his successor at
Rome, which was both a Britanne, and lived and died a Bishop here in the time
of S. Aristobulus, a Germane writer calls him Achates, but I take not that to
be his name, he was one of the happy companions of S. Beatus our noble
contryman consecrated at Rome, of whom I will speak more when I come to that
glorious man, when I have first entreated of the consecration of S. Mansuetus a
renowned Bishop, borne in this Island, consecrated by S. Peter himself.

This man, as many antiquities say, was natione Scotus, by contry a Scot, of
the north part of this kingedome, made Bishop by S. Peter, whose disciple he
was before, and sent into these parts, or consecrated by him here, and made
Bishop of Tullu^ in Lorrayne. Tullenses habuere Apostolu^, suaeque in Christum
fidei primu^ Antistitem S. Mansuetum S. Petri Apostoli discipulum, S. Clementis
Collega^ origin Scotu^, (Arnold. Merman. in Theatro Conuers. gentiu^ in
Metensib.) The inhabitants of Tullum (says Arnoldus Mermannius) had for their
Apostle and first Bishopp of their faith in Christ, S. Mansuetus a disciple of
S. Peter the Apostle, the fellow of S. Clement, a Scot by birth. An other
citinge also for Authors Antonius Democarez, and Petrus de Natalibus, says.
(Guliel. Eiseng. contenar. 1. part. 1. did. 3. page 56. Petrus de Natal. l.
11. c. vlt. Anton. Monchiacen. Democh. l. 2. de Miss. contr. Calvin. c. 33.) S.
Mansuetus, natione Scotus, ex nobili prognatus familia Simonis Barionae
Apostolorum Coryphaei discipulus, socius B. Clementis Episcopi Mettensis, a
Petro Leucorum in vrbe Tullensi primus Antistes consecratus est anno Christi
49. Tiberio Claudio Caesare Augusto. In the 49. year of Christ in the Empire
of Claudius S. Mansuetus a Scot by contry, borne of a noble family, disciple of
S. Peter chief of the Apostles, companion of S. Clement Bishop of Metz, was By
Peter consecrated the first Bishop in the city of Tullum.

Mermennius, before cited says, ( in Theatro conuers. gentium.) that Saint
Clement whose companion this our contrye man Saint Mansuetus was, was Bishop of
Metz in, or about the 40. year of Christ, in the time of Caius Caligula
Emperor: Metensibus fidei Religionisque Antistes fuit S. Clemens Romanus, anno
and quod excurrit 40. Caio Caligula Imperatore, S. Petro pontifice maximo. But
to admit, that S. Mansuetus was not made Bishop by S. Peter until the 49.
year of Christ, and was noe Bishop, but an assistant of S. Clement, at his
first sendeing by S. Peter of him to Metz, yett to have a Bishop of our nation,
and consecrated and sent to forreyne parts by the chief Apostle, is an
invincible argument, that both S. Peter was the first founder and father of the
Brittans birth and life in Christ, disposed of all spiritual affairs here,
long before the cominge of any other Apostle, either into this kingedome or
part of the world to convert it, and left at that time diverse Bishops in this
contrie, or fit for that most holy order: otherwise he would not have sent
S. Mansuetus of this contrie forth of Britanie, to execute that high dignity
in a strange nation, such as Lorrayne, where Tullum is, then was, and still
is, to this Island. And this I may more boldly write, by a consequent and
concluded leave, and warrant from our Protestant Bishops, and other such
Antiquaries, who in their great Theater of Britanie, give us diverse graunts,
and Rules to lead us, both to so tymely a being of Saint Peter in this
kingedome, and his disciples preaching here, and both claiming and exercising
such powerable jurisdiction and authority here, as I have related from others.
First they write in these words. ( Theater of great Britanie lib. 6. cap. 9..
5)

If Peter were here at all (which they granted and is demonstrated by them
before) it was before ever he went to Rome, and the gospel was preached here,
before it was in Rome, if Peter were the first, as some hold, that preached
there, both which may be more probable. Again thus they write ( 7.) It has
passed with allowance among the learned Senate of our Antiquaries, that when
Claudius began to bannish and persecute the Christians in Rome (which they
think to be before this time of S. Mansuetus being Bishop of Tullum) many
Romans and Britans being converted to the faith, fled thence into these remote
parts of the earth where they might and did, more freely enjoy the liberty of
their professions. And from this Sanctuary of salvation, the sad lamenting
Lady Pomponia Graecina, the wife of Aulus Plantius, the first Lord lieutenant
of Britanie brought that Religion, whereof she was accused and stood indicted
upon life and death, which was noe other then the Christian profession. And
to interpret themselves more clearlye where (as they hold) this great Lady
the Lord Lieutenants wife was converted, thus they set down their marginall
direction concerning this matter. Aulus Plantius his wife became a christian in
Britanie.

Now to assure us how soon it was, that S. Peter and his disciples had made
so happy an entrance, and wrought so glorious effects in this our kingdom,
these very Protestants tell us. That Aulus Plantius was sent hither out of
germany, with an army the second year of Claudius, which was (as some
Protestants write) in the 44. year of Christ, by others the 45. and stayed
here but a short time, returninge to Rome and triumphing there, for his
victories over the Britans, in the year of Christ 49. and then in the year
50. Publius Ostorius Scapula was Propraetor here. (Theater supr. lib. 6. c. 6.
page 193. Protestants in Festis Regum an. Dom. 44. Claudij 3. Stowe and Howes
histor. an. D. 45) By which account of these Protestants themselves, this
lamentinge Lady Pomponia Graemia, by them here converted to the faith of
Christ, and all her christian company, as chances in such cases at so great
parsonadges conversion, and many other christians of the Britans, which they
say were then converted by those disciples of S. Peter, or by himself, (noe
others then being here) must needs be converted before, or in the 49 year
of the Incarnation of our Savior, in which as I proved before our contryman S.
Mansuetus, was ordained Bishop of Tullum by S. Peter, which was 14. years
before the cominge of S Joseph of Aramathia hither, by all antiquities, and
diverse by the scriptures themselves, before S. Paul came to Rome or any
western nation.

And if we may believe the Protestant writers of the Theater, they make the
coming of S. Paul to Rome, long after, writing in these words. ( Theater of
great Britanie supr. l. 6.. 7.) Paul came not to Rome till the tenth of Nero.
When both by them and the scriptures, he was a prisoner two years, and could
not depart from Rome. Which makes these Protestants reckoning 16. or 17.
years after the conversion of so many in Britanie, and consecration of S.
Mansuetus that holy Bishop by S Peter. And to prove further unto us, not only
that these first christians of Britany were converted by S. Peter, but that
others of this our nation, were even at this time, consecrated priests, and
Bishops also by S. Peter, these Protestant Bishops and others, having
immediately spoken before of the conversion of Lady Pomponia Graecina here in
Britany in or before the 49. year of Christ, they proceed in these words. (
Theater of the Empire of great Britanie l. 6.. 9. B. Rhenan. in history, of
Germany. Pantaleon.) And much about these times, as B. Rhenanus in his history
of Germany, Pantaleon, and others do report, one Suetonius a noble man's son
in Britanie, converted to the faith by the first planters of the gospel in
this Island, and after his Baptism called Beatus, was sent by the brethren
from hence, unto Rome to be better instructed, and further directed by Saint
Peter himself. And returninge through Suitcerland, found such willingness and
flockinge of the people to hear, and receive the doctrine of Christ, that he
there stayed, and built an oratory not far from the bake Thun, and near the
Town called Vnderfewen, where in preachinge and prayers, he employed his time
to the day of his death, which happened in the year of grace 110.

Hitherto the words of our english Protestants, of this glorious and renowned
man, far exceeding that which they give him here: for as their Author Henricus
Pantaleon. ( de viris Illustr. Germaniae part. 1 p. 114. a German Protestant
writes plainly of him, that he was, the Apostle of Heluetians. S. Beatus
Heluetiorum Apostolus. Which Title and name none but puritans of any Religion
will give to any but Bishops, and none but such which only have power to
consecrate priests, (without which a true church cannot be) can either be, or
truly called their Apostle. And that this holy Bishop of Britanie though he
stayed most in Heluetia, yet that he was principally sent to be a Bishopp in
Britanie by Saint Peter, it is evident by these Protestants before, testifyinge
that he was returning into Britanie, and so cheifely directed by Saint Peter:
( Pantal. supra Stamph. lib. 7. de Sanct.) Which Pantaleon with Stamphius and
others do more plainly witness, saying. S. Beatus ille nobilibus parentibus
natus ex Britannia, in patriam rediens etc. S. Beatus borne of noble parents in
Britanie, returninge into his contry: and adding of him, omnia bona pauperibus
distribuit: he distributed all his goods to the pore: must needs be in
Britanie, where of these his goods he was to make distributor of them. And
these Germa^ historians tell us, that he had an other companion sent and
directed with him, from Rome by S. Peter or his authority there, and beeinge
also a Britain returned hither, being consecrated Priest or Bishop by the
same authority, and at the same time.

So that we see by these Protestants themselves, that so long as S. Peter
lived, the Bishops and Priests of Britanie were consecrated by him in this
contry, and in his absence hence went unto Rome for their consecration, and to
be directed by him. This other companion of S. Beatus, borne in this kingdom,
and consecrated at Rome by S. Peter, and returninge hither, where for any
thing we read otherwise in histories, he continued in preaching all his
life, and died here, some Germane writers have named Achates. (Anonymus apud
Beat. Rhenan. de Reb. German. l. 3. page 172. Rhen. supr) Whether that was his
true name or not, it is not material to my purpose to question here: the
history it self in germany being so certainly and generally received, that
it is, and aunciently was published, printed, and painted in their churches
there. Haec historia non solum picta est in templis ac scripta, sed etiam typis
expressa: of this history mention is made, especially of S. Beatus in the
Roman Martyrologe, S. Beda, Vsuardus, Molanus, Gulielmus Eisengrenius, the
Antiquities of Heluetia, and expressly in the ancient monuments of the church
of Constance, and others ( Martyrolog. Romans 9. die Maij. Beda Vsuard and Mol.
ab. Guliel. Eis. centur. 2. part. 5. Annal. Helu Momment. Eccle. Constant.
Baron. annot in Mart. Romans 9. Maij.) neither can we think that these two holy
Bishops or priests of this kingedome of our Britanie were singular in this, but
that we had more so consecrated, and directed from Rome besides them, and
needed not Bishops and pastors here, otherwise S. Beatus would not have stayed
most of his time in Heluetia, forth of his contry, nor S. Peter his
consercator and director, and our Apostle by these Protestants before, given
allowa^ce unto it.

Neither had S. Beatus been sent (the words of our Protestants and Pantaleon
also) by the brethren from hence unto Rome to be better instructed and
further directed by S. Peter himself. (Theater, and Pantal. supr.) But that
the Brethren and Christians here depended of Saint Peter, and accounted it both
their duty, and honor to this nation, to have their spiritual Guides,
Bishops, and Priests consecrated and directed by him, and his Apostolicque
supreme power and command, in Religious things.

Now let us return to S. Peter's beeinge here in Britanie; whereof I have
spoken before, how to supply all spiritual wants of this kingedome, and found
our church, in Britannia longo tempore fuit moratus, he stayed in Britanie a
long time, as the greek antiquities remembered unto us by our Protestants have
told us: and to express his great love, and care, to this and other western
nations, more particularly commended to his chardge, this long time was so
long, and his love to us so great, that as both S. Simo^ Metaphrastes, and
Eusebius Pamphili in some book not now, but in the time of Metaphrastes
exta^t, and by him constantly cited, say: S. Peter stayed at Rome, and in
Britanie, and the cities of the west, three and twenty years. Eusebius
Pamphili dicit Petrum viginti tres annos tra^segisse Romae, and in Britannia,
and in ciuitatibus quae sunt in occidente. (Simon Metaphrastes die 29. Iunij.
Eusebius Pamph. apud eund. supr. Surius 29. Iunij.) allotinge only as it
seems the rest of the 25. years which is commonly said, the time of his
being at Rome and these parts, to his Journey in the east, at the time of the
migration of the B. Virgin our Lady forth of this world. Which is confirmed by
some of our Protestant antiquaries of England in these words. This year 70.
being the fourteenth year of Nero Bassus and Tuscus, being then Roman
Consuls, the holy Apostle S. Peter having accomplished his preachinge, in the
west parts, returned to Rome, where he preached again, as he did before.
(Ioh. Stow and Ed. Howes histor, titul. Romans in Julius Agricola.)

And before his departure hence, as I have already remembered, besides S.
Mansuetus, S. Beatus and such as he consecrated Bishops of our nation in
forreyn places, or for them out of Britanie, he ordained here, and for this
kingedome Bishops, Priests and Deacons. Apud Britannos Episcopos, presbyteros
and diaconos ordinauit. Who these Bishops in particular were, I read noe man
precisely to set them down, yett if we will follow the antiquities of
Glastenbury saying that S. Iosephe the son of S Joseph of Aramathia was a
Bishop, as both Catholics and Protestants allow them in other things: I crave
pardon probably to write, that he was one of them which S. Peter consecrated
here.

First, because as is granted, before S. Aristobulus our Archbishop, unto whom
S. Joseph, whether Bishop or not, was subject, was ordained by S. Peter.
Secondly because S. Joseph is named a Bishop, and yet in probable judgment none
when he came hither, with his Father S. Joseph, for by the same and all other
antiquities and histories of that matter, S. Joseph his Father noe Bishop, was
the Abbot or Superior of all that company, yet neither Catholic nor Protestant
will easily instance that Bishops, by order and Sacrament Superiors, were or
might be Inferiors or subjects to any of Inferior degree.

Secondly there is noe possibility by any authority, that I find at all, to
surmise that S. Joseph was a Bishop before his cominge hither, but the words
of the antiquity which say of him: that Jesus consecrated him Bishop before in
the city Sarath: Quem Dominus Jesus prius in ciuitate Sarath, in Episcopum
consecrauit. (Antiquit. Glast. apud Capgrau. in S. Joseph ab Aramathia.) Which
noe Protestant will or may by their Religion say, was a true and real
consecration, but rather prophetical, what should be done, by orderly
consecration after. For this vision was long after Christ's Ascension into
heaven, where all Protestants of England ever since, imprison him to keep him
from being present in the B. Sacrament of the altar.

Thirdly they and all others generally deny such extraordinary proceedings,
where an ordinary and universal order, as in this case is appointed by Christ
himself. Wherefore S. Paul himself that vessel of Election, and extraordinary
Apostle, though miraculously converted, chosen, and called, yett he neither
was actually a christian without external baptism, nor a Bishop but by
Imposition of hands, and ordinary consecration. And we read of S. Sampson,
our holy Archbishop of york, that before he was a Bishop, S. Peter, S. James,
and S. John appeared unto him saying: (Io. Capgrau. in S. Sampsone Episc. and
Confessore.) Our Lord Jesus Christ has chosen thee for a Bishop, and sent us
to consecrate thee: whom when they had consecrated with benediction, they
disappeared out of his sight. Nocte quadam vidit se densissimis candidatorum
turmis circundari: and tres Episcopos vestibus aureis ornatos, cum illo
ecclesiam ingredientes orare, cuius vnus illorum ab ipso inquisitus, qui esset,
ait. Ego sum Petrus Christi Apostolus, and hic frater Domini Iacobus, and
Euangelista Ioannes. Dominus Jesus Christus te sibi in praesulem elegit, and te
consecrare nos misit. Que^ cum benedictione consecrassent, ab eius oculis
elapsi sunt. And yett neither S. Sampson nor any other took this for a real
consecration, but only figurative of that which was after to be done by the
holy external rite of the church of Christ; until as we read in the same
history, our holy Archbishop S. Dubricius upon the apparition and message of an
Angel did truly and really, externally consecrate him a Bishop: nec multo
post Angelus Domini beato Dubricio apparens, Sampsonem ordinari Episcopum
praecepit. (Capgr. supr.) So I might exemplify in many such cases, only
prophetical and figurative, what should afterward be done, and not what was
then effected.

Therefore if S. Joseph was a Bishop as that antiquity persuadeth, by that
figurative vision, and not consecrated before he came into Britanie, as is
showed before, and we read of no other which at that time made, and
consecrated Bishops but S Peter, I may probably at the least affirm, that S.
Iosephe was one of them which S Peter at his departure hence, (S. Iosephe
being certainly here at that time) was consecrated Bishop by Saint Peter here
in Britanie. And when I find both Catholics and Protestants affirm, (
Martyrol. Angl. 7. die Februarij. Dr^kin Almin. an. 1620. 7. Feb. with others.)
that S. Angulus was our Bishop of London and martyr, and yet noe historia^,
Catholic or Protestant, puts him in the number of them which were Bishops
there after the time of K. Lucius, but quite leave him out of that catalogue,
as appears by our Protestants Harrison, Godwyne, Stowe and others which with all diligence they could, have collected the ancient Bishops of London, I must
needs draw him to an higher time then that of king Lucius was, before which
noe consecration of Bishops in Britany was, or is so memorable as this by S.
Peter the Apostle ( Harris. descript. of Brit Godw Catalog. of Bishop in London
1. Stowe and How^. l. hist. Lucius Iocelin of Furnes l. de Episc. Brit.

And to end here the Relation or S. Peter's proceedings in Britanie, we have
clearly, deduced, with the allowance of our best English Protestant
Antiquaries, and other Authors by them approved; That S. Peter Prince of the
Apostles, was our first Father in Christ, and renowned Apostle, both
immediately by himself, and his holy disciples; That he performed here all
chief and eminent pastoral duties and offices, when our Emperors with our
Lieutenants here, as also all our Kings were pagan Infidels; That he ordained
and consecrated for us Bishops, priests, and other clergy men, and founded
churches to the honor and Religion of Christ, and the honor of his blessed
Mother S. Mary the Virgin, (few other christian Saints then deceased) as that
of Glastenbury not so dedicated without his approbation, being chief in such
affairs. He consecrated other Britans out of this nation, exemptinge them
from the pagan service of those such remembered princes, he sent them by
authority to preach the gospel, in other contries, he or his disciples
converted Pomponia Graecina the Lord Lieutenants wife of Britanie, as these
Protestants have proved, and many in the like case, their husbands continuing
in their infidelity, and contradiction, and many husbands and children, the
wives and parents not allowinge, as servants in respect of their Lords and
masters, and Subjects in regard of sovereigns.

I, a Catholic Priest, now demand of the best learned Protestants Bishops of
England, whether these proceedings and prerogatives in that most glorious
Apostle, and his worthy disciples, our first Masters in Christ, were not as
great and ample, as the renowned Priests and Catholics of this kingedome now
attribute, and give to the Popes of Rome his Apostolic Successors? We who
have read most, and suffered much for this cause, cannot see the difference,
or find instance of disparitie, except in number of parsons, less or greater
quantities of grounds, and some improportions in such things, which make noe
essential diversity, for otherwise we have been told by the best learned
Protestants with others, that S. Peter and his disciples did manifestly and
directly transfer and change those parsons, places, and property of things
of this our Britanie from a temporal, to al spiritual use, from the command
(except in temporal duty) of the present Emperors, Lieutenants, Kings, and
Sovereigns alienated from Christian Religion, to the co^mande of Christ, his
Religion, our most holy Apostle and his disciples, by his authority so
directinge.

THE III. CHAPTER. How in the rest of this first Hundred years of Christ after
Saint Peter, The Apostolic See of Rome, still continued and exercised this
supreme spiritual power in Britanie.
IT is a question, not only among Catholics (but some Protestants also)
whether S. Linus and Cletus were Popes after S. Peter, or only Suffragan
Bishops, as so ordained by him at the first. And Pope Leo the second an holy
Saint, with there nowned of our Historians to omit others, S. Marianus and
Florentius Wigorniensis, say plainly: Si Petrus Apostolorum princeps adiutoris
sibi asciuit Linum and Cletum, non tamen pontificij potestatem cis tradidit,
sed Clementi successori suo. If Peter Prince of the Apostles, did take Linus
and Cletus to be his Adiutors, yett he gave not them the Papal power, but to
Clement his successor. And Linus and Cletus did nothing by their own Laws
and power as popes, but only so much as was commanded them by S. Peter. ( S.
Leo 2. in epist. decretal. Marian. Scot. lib. 2. aetat. 6. Florent Wigor. in
Siluan. and Otho Consul. Robert. Barns in vit. Port. Romans in Linum.) Therefore
to omit doubtful and uncertain things, and to come next to S. Clement who
most certainly by all Cathololicks and Protestants was Pope of Rome nominated
by S. Peter: (though Baronius and others whom he alleges are of opinion that
S. Clement yielded his right, and did not exercise the office of supreme
pastor til after Linus and Cletus, yet who in S. Peter's life him were his
Coadiutors and after his death his successors before S. Clement, ( to 1. Annal.
p 742.743 744.745.) before any other: by this Pope, Doctors were sent into the
west (as our Protestants tell us ( Margin. annot. upon Matthew. Westin an. 94.
Matthew. Westminster supr.) in great numbers, as S. Denis, Nicasius, Taurinus,
Trophimus, Paulus Narbonensis, Saturninus, Martialis, Gratianus, Iulianus,
Lucianus, Firminus, Photinus all Bishops, and they add S. Regulus. Whom
although they setle the^ with their Bishoprics in France, yett it proves the
power and spiritual command of that holy pope, to have extended it self
as well to this kingdom, one and the same reason being for, and against them
both.

But we find diverse Authorities both late and ancient to induce us, to
consent that some of these named holy Bishops, sent at this time, by S.
Clement, were sent by him into this kingdom of Britanie, namely S. Taurinus
and S. Nicasius: and that S. Taurinus was Archbishop or Bishop of york. Among
others, William Harrison a Protestant historian. ( In descript. of Britanie.
page 23. Chronolog. ibid. an. 141.) produces an Antiquity that so affirms:
whereupon he writes in this manner: Whether Taurinus Bishop over the
congregation at york, were one of the nine scholars of Grantha Cambridge
spoken of in the chronicles of Burton, I do not certainly find. But certain
it is, that Walterus Rollewink in his history fasciculus temporum. (an. 94.)
says. S. Taurinus was Episcopus Eboracensis, Bishop of york, which is here in
Britanie: and so not Ebroicensis in France, where the same or an other of
that name was Bishop about the same time* And an other late writer ( Harris
Theatrum. l. 1.) in his manuscript history, alleging both S. Antoninus and
diverse others, says: diverse have written that both S. Nicasius and Taurinus
were here in Britanie, and for S. Taurinus, S. Antoninus says, that S.
Taurinus: filiam Lucij Regis Britanniae a morte suscitauit. S. Taurinus did
raise from death the daughter of Lucius, King of Britanie. (S. Antonin. hist.
part. 1. titul. 6. cap.) Which directly proves, that S. Taurinus was here in
our Britanie, and this King Lucius for certain, was either he that lived to
receive the faith of Christ publicly in the time of Pope Eleutherius,
beginning his reign in the year of Christ 124 ( Matt. Westminster. an. 124.) or
Lucius Antenous the Roman prefect in Britanie called there upon. Rex
Britanniae, King of Britanie, as well he might, prescribinge laws unto us in
Britanie as Hector Boethius. ( Scotor. hist. l. 5. fol. 76.77.78.) with others
witness: and was resident at york in the time of the Emperor Adrian, when
and where S. Taurinus is supposed to have been Bishop and wrought this
miracle. For S. Anacasius being sent hither by S. Clement, they which teach
so. ( Harris supr.) produce the french histories that he preached to the
Britans, which in that time were only those of this kingdom, the little
Britanie in France then and long after named Armorica, and not Britannia.

And yett to omit others, Arnoldus Mermannus in his Theater of the conversion
of nations. (. Britones.) says, that among other people, S. Anacasius being
delegated thither an Apostle by S. Clement, did instruct and inform in the
faith the Britans, and all the waste of the Ocean Sea. Britones, Normandos,
Rhotomagenses, Picardos, omnemque Maris Oceani tractum instruxit, formauitque
fide S. Nicasius a S. Clemente illuc Apostolus delegatus. And to putt us out of
doubt, that S. Clement did take upon him the spiritual chardge of this our
Britanie, as well as of France and other places, the same Author from others
testifies, that our Archbishop S Aristobulus, who as Eisingrenius says, had
been a Bishop from anno Christi 39. the 39 year of Christ, was yett our
Apostle in Britanie alive in the year of Christ 99 S. Clement then Pope. Et
quod excurrit 99. Clemente Pontifice Maximo, Domitiano Imperatore. (Guliel.
Eiseng. centen. 1. part. 1. did. 7. fol. 67. Arnold. Mermman. Theater conuers
gent. in Albione*) And we have yett in England an old manuscript, a short
historical relation. ( M. S. antiq. pr. Stores in Exordium.) Of the public
Mass, and church service, of the Britans, and French men, from the Apostles
time, written before the union of the Britans with S. Augustines mission, by S.
Gregory, and written by a British Author, testifying that the public church
service and Mass, both of the french and Brittans was carried up to Rome to S.
Clement, to be examined and approved by him then Pope, which he accordingly
performed by his papal power, etc this Mass was ever after used both in
France, and this our kingedome of Britanie.

So that most evident it is, by those few Antiquities left unto us, that in
the time of S. Clement who was Pope in the later end of the first, and
beginning of the second hundred year of Christ, this our church of Britanie
was wholly in spiritual things, dependant and subordinate to the church and
Popes of Rome: and thus much of the first age and hundred year, from the birth
of Christ. When here and of this nation there were yett living many Bishops
consecrated by S. Peter, and the Roman Papal authority: S. Aristobulus,
Mansuetus, Beatus, and probably S. Iosephe, Taurinus, Nicasius, Angulus, and
others; for to add to the former, S. Anacletus says in his Epistle, approved
by our Protestants of England, our contryman S. Marianus and others. ( Rob.
Barns in vita pont. Romans in Anacl. Mar. Scot. l. 2. de aetat. 6. col. 250.
Florent. Wigorn. in Domit.) that the provinces where Archbishops were, were
divided by the Apostles and S. Clement his predecessor, ab Apostolis and Beato
clemente praecessore nostro, ipsa Prouincia diuisio renouata est. (Some do make
Clitus and Anaclitus alone, and make him praedecessour to S. Clemente see.
Baro. to. 1.) Therefore most evident it is that S. Clement took upon him and
exercised, this supreme Papal and spiritual power in this kingedome.

THE SECOND CENTVRIE OR HUNDRED YEAR.
THE IV. CHAPTER. Showing by these Protestants, how the popes of Rome in this
second Century of years claymed, had, and exercised supreme spiritual
Jurisdiction and power in Britanie.
TO begin with the second age, and hundred year, Saint and Pope Anacletus
offers him self first, being the next and immediate Successor to S.
Clement, and as he himself wittnesseth. ( Epist. decretal. Marian. Scot. l.
2. aetat. 6. col. 250. Florentius Wigorn. in Domitiano. Matthew. Westin. an.
102.) Both instructed, and taught and made priest by S. Peter chief of the
Apostles: vt a beato Petro principe sumus instructi, a quo and presbyter sum
ordinatus. This holy Pope S. Peter's disciple beginning his papacy in the 102.
year of Christ as our Protestants of England inform us. ( Rob. Barns. in vit.
pontif. Romans in Anacleto. Ormerod. pict. of Pap. page 78.) Thought that the
primacy over all churches was granted to the church of Rome by our Lord
himself, and over all Christian people. Ab ipso Domino primatum Romanae
Ecclesiae super omnes Ecclesias, vniuersumque Christiani nomine populum
concessum esse asseruit. And they tell us further, how according to this
supreamacie granted by Christ to the Sea of Rome, over all churches and
Christian people, he executed the same in making his general decrees,
bindinge all Bishops, Priests and others, both concerning the most blessed
sacrifice of the Mass, and Jurisdiction.

Among other things, to speak in Protestant words. (Rob. Barns supra)
Episcopos officio pares, ordine duplici distinxit: eos primates, sieve
patriarchas appellari voluit, qui in illis ciuitatibus praeessent, in quibus
olim primarij Flamines sederunt: in alijs metropolitanis vrbibus, Episcopos
Metropolitans vel Archiepiscopos nominandos esse censuit. He distinguished
Bishops equal in order, into two degrees: causinge them to be named Primates,
or Patriarchs, which ruled in those cities, in which of old the Archflamens
did sit: in other Metropolitan cities, he would have them named
Metropolitans or Archbishops, and he calls this not his own decree, but the
decree of S. Clement his predecessor, and Saint Peter also. ( Anacl. supr. and
apud Mar. Scot. and Flor. Wigorn. supr) And sets down in a certain Tome,
what cytes were to have primates, both according to his own, S. Clements, and
the Apostles order.

And this decree of Saint Anacletus, in this highest question of Jurisdiction,
was so universal and general in it self, so embraced of all, and
includinge, that as not only Giraldus Cambrensis, and ancient authorities of
this nation, ( Lib. 2. de Iure Metropol. eccles. Meneuen. ad Innocent. 3.) but
the chief Protestant Antiquaries themselves, as Matthew Parker the first
Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury, ( Lib. antiquit. Britannic. page 24.) and
Sir John Prise, ( Io. Pris. defens. histor. Britan. page 73.) do plainly
acknowledge, that by that Tome of Saint Anacletus Pope, it was contained and
decreed, how many and which were the places throughout all this Island even as
it contained England, Scotland, and Wales. And thereupon this Protestant
Archbishopp, does in express terms call the division of Britanie in that
respect: Ex Anacleto huius Insulae diuisionem. The division of this Island
according to the decree of Pope Anacletus: And though this division was not
actually made at that time for setting Archbishops in those provinces at that
time, but was deferred until in after when the faith was recreaued here in
more public manner, when persecution ceased, or was mitigated; yett by these
authorities there is noe doubt, but this holy Pope both claymed, and exercised
the same highest spiritual Jurisdiction, as well in this, as all other
nations, that decree being general, and without limitation for all nations,
as it is allowed by these Protestants, and making all provinces in the known
world, substitute and subordinate to the church of Rome in such affairs, and
none exempted.

And as this decree alone will witness, he sent as opportunity and the cause
required, Bishops and priests into other contries, so he did the like to this,
to increase and continue that happy buildinge, which his predecessors had
founded here before. So we must say of his immediate Successor Saint
Euaristus, except we will reject the authority of one, of our most ancient
and approved historians, Nennius, who in his manuscript ancient history,
written if we may believe the Protestant Bishop Bale. ( l. de scriptor. cent.
1. in Nennio.) A thousand years since, confidently affirms that, Britannicus
Rex, A king of Britanie received an ambassadge from Euaristus Pope of Rome, to
receive the faith of Christ, missa legatione a Papa Romano Euaristo; (Mennius
hist. M. S.) who yett says with others, that the general conversion of this
land, was not until the year of Christ 167. others making it later.

This holy Pope began his papacy in the year 111. and lived therein until
120. before which time our king Coillus, brought up at Rome, was so well
disposed to Christian Religion, that as our Protestants and the antiquities of
Glastenbury tell us, he confirmed the twelve hides of land to the religious
Eremitage of Glastenbury. ( Antiquitat. glast. apud Capgrau. in S. Joseph and
others.) And therefore cominge from Rome into Britanie to be king (his Father
king Marius beeinge dead) we cannot think but as many of our contrimen his
subjects then at Rome, were Christians, and in so great number, that in one
British house there, the house of S. Claudia our British Lady, and children
after her, there were at, or soon after this time, in the time of Pope Pius
the first, 96. christians; ( Act. 5 Pudentianae Breuiar. Romans in vit. eius 19.
Maij.) So many of them, and of other nations also, and clergy men, were sent
hither by the Pope of Rome at that time, which many of our Protestant
historians will confirm, assuringe, that both now and at all times until the
conversion of king Lucius, there were many christians which came from Rome,
living in this kingdom. ( Godwyn Conuers. of Britanie page Caius l 1. antiq.
Cantabrig. Will. Harrison. descript. of Brit. Holinsh. hist. of Engl.) So do
diverse ancient antiquities of the Annals of Burton, and others of foreign
nations.

And touching the time of Pope Alexander the first, next successor to S.
Euaristus, he being made Pope in the year 120. and continuinge Bishop of
Rome by common opinion 8. years, and five months, in the fourth year of the
papacy of this blessed Saint, as both Matthew of Westminster. ( Annal. Burton.
an. 141. Catal. Episcop. Tungr.) and the autient Table hanging in the church of
S. Peter in Cornehil, in London, then builded in the time of king Lucius,
witness, beeinge the 124 year of Christ. The year of our Lord God 124.
Lucius was crowned king: so the one, and the other says: anno gratiae 124.
Coillo Britonum Rege defuncto, Lucius filius eius regni diademate insignitus
est. In the year of grace 124. Coillus king of the Britans being dead,
Lucius his son was crowned king. Math. Westin. an. 124.

This king Lucius, although neither he nor the kingdom were yett so
generally converted, yet well knowinge that many preachers had been sent
hither from Rome, and diverse Brittans here were desirous to embrace the faith
of Christ, did not only give way unto it, in this beginning of his Reign, but
except Albertus Krantzius a man well acquainted with our British antiquities
(as a Protestant antiquary witnesses) does deceive us. ( Io. Caius antiq.
Cantabrig. l. 1. Albert. Krantzius Metropol. l. 1. cap. 6.) Did write unto S.
Alexander the first, Pope of Rome to have christian Religion preached in this
kingedome. Religionem Christi Lucius quondam Britanniae Rex, ab Alexandro primo
eius nominis summo pontifice, impetrauit in Insula predicari. Lucius King of
Britanie did obtain of Pope Alexander the first, to here Christian Religion
preached in that Island. Which is confirmed by many Authorities, prouening unto
us, that this Island at, and immediately after that time, had diverse preachers
of the faith of Christ, and among them some Bishops, besides those I named
before, to prove that we had a continual succession of holy Bishops from
Rome, as these also were, from our first christianity.

And that we had many preachers, and many by them converted, may appear by
that is acknowledged before from these Protestants: to which many of them add,
and from antiquities, that many Scholars and Doctors of our Universities then
were converted in the year 141. nine in one place of Cambridge. In peruetustis
Annalibus Burtonensibus sic lego. Anno Domini 141. hic baptizati sunt nouem ex
Doctoribus and Scholaribus Cantabrigiae. I do read (says one) in very old
Annals of Burto^ thus. In the year of our Lord 141. here were baptized nine of
the Doctors and Scholars of Cambridge. ( Caius lib. 1. de antiq. Cantab. page
95. Theater of great Brit. lib. 6. Harris. descript. of Brit) Like to this
have many other Protestants: who assure us, this succession could not come from
S. Joseph of Aramathia and his company, for a Protestant Bishop, according to
the truth of histories writes: ( Godwyn. conuers. of Brit. page 16. c. 3.) It
seems that Joseph and his fellows prevailed little by their preaching, and
therefore gave themselves at last unto a monastical and solitary life in the
Island of Aualon.) And even their memory was so much forgotten when king
Lucius was converted, that as our best antiquities we have of that matter, tell
us, those which S. Eleutherius sent from Rome, found the best information of
them at Rome, and their ancient house or church was so desolat, that it was
become, Latibulu^ Ferarum, a den for wyld beasts at their cominge hither. (
Antiquit. Glaston apud Capgrau. in S. Joseph Aramath. in S Patr.)

I find in histories no others, from whom we have the least probability to
claim a continuance in Religion, therefore it must needs be from Rome, from
whence also we had among these holy men, some Bishops to continue a
succession from thence. For although S. Beatus was but lately dead living unto
this year 110. it is not unlikely but his companion was still living, and
except there were twoe of that name, and in those times and the same contrie,
which no history does remember, S. Mansuetus was yet a live, and long after
until we had many other Bishops sent from Rome, or consecrated here by the
Roman authority, in the time of this King Lucius. For we read in the
Annals and Catalogue of the Archbishops of Treuers, near unto Tullum, that in
the year 160. S. Mansuetus was Bishop there: Mansuetus qui huic nomini and
vocationi suae vita proba, anno Domini 160. optime respondit. The seventh
Archbishop of Treuers was Mansuetus, who by his godly life did excellently
answer this his name to be meek, and his vocation in the year of Christ
160. ( Annals Arch. Treuer. Petrus Merssaeus Catal. Arch. Treuer.) Which by
noe historye I can find, was or could be any other, but Saint Mansuetus our
contryman spoken of before, both the name, time, and place so near unto
Tullum, where he was first Bishopp alloweinge it, and nothing impugninge it.

And among those Bishops here in Britanie, and of our own nation, I find two
named being both consecrated and sent hither by the Authority of the Sea of
Rome: one of them S. Tymotheus son to our holy contryman, Saint Marcellus, or
by some Marcellinus a Britanne borne, and a Bishop here, and after Bishop of
the Tungers, and lastely, Archbishop of Treuers, both which preached here in
the time of King Lucius long before his conversion, and at or before this
time, and were instruments of his happy conversion, actually and parsonallye
concurringe thereto by mission and Authority from the Popes of Rome: of which I
have made more lardge and ample relation in other places: for this purpose so
many Authors here cited will suffice, both Catholics and Protestants
consentinge that S. Tymothie and S. Marcellus or Marcellinus, preached here in
the time of king Lucius and before his conversion. ( Petrus de Natalib. lib.
1. cap. 24. Harris Tom. 2. Magdeb. centur 2. Annal. Eccles. Cur. Io. Stumph. in
Rhetia. Petrus Merssaeus in catalog. Archiep. Treuer. in Archiep. 20. Anton.
Democh. l. 2. de Miss. cont. Calvin. Gulielm. Eisengren. centen. 2. part. 4.
distinct. 7. Petr. Merss. in Archiep. Treuer.)

And that this S. Tymothie could not be Saint Tymothie Bishop of Ephesus S.
Paul's Scholar, to whom he wrote the Epistles, who was martyred many years
before King Lucius was borne, and S. Onesimus was his Successor in S. Ignatius
time, as he himself is witness: ( Epist. ad Ephesians.) But only S. Tymothie
our blessed contryman by his mother S. Claudia, ( Martyrol. Romans die 20.
Iunij.) and a child baptized by the Apostles, and thereupon called their
disciple, who was owner of the house in Rome, where S. Peter by the Roman
tradition first entertained there, and of S. Tymothie the Lord thereof in his
time named Thermae Timothinae, the Bathes of Tymotheus, (Act. 5. Iustini
Philosoph. Baron. annot. in 20. Iunij in S. Nouato.) which he forsook for the
love of God, and this his nation, so soon, that by Pope Pius the first,
martyred in the year 154. his said house was consecrated a church, he
himself being then in all probability preaching in this Island, as so many
Authorities cited do warrant.

The history of S. Marcellus or Marcellinus, both to have been a Britane, a
Bishop, and to have preached here long before S. Linus was converted, that he
persuaded him to be a Christian, and after went into Germany, and returned
from thence into Britanie again, sent with others from Pope Eleutherius to
convert king Lucius and this kingdom as they did, is an undoubted verity,
acknowledged by all that write of that matter. And therefore our Protestants of
England freely grant us in these words. Even from the days of those godly
men, who first taught the Britans the gospel, there remained among the same
Britans, some Christians which ceased not to teach and preach the word of God,
most sincerely unto them: But yett noe king amongst the^ openly professed that
Religion, till at length this Lucius perceauinge not only some of the Roman
Lieutenants in Britanie, as Trebellius and Pertinax with others, to have
submitted themselves to that profession, but also the Emperor himself to
begin to be favorable to them that professed it. And then he sets down
how king Lucius sent to Pope Eleutherius to be instructed in, and receive the
faith of Christ: and in like manner is the Relation of other Protestants. (
Holinsh. histor. of England lib. 4. cap. 19. Math. Park, Antiquit Britan. page
4.5. Ioh. Goscelius in histor. Manuscript. Bal. l. 2. de actibus Pontif. in
Gregor. 1. and l. de Scriptor. cent. 1. in August Dirnoth. Godwyn Conuers.
Powel annot. in l. 2. Girald. Cambr. c. 1. Fox to 2. Act. page 463 Fulke Ans.
to count Cath. page 40. Middlet. papistam page 202. Stowe. Holinsh. etc.

Then if by these men there still continued a succession of true preachers in
Britanie from the Apostles time. ( Protestant Articl. of Religion. Bills.
Whitgift, Barlow, Bridges, Downam, Hockeer, Couel and others against puritans.)
Which the puclick Protestant Religion denies to be without true Bishops to
consecrate such priests and preachers: and the Roman Luietenants themselves
and christians, and so consequently as the greatness of their state and
necessity of the church here required had Bishops, and rather from Rome,
being themselves Romans; And I have exemplified in so many Bishops
consecrated and sent hither by S. Peter and his holy successors Popes of Rome,
and not any one Instance can be given of any one Bishop or priest in all this
time, sent or consecrated by any others, we must needs leave that prerogative
to Rome, and honor to Britanie, to have had the holy Bishops and pastors of
this church from thence: And that Apostolic See to have ruled here in
spiritual things, as these Protestants have freely acknowledged in the holy
Popes S. Anacletus, Euaristus and S. Alexander already. ( Rob. Barns in vit.
Pontific. in nominibus citat. Downam lib. 1. of Antichrist. cap. 3. page 35.

And so they teach, that all the following Popes unto S. Eleutherius, to wit
S. Sixtus the first, Telesphorus, Higinius, Pius and Anicetus the immediate
predecessor to Eleutherius, took upon them generally the supreamacy and
highest commau^ding power in all spiritual things, and all places without
exception or limitation. S. Sixtus gave authority to appeal to the Popes of
Rome from all Bishops. Ab Episcopo ad Romanum Pontificem appellandi Ius dedit
ecclesiasticis ministris. (Barnes supra in Sixto.) Saint Telesphorus prescribed
generally the fast of Lent. ( in Telesphoro.) Published the manner or order of
Mass, and made a decree as supreme Judge, how all suites and controversies
should be tried, and decided. Saint Higinius made a law byndinge all Bishops
and Metrapolitans, and the whole clergy, ( in Higinio.) S. Pius dedicated the
house of our renowned contrywoma^ S. Pudentiana in Rome, to be a church, ( In
Pio) made general decrees for the holy sacrifice of the Mass, binding all
Priests and Bishops. Declared it to be sacrilege in all people whomsoever,
which converted lands or goods dedicated to Religion, to profane uses
Appointed the age of virgins to be consecrated. He decreed that matters
apperteyning to Religion should be heard in provincial counsels of Bishops,
reseruinge the authority of the Pope of Rome and appeals to him Quae ad
Religionem spectant a suae Synodis audienda esse statuit, salua tamen
pontificia authoritate. (Idem in vit. Pont. in Aniceto.) S. Anicetus the next
before S. Eleutherius, made or renewed the decree, how both Bishops and
Metropolitans were to be ordained. That an Archbishop was to be accused
before the Pope of Rome. That noe Archbishops should be called primates,
except that prerogative of name were granted him from the Pope of Rome.
Archiepiscopos non primates appellandos, nisi ista praerogatiua nomenclaturae
ei a Romano Pontifice concederetur.

Wherefore these Popes being by all Protestants holy Saints, and Martyrs, and
the church of Rome then by his majesty and al other learned men of the
Protestant profession, our mother church, the true church, commandinge church,
most high Apostolicque church, and these their decrees universal and general
comprehending all, and excluding none, either in Britanie, or any other nation,
except we will be wilfully headstronge in disobedience, we must needs
acknowledge, that this kingdom from S. Peter's first preachinge here, unto the
general conversion thereof in the time of Pope Eleutherius (of which
sufficiently in the next chapter) ever was, and did acknowledge it self
subject in spiritual things to the holy Apostolic See of Rome. And this in
particular also proved by so many ancient, and approved Authors, historians
and others that entreat of this subject, shewinge how often the Popes of Rome
in these remembered days sent preachers hither, and the Britans likewise
acknowledginge ever, that See for the chiefest and supreme, sent thither
though so far distant hence, to have preachers and Instructors to be sent
hither by the highest papal power there.

I will insist in Protestants relation for this business: They tell us that S.
Bid, the old chronicle of La^daffe, Goceline in the life of S. Augustine cap.
31. historiae maioris, the old chronicle called Brutus, Ioannes Nauclerus, an
old manuscript history which the Protestant Bishop Godwyn says he had in
latin, say that many preachers were sent hither from the Pope of Rome in the
year of Christ 156. when S. Pius was Pope: and I have read a very old
manuscript, testifyinge that king Lucius did in that year, send legates to the
Pope of Rome, to that purpose. An epistle written from the Pope of Rome to the
king of Britanie, dated in the year 159. found among the old constitutions
of this land, and in the old chronicle called Brutus, which the Protestant
Bishop Bridges, says he had seen, says there was the like sendinge, in, or
about that time. Mennius, as these men tell us, affirms as much of the year
164. so does an other ancient chronicle, which Godwin cites. William of
Malmesbury has the same, of the next year 165. S. Edwards laws say so, of
the year 167. Henry of Hardfrord has the life of the year 169. Marianus
Scotus published by our Protestants, so writes of the year 177. The
Protestant Bishopp Bale has so of the year 179. Polydor Vergil the history of
Rochester, Matthew of Westminster, and Martinus Polonus by Protestants, so say
of the year 188. Therefore to save the creditt of these, and many others so
ancient, and allowed by Protestants, we must needs by their leave and
allowance say also, that this our kingedome in those days depended upon the Sea of Rome in Religious affairs. And thus much of this matter before our
general conversion in the time of King Lucius. ( Io. Caius antiq. Cantabrig.
lib. 1. page 109.110.111. Godwin. conuers. of Britannie. p. 21.22. Holinsh.
hist. of King. Lucius Theater of Brit. lib. 6. M. S. pr. gloriosi, ac Deo
dilecti. in S. Dubritio. Matthew. Westminster. an. 154. Godwyn. Conuers. pa. 29.30.
Stow hist. in Lucius. Caius supr. page 100. Godw. Conuers. page 29.20.22. Mason
book of consecrat. in Lucius. Will. Lambard. lib. de leg. Reg. fol. 130. page
2. Godwyn. Conuers. page 22.

THE V. CHAPTER. How in the general Conversion of this kingedome in the time
of King Lucius, all spiritual things were ordered, settled, and confirmed
here, by the Popes Authority.
AT the time when our King Lucius, and this kingedome was generally converted,
there were, as these Protestants have proved, or granted before, diverse
Bishops and Priests in England, we had many universities, as Cambrige,
Stamford, Greekelade, Bellisium, Oxford, and others, as our Protestants
contend, and diverse learned men in them, our next and neighbouringe contries,
France, the hither parts of Germany, Lorraine, Heluetia, and all Italy, even
unto Rome it self, situated in the further part thereof were full of Bishops,
priests, and learned clergy. ( Ioh. Lidgate in Cant. Caius antiq. cont.
Brian. Twin. antiquit. Oxon. Harrison descript. of Brit. Cambd. in Britan.
Harding. histor. l. 1. c. 15. Ioh. Bal. in praefat. ad l. de scriptor. etc.)

And yett King Lucius and his nobles, now resolved to receive the faith of
Christ, could find noe center, to rest their holy desires of so happy a
change, until they arrived at the Apostolic See, from whence this nation
from the first original, of christianity here, ever received instructors, and
instruction. And to obtain this his so heavenly purpose, this Renowned king
with applause of his nobility, did not send one only Messadge, Ambassadge or
epistle, and at one time to that end, but as our best antiquities say:
Epistolas suas Eleutherio Papae direxit: (Epist. Eleuther. ad Luc. and leg. S.
Eduardi apud Lumb. Calfrid. Monum. l. 5. cap. 19. Pont. Virun. l. 4. Matthew.
Westminster. an. 185.186.) he directed his epistles to Pope Eleutherius: diverse
Epistles, and consequently diverse Ambassadges, so read the old British
history, Ponticus Virunnius, Matthew Westminster, as they are published and
allowed by our Protestants, and others.

And these so diverse epistles, were only to become a Christian, and to have
his kingdom instructed in the faith of Christ, and all things thereto
belonginge ordered by his highest papal authority, petens ab eo, us
christianus efficeretur. And none of these epistles was that which our
Protestants tell us he wrote unto that holy Pope, for laws to govern his
kingdom by, which were distinct from this, of which I shall speak hereafter:
Whereby it is evident that this blessed king and his wisest council at that
time, by so often writing both to this holy Pope Eleutherius, and some others
of his predecessors before, as appears by that I have written already, did
fully and constantly inform themselves, that the highest directing power in
things religious, was only residing in the Popes of Rome, otherwise they were
all strangers unto him, far distant, and above all Bishops of the world more
persecuted, all of them before this time and long after, sufferinge cruel
deaths and Martyrdom for Christ. Therefore it was for the due honor, and
right belonginge to that holy See, and not temporal glory or countenance, as
a Protestant Bishop would gloss the matter. ( Godwyn Conuers. of Britanie c.
3. page 36.) but the supreamacy of the Roman Bishops, which these Protestants
have given to all the Popes before.

And because, to speak in the words of the first Protestant Archbishop in
England: The renown of the popes of Rome at that time, was most famous in all
the world, for their often martyrdom, and constancy and sincere discipline of
faith: quorum tunc fama crebro martyrio and constantia, ac sincera fidei
disciplina, per totum Christianum orbem celeberrima fuit. (Matthew. Parker.
antiquit. Brit. page 5.) This was that, which moved king Lucius, to give this
due honor to the Sea of Rome, and appeal unto it for instruction: for he saw
that by that holy See the faith of Christ, was dilated into all these nations,
as the recited Protestant Archbishop thus witnesses. ( Parker. supr. page 4)
Cognouit complures nobiles Romanos eandem fidem a pontifice Romano accepisse,
eorumque exemplo Christianum nomen in singulas prouincias sparsum and
disseminatum fuisse, statuit in eadem fide sub Eleutherio tunc Romano pontifice
inaugurari. When King Lucius knew, that very many noble Romans, had received
the faith of Christ from the Pope of Rome, and by their example, the Christian
name was dispersed and sown abroad into all provinces, he did resolve to
receive the same faith, from Eleutherius the Pope of Rome. Where it is
evidently confessed, that if king Lucius had not acknowledged this highest
spiritual dignity in the Sea of Rome, and have sued to have the Christian
Religion settled here by that authority, he should have been singular in
that kind, as our Protestants now are all other provinces giving then that
honor to Rome, and having their faith in Christ established from thence.

And this is evidently declared, by the manner of the sending, and writting of
this king, to that Pope S. Eleutherius, S. Bid says: hist. eccl. l. 1. c. 4.
that K. Lucius did humbly beseech Pope Eleutherius by his letters, that by his
commandment he might be made a Christian. Obsecrans vt per eius mandatum
Christianus efficeretur. The Roman Tradition says: In the beginning of the
papacy of Eleutherius, there came humble letters unto him from Lucius King of
the Britans, to receive him and his subjects into the number of Christians.
Huic initio Pontificatus supplices literae venerunt a Lucio Britannorum Rege,
vt se ac suos in Christianorum numerum reciperet. (Breu. Romans in S. Eleuther.
26. Maij. Baron. hist. Eccl. tom. 2.) A Protestant Bishop reads: praying that
by his direction, and appointment, he might be made a Christian. (Godwyn.
conuers. p. 20.) An other Protestant antiquary says: Desiring Eleutherius
Bishop of Rome, to send some devout and learned men, by whose instruction he
and his people might be taught the faith, and Religion of Christ. The old
chronicle of La^daffe is: implorans vt iuxta eius ammonitionem christianus
fiat. Humbly entreatinge, that by his appointment he might be made a
christian. ( Annal. Landaf. apud com. antiq. Cantab. l. 1. page 98. thus our
Protestants allege that Antiquity. Others of them say. Lucius sent an
Ambassadge to Eleutherius, Bishop of Rome by Eluanus, and Meduinus Britans,
entreating Eleutherius by them, that he would open a passadge by himself and
his ministers, for the fosteringe and cherishinge of christian Religion in
Britanie. Frauncis Mason. l. 2. p. 52. ca. 3.

Like is the testimony of other historians, both Catholics and Protestants,
that king Lucius proceeded in this humble, and submissiue manner in his
writings, and Ambassadges to the Pope of Rome at that time, and in these
affairs. The which highest authority spiritual in the Pope of Rome, these
our Protestants further confirm, in that they teach generally, that these two
Ambassadors of King Lucius, Eluanus and Meduinus, received all the authority
they had, to preach here in Britanie, from Pope Eleutherius, who consecrated
the one Eluanus a Bishop, and made the other a Doctor to preach the gospel.
(Theater of great. Brit l. 6. Stow. hist. in Lucius, Godwyn. conuers. of Brit.
Mason l. 2. c. 3. Bal. cent. 1. in Eluan.) And the present Protestant
Archbishop of Canterbury, Doctor George Abbot, director of Master Mason as he
protests, and his directed Scribe ar of this opinion, that all the Bishops of
Britanie after this, derived consecration and succession episcopal, from this
one only Bishop Eluanus, consecrated and authorized by Pope Eleutherius. (
Frauncis Mason consecrat of Bish l. 2. c. 3. p. 55.56.) Which, and more, is
approved by an other a Protestant Bishop, by whom Pope Eleutherius even in
this great business is termed. Paterfamilias, the Master of this spiritual
house and family of Britanie. (Bal. l. de Act. Pont. Romans l. 1. in Eleuther.)
and this kingedome was consequently of his family, and under his rule and
command, and thereupon as a good Master and Governor of this family, did
confirm and solidate the Brittans, and the whole kingedome in the faith
received by the Apostles. Eleutherius, vt bonus paterfamilias de thesauro suo
noua cum veteribus proferens, effecit, vt confirmatis and consolidatis
Britannis, in suscepta prius ab Apostolis doctrina, totum illud regnum in eius
fidei verba iuraret.

And to make most evident demonstration further, even by these Protestants,
as well as by all other Antiquities, that the supreme power spiritual in all
proceedinges in this kingedome at that time was wholly, and undeniably in Pope
Eleutherius, and those his twoe Legates, which he sent hither, Damianus and
Fugatianus, as they are commonly called. The Protestant Archbishop and his
Mason tell us, in these words. ( Mason l. 2. e. 3. p. 55 56.) From Rome there
came two, Fugatius and Damianus, but we cannot learn that either of them was
a Bishop. This is the constant writing of these Protestants: yett to deal
plainly, these men knew not all things, or else they might easelye have
known, that both the British history, Ponticus Virunnius, and Matthew of
Westminster, as they are published by Protestants, call them Antistates,
Bishops: and a Protestant Bishop produces an old Manuscript Author, testifying
that the first church of Wincester was hallowed and dedicated to the honor of
our Savior, October 29. 189. by Fuganus and Damianus Bishops. (Galfrid. monum.
l. 4. hist. c. 20. Pontic. Virun. lib. 4. in fine, Godwyn. Catal. in Winchest.
Matthew. Westminster. an. 186.)

And if they were noe Bishops, it so much more aduaunceth the Popes power, in
this kingedome, for these Protestants with others shall testify, that by their
legatine power from Pope Eleutherius, they exercised more and greater
Jurisdiction spiritual here, then any Bishop, or Archbishop of that time. And
if they were Bishops, as those Authors affirm, yett I find none to write that
either of them was an Archbishop: yett as before, and shall immediately be
proved, they by their delegate power from Pope Eleutherius, executed here
greater Jurisdiction spiritual and more ample, then any Bishop, Archbishop,
prince, king or whosoever, the Pope himself excepted, could lawfully do.
Which these Protestants and other undeniable antiquities do, thus demonstrate
unto us.

The first Protestant Archbishop of Canterburye ( Parker. antiquit. Britan.
page 5.) writes from diverse witnesses, that these two Religious men were,
assigned by Pope Eleutherius as chief work men, tanto operi praeficiundo, in
gouerninge so great a work, and establishinge the discipline of christian
Religion. In sancienda christianae religionis disciplina, and (...) cooperarij
adhibiti in administranda ecclesia p^riti. Joined by Pope Eleutherius with the
Bishops in gouerninge the church, beeings killfull therein. Which must needs
be, by their legatine power from Pope Eleutherius. Martianus Polonius. ( In
Eleutherio Papa col. 49.) published by Protestants, and dedicated by them to
Queen Elizabeth, says: Papa Eleutherius misit duos Religiosos viros Fuganum
and Damianum qui Regem praedictum and populum baptizarent, erant tunc in
Britannia viginti octo Pontifices Idolorum, quos Flamines vocabant: Inter quos
tres Archiflamines erant, sed praedicti Sancti, de mandato Apostolico, vbi
erant Flamines, instituerunt Episcopos, vbi Archiflamines, Archiepiscopos. Pope
Eleutherius sent two Religious men Fuganus and Damianus, who baptized the said
King Lucius and his people. There were then in Britanie 28. high priests of
the Idols, whom they called Flamins, among which there were three
Archflamins, but the said holy men by the commandment of the Pope, did
institute Bishops, where there were Flamins, and Archbishops where there were
Archflamins.

This is confirmed, not only by all Antiquities of these things, but the
chief Protestant writers, among which the Protestant Archbishop Whitgift, and
his friend Fox write in this manner. ( Whitg. defense of the Answ. page 323.
Fox tom. 1. fol. 146.) Eleutherius the good Bishop, hearing the request of
the king, and glad to see the godly towardnes, of his well disposed mind,
sends him certain teachers and preachers, called Fugatius, or by some
Fuganus, and Damianus, or Dimianus, which converted first the king and people
of Britanie, and baptized them. The temples of Idolatry and other monuments of
gentility they subverted, conuertinge the people from their diverse and many
gods to serve one living God. Thus true Religion with sincere faith
increasing, superstition decayed with all rites of Idolatry. There were then
in Britanie 28. Head priests, which they called Flamins, and three Archpreists
among them, which were called Achiflamins, having the oversight of their
manners, as Judges over the rest. These 28. Flamines they turned to 28. Bishops,
and the three Archiflamines to three Archbishops, having their seats in the
three principal cities of the Realm: That is, in London, in York, and in
Glamorgantia, videlicet in vrbe Legionum by Wales.

Thus far these Protestants, and one of them named the Archbishop tells us,
that the constitutinge of Archbishops, in the places of the gent^les
Archflamines, by these Legates of Pope Eleutherius, was to follow the example,
and order of S. Peter himself, who did so, as S. Paul likewise, and makes
this reason. ( Whitgift d^f of the Answ. page 320. 321. Which might be done in
respect of the city and place, and not in respect of the Idolatrous priests:
for Archiflamines were in great cities, which being converted unto Christ,
might have in the place of their Archiflamines, godly and learned Archbishops,
to ouersee and direst the rest of the Bishops and preachers, that unity and
order might be observed. Thus Paul did at Ephesus and Creta. And why might not
Peter do it in other places likewise? Master John Seldom, a great Protestant
antiquary, and lawier, writing of these two holy Legates, speaks thus. ( Io.
Seldom Analect. c. 6.) Beati doctores cum per totam fere Jerusalem paganitatem
deleuissent, Templa quae in honor plurimorum deorum fundata fuerant, vni Deo
ciusque Sanctis dedicauerunt, diuersisque ordinatorum coetibus repleuerunt.
When the blessed Doctors had blotted out paganism almost throughout the
Island, the temples which were founded in honor of many gods, they dedicated to
one God, and his Saints, and replenished them with diverse companies of clergy
men. The very same be the words of Matthew of Westminster, as he is published
by English Protestants. Matthew. Westminster. an. Dom. 185.

And this present Protestant, Antiquarie refutinge the ridiculous and ignorant,
or very wilful singularity of Godwyn the Protestant Bishop, singularly and
only as he himself writes. ( Godw. conuers. of Britanie p. 26.) excepting
Sutcliffe, denying Archflamines in this Island, citing for authors Pomponius
Laetus, and Fenestella, thus adds. ( Pompn laet. de Sacerdot. Romans ca. 7.
Fenestell. de Sacerd. Romans c. 5.) Quemadmodum autem Episcopis apud nos
Archiepiscopi, sic Flaminibus Archiflamines praeponebantur. Horum potestati
caeteri Iudices in Insula subijciebantur. Hos autem ex praecepto Apostoli
Idolatriae eripuerunt, and vbi erant Flamines Episcopos, vbi erant
Archiflamines Archiepiscopos posuerunt. Seeds autem Archiflaminum in tribus
nobilioribus ciuitatibus fuerunt, Londonijs videlicet, Eboraco, and in vrbe
legionum. His tribus euacuata superstitione, octo and viginti Episcopi
subduntur, diuisisque parochijs, subiaeuit Metropolitano Eboracensi Deira and
Albania, quas magnum flumen Humbri a Loegria secernit. Eboracensis autem
Archiepiscopis in omnes Scotiae praesules, ac Antistites iure primatis olim
fungebatur. Quod and resaucitum erat sub Henrico secundo and Hugone Legato
Pontificio celebrato concilio. As Archbishops with us Christians, are in power
over Bishops, so were Archflamines over Flamines. In this Island the other
Judges were subject to their power, these by the the commandment of the
Apostle (and Pope) they delivered from Idolatry, and where there were Flamines
they placed Bishops, and Archbishops where there were Archflamines. And the
Seats of the Archflamines, were in the three more noble cities, in London to
wit, in York, and the city of the Legions. To these three, superstition
being taken away, eight and twenty Bishops are subjected, and the parishes or
diocesses beeinge divided, Yorkshire and Scotland (which the great river of
Humber does divide from Loegria England) was made subject to the Metropolitan
of york. And the Archbishop of York, did of old time enjoy the Right of
Primate over all the prelates, and Bishops of Scotland. Which was again
decreed in a cowncell held under king Henry the second, and Hughe the Popes
Legate.

The like to this have all our Antiquaries, Catholics or Protestants writing
of this matter. The Author of the old British history, the book of Landaffe,
the Antiquities of Glastenbury, S. Bid, Ponticus Virunnius, Radulphus de
Diceto, Asserus, Capgraue, Will: of Malmesbury with other ancients, and our
present Protestant Antiquaries consentinge, as Cambden, Holinshed, Harrison,
Stowe, Howes, the Theater writers and others two many to be recited, and
needles, their works commonly extant and to be seen of all, only I will
allege Bicetes, because his manuscript is rare, and he much commended, both
for Antiquity and Authority by the Protestant Authors of the great Theater,
Thus he writes: Eleuther Papa ad quem Lucius Rex Britanniae missa epistola se
fieri Christianum impetrat. Eleuther ergo misit Faganum and Dinuanum, qui Regem
Lucium baptizauerunt. Templa etiam quae in honor plurimorum deorum fundata
erant, vni Deo dedicauerunt. Erant tunc in Britannia 28. Flamines, and tres
Archiflammines, and vbi erant Flamines, Episcopos, vbi autem Archiflamines,
Archiepiscopos posuerunt. Londonensi subiacuit Loegria and Cornubia. Eboracensi
Diera and Albania, vrbi autem legionum Kambria. Eleuther Pope of whom Lucius
king of Britanie obtained by an epistle he sent unto him, to be made a
Christian, sent Faganus and Dimianus, which baptized King Lucius. The Temples
which were founded in honor of many gods, they dedicated to one God. There
were then in Britanie 28. Flamines, and three Archiflamines, and where there
were Flamines they placed Bishops, and where there were Archflamines they
placed Archbishops. To the Archbishop of London, England and Cornwall were
subject. To the Archbishopp of York, were subject Diera, the North of England
and Scotland, and Wales to the Archbishop of Caerlegion. ( Galfrid. Monum. l.
4. c. 19.20. Chronic. eccl. Land. apud Came. l. 1. antiq. cantabrig. Antiq.
Glast. apud Capgra. in S. Patric. Bed. l. v. hist. c 4. Pontic. Virun. l. 4.
Radulph. de Dicet. hist. in Lucio. Guliel. Malmes. de antiq. caenob. Glast.
Camb. in Brig. Holinsh. hist. of Engl. in Lucius. Harris. descript. of Brit.
Stow and Howes in Lucius. Theat. of great Brit. lib. 6. Hector Boeth. l. 5.
fol. 86.85. with others.

Thus we see by all historians, old and late, Catholics, and Protestants,
that in this general plantinge of the faith in this nation, all Religious
matters were wholly ordered by these Legates of the Pope, and his supreme
direction, all Jurisdiction spiritual of Archbishops and Bishops, with their
peculiar diocesses and gouernements, assigned and distinguished by this highest
papal authority of the Pope of Rome by his legates here. And to assure us,
that nothing was then thought by the king himself, or any christians here, to
be firm and validate in this kind, without the confirmation of the Pope
himself, when these Archbishops, and Bishops with their Jurisdictions were
settled, many churches dedicated to God, and his holy Saints, universities or
colleges for christian learning and education assigned, all orders of
clergy men instituted, with all other necessary things in such a cause
remembered in our histories, which I have at lardge related in an other place,
these holy Legates returned to Rome again, to obtain the Popes confirmation
of all these their holy ordinances, and constitutions, which was orderly
performed, as both Catholic antiquities, and Protestant historians do thus
undoubtedly assure us herein.

First Ponticus Virunnius in his British history, l. 4. as it is warranted by
Protestants, says of these Legates, sent by Pope Eleutherius: Romam redierunt,
and cuncta quae fecerant, a Pontifice confirmari impetrarunt: confirmatione
facta, cum pluribus alijs redierunt in Britanniam. They returned to Rome, and
obtained to have all things they had done, to be confirmed by the Pope, and
the confirmation being made, they returned into Britanie with other. The
Author of the old Birttish history, published with the self same Protestant
approbation. ( Galfrid. Monument. l. 4. histor. Britan. cap. 20) says, Denique
restauratis omnibus, redierunt Antistites Romam: and que fecerunt a beatissimo
Papa confirmari impetrauerunt, confirmatione vero facta, reuersi sunt in
Britanniam compluribus alijs comitati. At last when the Bishops (so Virunnius
also terms those Legates) had restored all things they returned to Rome, and
obtained to have those things they had done to be confirmed by the most
blessed Pope, and the confirmation being made, they returned again into
Britanie, accompanied with many others. Like be the words of Matthew of
Westminster, warranred by these Protestants in this manner. ( Matthew. Westminster. an.
186.) Anno gratiae 186. beati Antistites Faganus and Deruuianus Romam reuersi,
quae fecera^t impetrauerunt a Papa beatissimo confirmari In the year of grace
186. The blessed Bishops Fuganus and Deruuianus returned to Rome, and obtained
those things, which they had done to be confirmed by the most blessed Pope.
Which being finished, the said doctors with many others, returned into
Britanie.

And our English Protestants in their Annotation upon this place thus, approve
it. ( Protest. annot. Morginal. in Matthew. West. supr. ad an. 186. ( Fides
Christi in Britannia confirmatur. The faith of Christ is confirmed in Britanie.
All things of this nature were here confirmed by the Popes Authority. De
mandato Apostolico, by the Popes commandment, as Martinus Polonus turned
Protetestant, by these men in their publishinge of him. De mandato Apostolico,
ex praecepto Apostoli, by the commandment of the Apostle or Pope, as reads
the Protestant Antiquarie Master Seldom. ( Martin. Pol. in Eleutherio col. 49.
Seldom supr. in Anaclet. c. 6.) And so all Protestants do, or ought to
confess, approuinge those Authors I have cited before, and fetchinge the
greatest evidence they have of these things and times, from them, so
particularly as before, registringe both the necessity of the Popes
approbation and confirmation to be such, that the Legates themselves were
enforced to go from hence to Rome to procure it, and returned not hither for a
final settlinge of all things, until the Pope had confirmed and approved them
at Rome.

And this illimitated and supereminent Power, both claimed and exercised by
this holy Pope, was not confined in and with his proceedinges with this
kingedome, so happily converted to the faith by him, but to show himself by
these Protestants, as his his holy predecessors before have been proved by the
same allowance, to be the supreme and highest commander, and governor of the
church of Christ in all places on earth, he generally proceeded accordingly,
making and ordeyninge decrees, for all parsons and places, and times, as these
Protestants thus assure us. (Robert Barnes in vit. Pontif. Romans in Eleutherio.)
Hoc tempore Lucius Britanniae Rex, Christiano caetui cum suis subditis adiungi,
a Pontifice petijt per literas. In this time of Pope Eleutherius, Lucius King
of Britanie desired of the Pope by his letters, that he and his subjects,
might be joined to the Christian company: as though S. Eleutherius then Pope,
by power of that nam and place had such power over the whole company of
Christians, that none that is a king or great prince, on whose public
conversion together with his people, so many matters requiring the consent and
confirmation of the highest Pastor, and supreme Jurisdiction depended, might
be admitted to be a Christian, without the Popes Approbation.

And to confirm this highest power spiritual in him, as in his predecessors
before, they further tell us. ( Rob. Barns. supr.) That generally in the cases
of Bishops, which is the greatest, he decreed that nothing should be defined
in their cases, but by the Pope himself. Accusationem contra Episcopos
intentatam, Episcopos audire permisit: sed vt nihil, nisi apud Pontificem
definiretur, cauet. And again that any priest might appeal from his Bishop to
the Pope of Rome, if the sincerity of the other judge his Bishops was
suspected. Vt nemo Clericum accusatores, pertraheret ad alterius dioecesis
Episcopum, sed accusaret eu^ apud suum Episcopum: Si vero Iudex Clerico
suspectus esset, appellandi facultatem dedit Reo. Where he evidently by these
Protestants makes himself and his Successors in the Sea Apostolic of Rome,
supreme Judge in spiritual things, and reserueth appeals to them in such
affairs from all other Judges.

THE VI. CHAPTER. How this most renowned Pope Eleutherius, did by these
Protestants, and antiquities allowed by them, claim, exercise, and settle
here, for him, and his Successors, as ample prerogative, and Jurisdiction, as
Catholic Schools do, and Catholicques may give to Popes.
ANd because there is great difference between Catholics and Protestants,
concerning some privileges which the former commonly yield, and the second as
usually in England deny unto him, and either of them would be thought to
reverence and embrace the opinion, and practice of that blessed Pope
Eleutherius, and those unspotted times, especially as they are interpreted by
themselves, let us now take counsel and advise of these Protestants their
persecutors in this kind, whether this most blessed Pope Eleutherius, who
so converted this nation, and was so blessed, and worthy a Saint with these
men, was not by their Judgments, and testimonies, as far engaged in this
matter, as Pope Gregory, the fifteenth of that name, now is; or King Lucius
that holy king and Saint, the holy Bishops, and clergy, and all the
Christians of this land, at that time did not give to the Popes of Rome then,
as much in this kind, as any English priest, or Catholic now does, and by
the present Roman Religion may give, and allow to this present Pope, or any
other.

This is evidently proved, and inuincibly made manifest unto us before, not
only by so many our best Antiquities, but generally by the best learned
English Protestant historians, jointly and with an uniform consent, agreeing
in this, that at the settlinge of many Archbishops, and Bishops in this Island,
by the highest Papal power of Saint Eleutherius, by the same also the whole
kingedome of Scotland, with the Northern Islands, were made subject to the
Archbishopp of York, in spiritual things, as I have proved before by the
best historians, Catholics and Protestants which have written of this matter.
Which also agree, that these kingedomes were at that time, long before, and
until the union of them by our present Sovereign king James, not only
distinct, and diverse kingedomes, under diverse kings, laws, and governments,
but ordinarily, as then they were, at open wars, and hostility in civil and
temporal respects; Therefore it was neither King Lucius, who to use the words
of Hector Boethius. ( Scator. histor. l. 5. fol. 83. Godwyn conuers. of
Britanie page 22.23) aggreing with our English Protestants, and others in this,
was but a king by courtesy of the Roman Emperors and their Authority. Lucius
Britonibus Caesaris beneuolentia and authoritate imperitabat. Therefore he
neither had, nor possibly could have his power, and principality extended
further, then that of the Romans was, which went noe further then the wall of
Adrian, which divided the kingedomes, making Scotland a distinct kingedome,
and never subject to the Roman Emperors. Which could not allow to king Lucius
more, then they were Lords and Masters of themselves, for according to that
law maxim, used by many Protestants, and a grownde in the law, and light of
nature it self; Nemo potest plus Iuris in alium transfer, quam ipse habet:
Noe man can give more power to another, then he himself has. For so he
should give that which he has noe right or power to give, beeinge a thing
impossible.

Therefore king Lucius, nor the Roman Emperors, having any power, or right at
all spiritual, or temporal, over the Scots or Britans, or any people then
dwellinge beyond that Wall, in the kingedome now called Scotland, they could
not by any possibility give such spiritual power, to the Archbishop of York
to command in that contrie, nor command the inhabitants of Scotland, in noe
respect subject unto them, to be subject to the Bishop of York, their subject
in temporal respects. Neither did, would or could the kings of Scotland, then
pagans subject, and submitt their people and contry to the Archbishop of york
of an other kingdom, now enemy to them, both in spiritual and temporal
respects. And it is directly against all Protestants professions, confessions,
or churches, that any Protestant Prince or other whosoever clayminge or
pretending supreme spiritual Jurisdiction among them, should challendge or
presume to extend it further, then their temporal ditions and Governments, as
is evident in all places where the new Religion is admitted, as England, the
Low contries, the cantons of Switserland and the rest, where the spiritual
Jurisdiction which they claim, is limited and confined within the circuites of
their temporal Dominions, without any further progress. Parlam. 1. Elizab. 1.
Jacob. Scotic. Confessiones Heluet. Gallic. Saxonia. Belgic.

Therefore this highest supreme directing spiritual power (which established
at that time, and long after, the subordination and subjection of Scotland and
the Islands to the Archbishop of York) must needs by these Protestants, and all
Antiquities, be only peculiar to the Pope of Rome, who and that alone
effected these things: as so many Protestants and others have proved before,
and others from our best antiquities affirm, that all ecclesiastical things
were ordered here, according to the commaundment of Pope Eleutherius that
blessed man. Secundum iussum beati Eleutherij Papae. (Annal. Landaf. apud Io.
Caium l. 1. de antiquit. Cantabrig. p. 90.) Which is an evident demonstration,
that this holy Pope had this supreme spiritual power over all this Island at
that time; for without such a power, these things could not have been
performed. And demonstrateth also, that noe other power on earth, could have
duly performed it, especially any temporal King, Prince, Emperor or
Lieutenant whatsoever, for so, contrary to the names, offices, and powers of
such Rulers, they should be Emperors, Kings, Rulers, Regents and the like
where they have noe Empire, Kingedome, Rule, Regiment, sovereignty or any
subjects, a thing in the light of nature of it self, imployinge
contradiction, and impossible.

And let noe man say, that according unto some, as namely Giraldus
Cambrensis, this Island was divided into five provinces, Britannia prima,
Britannia secunda, Flauia, Maxima, and Valentia, which now is Scotland, and
that there was an Archbishop there. ( Girald. Cambr. l. de Iure Metropol. eccl.
Meneu. apud Park. antiq. Britan. page 24. and Io. Pris. def. hist. Brit.) For I
answer, this division was made long after this, as the twoe last provinces,
Maximia and Valentia prove in their own names. For the same Author says, that
Maximia was so named, of Maximus the Emperor, Maximia. Ab Imperatore Maximo
vocata, and Valentia now Scotland, was so called of Valens the Emperor.
Valentia a Valente Imperaeore sic dicta est. (Girald. Cambr. Parker. and Pris.
sup.) Both which Emperors Maximus and Valens, were long after this time, and
Scotland not under the Romans, to be made a province by them, and besides so
many Protestant Authors and Antiquities before, that there were but only three
Archbishops here at this time, nor after diverse hundreds of years, the
Scottish histories, and all Protestants agree, that Scotland had neither
Archbishops nor Bishops, perhaps long after this time.

The testimonies of these things ar to many to be produced, therefore I will
only instance in the present Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury and his
deputy, in writing the book, Entitled of the Consecration of the Bishops of
the church of England, who speak in this manner: ( Fra^c. Mason epist. dedicat.
and l. 2. c. 3. page 54) The Romans before this time of King Lucius his
receauinge the faith, had divided Britanie into three Provinces, one of them
was called Maxima Caesariensis, the Metropolis whereof was York. An other,
Britannia prima, the Metropolis whereof was London: the third Britannia
secunda, the Metropolis whereof was Caerlegion. And prouinge, besides so many
other Authorities before cited; both by Asseruius Meneuensis schole-master to
King Alfred, Ptolomeus Lucensis in the life of Eleutherius, William Read, (De
vit. Pont. in Eleuther. page 3.) and John Leland, (M.S. Leland. in assert.
Arthur. fol. 36.) that the Archbishops of this Island, were only seated in
those three Metropolitan cities, of London, York, called also Maximia or that
province, whereof it was Metropolis, and Caerlegion. To answer fully this
objection thus they add: Georg. Abb. and Fraunc. Mason supr. page 54.

Although Britanie was after the Nicen. council divided into five Provinces,
Valentia and Flauia Caesariensis beeinge added to the former, yett there were
noe new Archbishopricks erected. The reason whereof was, because those two new
Provinces. ( Notitia Prouinc. Occid. page 117.) were taken out of the former;
and consequently could not have Bishoprics, without the diminishinge of the
authority of the former, in whose Jurisdiction originally they were, which was
not sufferable, because it was against the canon of the Nicen council ( Can.
6.) decreeinge, that in Antioche and in other Provinces, the dignities,
prerogatives, and authorities of churches should be maintained. And for S.
Andrews in Scotland to have been always subject to York, or when York had
noe Archbishop, as at the cominge of the pagan Saxons hither, and driuinge the
Archbishop from thence, to the Pope himself, immediately these Protestants
prove unto us, by the ancient Antiquity called Notitia Prouinciarum, which
they cited before: for in that thus we read: S. Andreae Episcopatus est
Domini Papae. The Bishopric of S. Andrews belongs to the Pope of Rome,
where the Annotation is: olim in Scotia nullas erat Archiepiscopatus, adeoque
Episcopatus Scotiae Domino Papae in spiritualibus immediate suberant, vt in
manuscriptis exemplaribus nostris notatur. In ancient time there was noe
Archbishopps See in Scotland, but the Bishops of Scotland in spiritual
things, were immediately subject to our Master the Pope, as is noted in our
manuscript copies. Notat. Episcopat. in Scotia edit. per Aubert. Miraeum.
Aubert. Miraeus in annot. in illum locum.

Which first immediate subjection to the Pope, and not the Archbishop of York,
did begin but in the time ot King William of Scotland, as Roger Houeden and
others prove, setting down the Popes decretall letters thereof at lardge, but
had continued under the Jurisdiction of York, by the first institution of Pope
Eleutherius a thousand years, and besides the testimonies of many Authors both
late and ancient, Catholics and Protestants, settinge down the whole
proceedinges at lardge, how Pope Clement did only exempt it from the Sea of
York, and subjected it immediately to the Sea of Rome, because of the
continual, all most, wars between these twoe nations. This matter is
publicly confessed and acknowledged by King William of Scotland, and David
his Brother, Richard Bishop of S. Andrews, with others in their public
Charter, in public council in the church of S. Peter at York, as Houeden and
others set down at lardge. Epistol. Clementis Papae ad Guliel Scotorum Regem
apud Roger. Houed. part. histor. in Henric. 2. and epist Papae Caelestini apud
eund. in Richard. 1. and Thom. Walsing. in Eduard. 1. Polydor. Vergil, Angl.
histor. l. 13. l. 9. l. 24. Guliel. Malmesb. l. 3. de Regib. Godwyn Catalog. in
York in George Neuill. Roger Houeden Annal. part. postr. in Henric. 2.

And when Scotland after a thousand years subjection unto the Archbishop of
York by the Popes ordinance, neither was nor could, notwithstanding so many
dissentions between these kings, and nations, be exempted from that
obedience, but by the Pope himself, and yet with this reservation, to be
immediately subject to the Pope of Rome, as the words of the Popes decree thus
testify. (Epistol. Clement. Papae apud Rog. Houed. supr.) Clemens Episcopus
seruus seruoru^ Dei, Charissimo in Christo filio Willielmo illustri Scotorum
Regi praesentis scriptis pagina duximus stastuendum, vt Scotticana ecclesia
Apostolicae sedi, nullo mediante debeat subiacere. Clement to his most beloved
son in Christ William the Renowned king of Scots. We have thought good to
decree by this our present writing, that the church of Scotland, shall be
immediately subject to the Sea Apostolic. So that it is most evident by all
testimonies, that this kingedome of Britanie, was from the first conversion
thereof to Christ, ever subject to the Sea of Rome in spiritual things, as
far as the Pope of Rome now requires, or Catholics attribute unto him.

Which these our Protestants of England, and from Authentical Antiquities, as
they say, will more Amply prove unto us, and in the highest degree of papal
privileges. For they tell us, that king Lucius did not only receive the
Christian faith, Iuridicall direction, and settling of all spiritual and
meerlie Religious affairs, by the authority of the Pope of Rome, but the same
holy Pope, not only with the good likinge and consent of King Lucius, but by
his suite and petition interposed himself, in the ordeyninge alteringe, or
correctinge and settlinge, the very temporal laws themselves in this
kingedome, to govern Rule and direct it, even in civil and merely humane
things, as is manifest in a certain Epistle which these Protestants, with
general consent asscribe to S. Eleutherius himself, written to king Lucius,
as responsory, and satisfactory to some letters, which this king had written
unto him to such purpose, to have temporal laws from him to govern this
kingdom by: Petistis a nobis leges Romanos, and Caesaris vobis transmitti. You
require of us (writes this holy Pope to king Lucius) the Roman Laws, and the
Emperors, to be sent over unto you, which you would practice, and put in
ure, within your Realm: the Roman Laws and the Emperors, we may ever
reprove, but the Law of God we may not; you have received of late through
gods mercy, in the kingedome of Britanie, the Law and faith of Christ. You
have with you within the Realm, both parts of the scriptures, out of them by
gods grace with the council of your Realm, take you a Law, and by that
Law by gods sufferance, rule your kingedome of Britanie, for you be gods
vicar in your kingedome. Epist. Eleutherij Papae ad Lucium Reg. Britan. apud
Fox to. 1. Iuel contra Hard. Franc. Mason l. 2. Godwyn. Conuers. of Brit. page
38. Lambert. in leg. S. Vsuardi. Stow in Lucio.

Thus these Protestants translate that part of that Popes Epistle. Whereby
first it is manifest, That King Lucius now a Christian did not, and in
conscience could not, write for, or absolutely desire the Imperial Laws, the
Emperors then being pagans, and their Laws accordingely mayntaining the
Idolatries of the gentiles, but as they should be moderated and corrected by
the Laws of Christ, which noe man could with more authority and better
perform, then the holy Pope, having then the supreme place in the church of
God. For otherwise he should have been an enemy to Christ, and his law which
he now professed: and being in so high grace, and favor with the Emperor,
and Roman Senate, as these Protestants and other antiquities tell us, he might
and should with far more honor, love and likeinge, have received these Laws
from the Emperor himself, the Senate of Rome, or many Romans here in
Britanie, who then lived according to those Roman and Imperial Laws, then
from Pope Eleutherius, who lived not as those Laws commanded, but so far
otherwise, that he and all the Popes of Rome before, and many after him, were
both persecuted, and putt to death for christian Religion by those laws.

Therefore king Lucius requestinge such Laws from Pope Eleutherius, must
needs hereby acknowledge, that as by sendinge so far unto him, to be
instructed in the faith of Christ, and all such matters spiritual to be
settled and ordered here by his highest power: so in his temporal proceedings
which to be just, and holy must needs have a subordination unto spiritual,
and the judgment over Laws. Whether they are holy just and such as Christians
in conscience and Religion ought to use, and be directed by, is to be made by
them chiefly, who have the greatest knowledged, and command in such cases,
and judgments, which be the governors and Bishops of the church of God, he
thought noe Laws to be vncontrolably warrantable, but such as the chief
pastor of the church of Christ, the Pope of Rome should give validity unto, by
his confirmation and allowance. For among so many Laws, as so ample, and
great a kingedome was to be ruled and governed by, there must needs be many,
which of necessity were thus to be examined by the Law of God, and chiefest
interpreters thereof. Which Saint Bleutherius warned King Lucius of, when he
prescribed unto him, to have his Laws warranted by the scriptures, and taken
forth of them by the council of the Realm, and by that Law to Rule the
kingedome: where it is evident, that he appoints the Law of Britanie to be
conformable to the Law of God, and to be secure it should be such, it to be
enacted and concluded by the best council of his Realm in such things, which
were the Bishops, clergy and learned divines, cheifely which S. Eleutherius
had settled here, for they were the only or principal Interpreters of holy
scriptures here at that time: and others in a manner, concerning such things,
Catechumenes, to be instructed themselves, and not to draw Laws out of
scriptures, to instruct, and direct others. And so a Protestant Bishop with
such public warrant expounds it in these words: By the advice of the
clergy of their dominion. Bridges def. l. 16. page 1355.

And S. Eleutherius taking upon himself, as Pope of Rome, the supreamacy
over the whole church, as these Protestants have told us, cannot by any but
careless or ignorant of truth be interpreted, to give any such preeminence to
a newly become Christian temporal prince, but calls him only the Vicar, or
Vicegerent of God, as all princes Christians and others ar, or should be to
see justice performed to all within their dominions, which is sufficiently
expressed in this very epistle it self, where that holy Pope tells King
Lucius, what is the duty and office of a king, the words by Protestant
translation ar: The people and nations of the kingedome of Britanie is yours,
such as ar divided, you should gather them together to the Law of Christ, his
holy church to peace and concord: and cherish, maintain protect, govern and
defend them from the injurious malicious, and their enemies. A king has his
name of gouerninge, and not of his kingedome, so long you shall be a king,
as you rule well, otherwise you shall not be so named, and loose that name
which God forbid. God grant that you may so rule your Realm of Britanie,
that you may Reign with him euerlastingely, whose Vicar you ar in the said
kingedome. Epistol. Eleuther. apud Godwyn.Conuers. page 23. Fox tom. 1. Stowe
and Hovves histor. in Lucius. Bridge. def. p. 1355. Ieuel. ag. Hard. Lambard. de
legib. Theater of Brit. and others.

Where we see, in what sense this holy Pope called King Lucius the Vicar, or
Vicegerent in his kingdom, to see justice ministered, the church of Christ to
be defended from wrong, and the privileges thereof to be kept inviolable.
Which this holy king most christianly performed, for when all ecclesiastical
matters were settled here by the Popes authority, and these Laws here
appointed for this kingedome, first here concluded, and then with the rest
confirmed by the Pope: cuncta quae fecerant a pontifice confirmari
impetrauerunt: Then this king according to the direction and instructions of
the holy Pope to speak in Protestants own, words: endowed the churches of
Britanie with liberties, Lucius Rex, ecclesias Britanniae libertatibus muniuit.
Which are to many to be related, and ar set down in the British history,
Matthew of Westminster and others. ( Pontic. Virun. lib. 4. in fine. Galf. Mon.
lib. 4. histor. Reg. Britan. cap. 2O. Matthew. Westminster. an. 186. Protest. Annot.
upon Matthew. West. an. 187. Galfrid. Monum. sup. l. 4. Matthew. West. an. 187.)
And in this sense our best British and christian Saxon kings, who were most
obedient ever to the church of Rome, were from that time, and by virtue of that
donation, of Pope Eleutherius, giuinge Lucius the Title of the vicar or
vicegerent of God in his Kingdom, so called and enjoyed that Title as a
Protestant Lawier, and Antiquarie thus deduceth. (Seldom Analect. l. 1. page
40) Ex quo non solum Britannorum, sed ettam Anglorum subsequentes Reges, hoc
nomine vicarij Dei sunt potiti. From which time, or the grant of Pope
Eleutherius, the kings that followed, not only of the Britans, but English
also obtained this name of the vicars of God: and cites the ancient Lawyer
Henry Bracton, for the same. But we need not demurre upon the authorities of
private Lawyers, or Antiquaries for this matter. For we have Laws themselves
of good king Edward, which William the Bastard afterward confirmed (a
Protestant Lawyers or rather the words of the Law, to confirm and warrant
this: Where the very words of the Law thus ancient and confirmed, are these.
Leges S. Eduardi apud Gul. Lamb. fol. 126. page 2. leg. 1. cap. 17. and leg. 77.

Rex autem quia Vicarius summi Regis est, ad hoc est constitutus, vt regnum
terrenum and populum Domini, and super omnia sanctum veneretur Ecclesiam eius,
and regat and ab iniuriosis defendat, and maleficos ab ea euellat, and destruat
and penitus disperdat. Quod nisi fecerit, nec nomen Regis in eo constabit,
verum testante Papa Iohanne nomen Regis perdit. The king because he is the
Vicar of the highest king, is constituted for this to rule the terrene
kingedome and people of God, and above all things he ought to reverence his
holy church, and defend it from injurious people, and to pull from it, and
destroy and wholly ouerthiowe evil doers Which except he performs, the name
of a King shall not be appearinge in him, but as Pope John does wittnes, he
loses the name of a king, or Ruler. Where we see by the public Laws
themselves, that the King is not called the Vicar or Vicegerent of God in
respect of spiritual but temporal affairs, to reverence and defend it, and
suffer noe wrong to be done unto it, or privileges taken from it; which is
more plainly expressed in the same Law in this manner: (leg. S. Vsuardi supr.)
Debet Sanctum Eccesia^ regni suicum omni integritate, and liberate iuxtae
constitutiones patrum and praedecessorem seruare, fouere, manutenere, a king
ought to keep, foster, and maintain the holy church or his Kingedome, with
all integrity, and liberty, according to the constitutions of the Fathers,
and predecessors. Which a king ought to swear in proper parson upon the
ghospels and relics of Saints before the laietie, priests, and clergy, before
he is crowned by the Archbishops and Bishops of the kingdom: hither to this
holy law of our auntie^t kings.

I have insisted upon this Epistle of Pope Eleutherius the longer, because with
Protestants it is in so high esteem, so ancient and certain, that a
Protestant Bishop writes: We have seen the Bishop of Romes own letter to
king Lucius, that is reputed to be the first christian king of Britanie.
(John Bridges def. of the gouernm. in the church of Engl. l. 16. page 1355.)
The Theater writers say, it is in the custody of Sir Robert Cotton Baronet of
Conington in Huntington shire, ( Theater of great, Brit. l. 6. c. 19.) Others
say it is likewise found, in the old history called Brutus. ( Caius antiquit.
Cantab. l. 1.) Stowe writes: I find the same entered in a book entitled,
Constitutions, pertayninge to the Guilde hall of London. (Stovve histor in
King Lucius.) And it is found also among the old Laws of Saint Edward our
king and others before him, and placed and received as a part of our Law,
both by our Saxon kings, and Norman also, as namely king William the first,
as the Protestant publisher of them him else, a lawyer and antiquarie is
witness, with all most all writers, plaerique scriptores omnes, as he
testifies: ( Williel. Lambard. lib. de Prisis Anglorum legib. fol. 1. ante
praef. fol. 126.131.) Therefore I may boldly term Pope Eleutherius the first
Christian Law maker, and first director, and confirmer of Laws in this
kingedome. Which how it can stand to be justly done, as all these our kings,
their nobles, clergies, lawyers and these Protestants auouche, without as
great a preeminent power as the Popes or these times do claim, or commonly
Catholics ascribe unto them, I leave to the quickest sighted Protestants to
distinguish.

And yet this schole of Protestant antiquaries, do read a lesson unto us, to
clymbe a stepp higher in such affairs. For they assure, from the same public
laws or our ancient Saxon and other kings, and from the same Pope
Eleutherius his own donation, that he declared to be annexed to the crown of
this kingedome, all the Islands between us and Norway, and that our kings
should have care thereupon, to enjoy them. The words of that ancient Law by
Protestant publishing, and allowance public ar these: ( Leges Edowardi Regis
c. 17. apud Lumbard. supr. fol. 130 page 2.) Debet de iure Rex omnes terras and
honores, omnes dignitates and iura and libertates coronae regni huius in
integrum cum omni integritate, and sine diminutione obseruare, and defendere,
dispersa and delapidata, and amissa regni iura in pristinum statum, and debitum
virioius omnibus reuocare. Vniuersa vero terra and tota, and Insulae omnes
vsque Norwegiam and vsque Dariam pertinent ad coronam regni eius, and sunt de
appendicys, and dignitatibus Regis, and vna est Monarchia, and vnum est regnum,
and vocabatur quondam Regnum Britanniae, modo autem vocatur Regnum Anglorum,
tales enim metas and fines, and praedictae sunt, constituit and imposuit
coronae Regni Dominus Eleutherius Papa sententia sua, qui primo destinauit
coronam benedictam Britannia, and christianitatem Deo inspirante Lucio Regi
Britonum. The king of right ought with all integrity and without diminution
observe, and defend all lands, and honors, all dignities, and Rights, and
liberties of the crown of this kingedome, wholly, and call back again all the
Rights of the kingdom that be dispersed, dilapidated, and lost, with all his
power unto their ancient and due state. And the whole and all the Land, and
the Islands even to Norway, and Denmark do belong to the crown of his
kingdom, and ar of the Appendicies, and dignities of the king, and it is one
monarchy and one kingedome and it was anciently called the kingedome of
Britanie, and now is called the kingdom of the English men, for our Lord the
Pope Eleutherius did by his sentence co^stitute and appointe such limits, and
bounds to the crown of the kingdom, first sending by the inspiration of God,
a hallowed crown and Christianity to Britanie to King Lucius. Hitherto this
so ancient and public authority and antiquity, now, seeing all writers,
Catholics and Protestants agree, that both S. Eleutherius, which made this
declaration and confirmation of so many Islands and Rights, and King Lucius
which accepted it, was in the like degree, and all our kings so many hundred
years after, many of them holy Saints, which by this declaration esteemed
these territories to be their own, to keep them all, or any of them,
declarer or receauers from horrible and damnable usurpation, as of necessity
by these Protestants we must do, what way is there to end this difficulty,
except we allow, of the Popes Authority in such a declaration.

But to yield a greater, and more ancient honor, and privilege, to this
kingedome, and the kings thereof, then many Protestants, enemies to our
British Antiquities, will allow unto it, not only to comprehend al these
Northren Islands unto Norway, under the name of, Insulae Britannicae, the
British or Britons Island. But that the kingedome of Denmark was subject and
tributary to Britanie, diverse hundreds of years before Christ, and so
consequently the adjacent Islands, which by Ius gentium, belonged to the
Continent, next adioyninge, we shall by this exempt this kingdom from
receiving any thing by a free donation from Pope Eleutherius in this kind,
claiminge by this, that he only adjudged the old Right and Title of Britanie
to be true and lawful in this case, not giving any new prerogative by that
confirmation. Yett this will not exempt either king Lucius from embracinge, or
Pope Eleutherius from assigning and confirminge that division, and preferringe
the Title of king Lucius before the Scots and others, which by their histories
had then enjoyed long time diverse of those Islands, and so we must still
acknowledge that both Eleutherius the Pope, and king Lucius, then thought, the
decision of such things, did in some respect in conscience belong to that See
Apostolic, otherwise neither would the one have made it, or the other sought
for, or accepted it, in that manner, both of them being worthy and renowned
Saints in the church of Christ. M. S. pr. Regnum Britanniae in Gurguntio. Ioh.
Rom apud Stowe in eod. Stowe and Howes histor. in Gurg. an. ante Christ. 375.
Ioh. Lydgate in Cantab. Ioh. Harding Chron. c. 34. fol. 29. 30. Caius Antiq.
Cantab. 1. Matthew. Westminster. aetat. 5. c. 5. Hect. Boeth. hist. Scot. Giral. Ca^b.
ap. Stow. supr. And into the same laborinth we fall, by these men denying power
in the Pope of Rome, to give pardons, or Indulgences to mitigate, or release
the punishments of sins, if we should harken unto them; for they greatly
commend unto us the Epistle ascribed to S. Patrick the Irish Apostle in the
antiquities of Glastenbury, to be of great authority, and yett in this we
read. Quod sanctus Phaganus and Deruuianus ab Eleutherio Papa qui eos miserat,
dece^ annos Indulgentiae impetrarunt. That S. Phaganus and Deruuianus, obtained
of Pope Eleutherius that sent them, ten years of Indulgence for the pilgryms
visiting that holy place, a greater power in the Pope then the other, by these
Protestants. And thus much of this hundred years. Theater of great Britanie
lib. 6. Godwyn. Conuers. of Britanie cap. 2. page 10. Ioh. Leland. in Assert.
Arthur. Antiquitat. Glaston. in tabula lignea. Capgrau. in Catal. in S.
Patricio. and M. S. Antiq. in eodem.

THE THIRD CENTVRIE OR HUNDRED YEAR.
THE VII. CHAPTER. How the Popes of Rome in this third Centurie, or hundred of
years also, by our Protestants and others, ruled and governed here in Britanie
in spiritual things, by their supreme power therein.
NOw having ended this second hundred year, when there was so general an
acceptance of this highest papal Authority in Britanie by the king, his
Nobles, three Archbishops, so many other Bishops, and the noble clergy and
others here, we may be more breife in ages followinge: for it is a common
consent of the Protestant writers of England, that the same faith and Religion
in all material points (such as this is) continued firm and inviolable here
at the least until the cominge of S. Augustine hither in the later end of the
sixth hundred year. And it is a verity granted by all, followinge S. Bid,
susceptam fidem Britannie vsque in tempora Diocletiani Principis inuiolatum
integrumque quieta in pace seruabant. The Britans kept the faith which they
received in the time, of king Lucius, inviolable and whole in quiet peace
until the times of Diocletian. ( Bed. hist. eccles. l. 1. c. 4.) Who did not
begin his Empire, until the year 285. and his persecution long time after
about the year 296. And no man can think, but among so many Archbishops,
Bishops, and clergy men, which together, with the whole christian Religion,
embraced the papal power, lived, and governed the church of Britanie here many
years in this age, in the same manner and order, as it was commended unto them
by the Roman supreme spiritual Authority, of S. Eleutherius and his
Apostolic Legates.

Therefore to be breife, the next Pope which was in the beginning of this
hundred year, Scotland (as hereafter) a great portion of this Island, and then
a distinct great and invincible kingedome, unto the most powerable Roman
Emperors, was converted to the faith of Christ. The very name of this holy Pope
and Martyr carries spiritual supreamacy with it, in all the Christian world,
Asia, Africa, and Europe, by the mouths and pens of all Protestants and
others. A Protestant Bishop for all shall answer in these words. Pope Victor
excommunicated all churches both greek and latin, which differed from his
church, in the observation of Easter. (Morton. appeal l. 1. cap. 9.) Which noe
man can question, but it was the highest act, to have and exercise such power
over all churches, and yett most justly and lawfully, and he a blessed man,
which both a Protestant Archbishopp and his majesty king James shall testify
for all. The church of Rome was then a Rule to all, says our King. (King
James in parlam.) The other says: Victor was a godly Bishop, and a martyr, and
the church at that time was in great purity, not beeinge long after the
Apostles times. (Whitgift Answ. to the admonition p. 80. sect. 4.) Wherefore
King Donalde of Scotland now moved by the example of King Lucius, his
neighboring Sociate in terrene principality, and his whole kingedome, and
being assured by this supreme power spiritual exercised by S. Victor over
all churches, that it was his right, and the surest way in time of
controversies (as that was in the observation of Easter) to adhere unto the
chief and commandinge church of Rome, he sent to this holy Pope, to be
instructed in the faith of Christ, a long paineful and troublesome journey and
labor on both sides, so many Bishops now being in Britanie, France, and in
all places between Scotland and Rome, if kings and kingedomes could have
been converted to the faith of Christ, and matters of the church with them
ordered, without his direction or confirmation. For as truly write the
Scottish historians. Pope Victor sent priests, in extremam Albionem, to the
vttermoste part of Albion, or the vttermoste Albion, to preach the doctrine of
Christ. ( Hector Boeth. l. 5. Scot. histor. fol. 89. p. 2. Boeth. supr. p. 1.
Buchan. Rer. Scotic 1. 4. Reg. 27. Holinsh. histor. of Scotl. in Donald. Ed.
Grymst. p. 20. in Scotl.. 17.) the narration whereof is this.

Talem dederat Donaldo Regi animum, pacis Princeps and author Christus Dominus
quod vera pietati, aspernato malorum demonum cultu, sese paulo ante addixerat.
Nam Seuero Imperante Romany, apud Victorem Pontiscem maximum qui quintus
decimus post Petrum Ecclesiae praefuit, per legatos obtinuit, vt viri, doctrina
and Religione insignes, in Scotiam ab eo missi, se cum liberis and coniuge
Christi nomen profitentes, baptismate insignirent. Regis exempla Scotica
nobilitas sequuta, auersata impietatem, Christique Religionem complexa, sacr^
font est abluta. Fuit annus ille quo Scoti ad lumen vera pictatis, Dei Optimi
Maximi benignitate vocati sunt, and recepti; ab eo qui primus fuit humanae
salutis tertius supra duce^te simum: a Scotorum Regni institutione quingente
simus tricesimus tertius. Christ our Lord prince, and Author of peace, gave
such mind to king Donald, that castinge aside the worship of wicked devils,
he had a little before addicted himself to true piety. For when Seuerus was
the Roman Emperor, he obtained of Pope Victor the fifteenth after S. Peter,
that ruled the church, that men renowned for learning and Religion, sent from
him into Scotland, might baptize him, with his wife and children, professinge
Christ. The Scottish nobility followeinge the example of the king, forsakinge
impiety, and embracing the Religion of Christ, was baptized. This was in the
year of the Incarnation of Christ, two hundred and three, and from the
beginning of the kingdom of the Scots, five hundred thirty and three.

And a little after speakinge of the renowned leardned Christians, of that
time, he adds. Incipere and nostri tum primum, sacras colere literas,
Sacerdotibus praeceptoribus, quos Victor Pontifex Maximus ad Christi dogma
propalandum, in extremam miserat Albionem. At that time our Scottish men first
began to study divinity, having for their Tutors, those priests which Pope
Victor sent to teach the Religion of Christ in Albion, the uttermost country in
this part of the world. And again: nostri qua fide and pietate instituti semel
fuerunt, hactenus erroribus aspernatis, perseuerant. Our contrimen (of
Scotland) persevere at this day (it was written in the year 1526.) in the faith
and piety wherein they were then instructed. ( Hector Boeth. in fine praefat.
Bal. centur 5. in Hector Boeth.) And a Protestant of England in the year 1615.
writteh: Scotland received the faith in the time of Pope Victor the first, in
the year 2O3. Celestin the first sent Palladius thither, to root out the
Pelagian heresy, which began to increase there, under Eugenius the second,
who died in the year 460. since this time the Realm continued long in the
profession of the Romish church, until these later days. (Edward. Grimston.
Book of Estates page 20. cap. 17.) He means the days of this our
Sovereign king James the first of England, and sixth of that kingedome.
Therefore it is a thing without question, that this holy Pope, so earnest for
the spiritual supreamacie of his Apostolic See, settled it with other
doctrines in this Island, where with the rest it still continued until these
times, as these Protestants have declared. Which is evident by all histories,
not any one affirminge, but rather denyinge, that he altered any thing of
that constitution of Pope Eleutherius, submittinge the whole nation of
Scotland, to the Archbishopp of York in spiritual affairs. And if king
Donald and the nobility of Scotland then had not been assured, that this
supreme spiritual power, in disposinge and orderinge church matters, in such
cases, had belonged only to the Popes of Rome, of all people and places in the
world, they would not have appealed to Rome, for those things at that time in
the Empire of Seuerus, when above all others, there was the greatest enmytie
and wars between the Romans and Scots, that ever were testified by all their
histories. Bed l. 1. histor. c. 5. Hect Boeth. lib. 5. Scot. hist. Bucan. Rer.
Scotic. l 4. Holinsh. hist. of Scotl. in seuerus.

In an other point also we are assured, that S. Victor who had by his
highest authority excommunicated so many churches, both greek and latin, as
these Protestants have told us before, for their wrong keeping of Easter,
settled the right observation thereof in Scotland at this time. For to speak
in Protestants words of this Pope: He confirmed the ordinance of Pius,
touching the celebration of Easter upon the Sunday. So did Pope Eleutherius
before him, and so consequently also among other Christian doctrines, by his
legates taught and delivered it here in Britanie. And we are taught by these
learned Protestants, that in the first general council of Nice: De
obseruatione Paschae antiquus canon sancitus est, ne porro in hac re Ecclesiae
variarent: The old canon of the observation of Easter was decreed, least the
churches should afterward differ, about it. ( Ed. Grymston p. 436. in Victor.
Rob. Barnes in vit. Pont. Romans in Victor. Bal. lib. 1. de act. prat. in eod.
Magdeburg. centur. 3. and in Eleuther. Damas. in Eleuther. Barns in Siluestro.
Magdeburg, cent. 4.) And that we had British Bishops there, which consented
to this decree, and received it for Britany, they testify in these terms. (
Theater of great Britanie l 6. cap. 9. page 206 n. 19.) The Britannes
continued constant in christianity, and the censures of their Bishops, for the
great estimation of their constancy, piety and learning, were required, and
approved in great points of doctrine, among the assemblies, of some general
counsels, as that of Sardis (Where appeals to the Pope were decreed) and
Nyce, in the time of great Constantine, we had our Bishops present. And all
men of readinge are assured of this both Constantine the Emperor in his epistle
to the churches, and S. Athanasius in his Apology write plainly, that this
our Britanie received the council of Nice. Epist. Constant. apud Theodoret.
Athanas. Apolog.

Therefore it is a very idle and ignorant conjecture, or rather malicious error
of some Protestants, to seem to write as though Britany had received the faith
from some of the Asiatical churches, because some of the later Scots and
Britans die err in that observation, but this error of the Britans as diverse
have proved already was quite different from that or some part of Asia and
greek. And the first gretian that came hither, except some sent by Roman
Authority, that I find was S. Regulus Albutus borne in Achaia, who came into
Scotland, when Augustinus was king, almost two hundred years after this, and
long after the controversy of keepinge Easter was ended, and brought thither
holy relics of S. Andrew the Apostle, who coming into Pictland, and the same
of this known, very many came to reverence the holy relicques of the Apostle,
and made offerings there, and the king of the picts Hirgustus received by him
with procession and lyinge upon the ground, with much reverence, kissed the
holy relicques, and after mass ended he bequeathed his palace to Saint
Andrew, and to Regulus and the Priests to serve God in. Huius rei fama per
Pictorum regiones delata permultorum animos ad visendas venerandas que sacras
Apostoli reliquias attendit. Confluxerunt ergo illuc vndique donaria Christi
Apostolo pretiosa asserentes. Affuit and Heirgastus Rex eorum, quae fama ad eum
detulerat, visendi cupidas. Venientem ad se Regulus cum sociijs pio apparatu
cum Sacerdotum ac Monachorum religiosa deductione in hymnis and canticis
excepit. Rex humi proenmbens, sacras reliquias multa veneratione osculatus, vbi
sacra Christiano more, curus ipse Heirgustus erat obseruantissimus, erant
peracta, regium palatium amplis structuris ornatum diuo Andreae, Regulo, ac
Sacerdotibus ibidem deinceps Optimo Maximo Deo famulaturis, libere erogauit,
struxit and haud procul a Palatio, sacram aedem diuo Apostolo dicatam: and
builded an other church not far from the palace, dedicated to the holy Apostle.
And thus much of S. Victor.

Next to him succeeded Pope and S. Zepherinus, who to prove he still
maintained this Roman supreamacie, as his predecessors before, over all
Bishopes, Primates, Patriarckes, and whomsoever, or wheresoever of the
clergy, or others, did generally decree as these Protestants tell us. (Rob.
Barns in vit. Pontif. Romans in Zepherin. he calls him seuerus.) Sine Romani
Pontificis authoritate accusatum Episcopum, nec a Primate, nec a Patriarcha,
nec a Metropolitan), in Iudicio condemnandum esse. That a Bishop accused,
should not be condemned, neither by the Primate, nor Patriarcke, nor
Metropolitan, without the authority of the Pope of Rome. By which is evident,
that even the Archbishops themselves of Britanie, to whom all others were
subordinate in things spiritual, were subject to the Pope of Rome at this
time.

Pope Calixtus succeeded next, and to speak in a Protestant Doctors words: (
Powell. 1. of Antichrist. page 130.131.) Calixtus Pope defined, that all
Bishops though gathered in a general council, shall fulfill the will of the
church of Rome. They which do not this are pronounced to keep a conciliable,
and not a council. And to be short in this matter, the Protestants of England
prove unto us, that this business of the spiritual power of that See over all
other churches, is the chief scope of many of their Epistles decretall. ( Rob.
Barns in vit. Vrbani, Antheri. and Dovvnam. lib. 1. Antichristi. cap. 3. page
35.) And to give some particular instances hereof more in Britanie, in this
age: we find in histories. ( Matthew. West. an. 257.258.) that Pope Stephen
about the year of Christ 257.258. or 259. When S.Mellon, then noe Christian,
was sent from hence by public authority to Rome, about the temporal affairs
of this kingedome, converted him to the faith of Christ, made him priest, and
soon after Bishop, exempting him from his civil employments of this his
country, and by his Apostolic power sent him Archbishop to Rhoan in
Normandy. ( Petr. de Not. de vit. 51. Vincent. in. Specul. l. 11. c. 74.
Martyrol. Romans 22. October. Ioh. Capgr. in 5. Mel. M. S. antiq. in eod. and
Catal. Episcop. Rothmag. Matt. West.) And among others our glorious men and
martyrs herein this age, it is the common opinion, that S. Amphibalus who
converted S. Alban. ( Matthew. Paris p. 178.179. Lidg. in vit. eius. Engl.
Martyrol. 25. Iun.) both was a Britan borne, and consecrated at Rome, some say
by Pope and Saint Zepherinus, what and how glorious his history is, for his
preaching and martyrdom with us, all histories of that time are full: and how
renowned he and others of his holy company, sent by that Apostolic See were
at the same time in Scotland, namely Modocus, Pris^us, Calanus, Ferranus,
Ambianus, and Carnonus, both Scottish and English histories will witness. Where
S. Amphibalus was the first Bishop they had, and in Mona the Island: Amphibalus
Brito vir insigni pietate primus Antistes ibi creatus. Hector Boethius Scotor.
histor. lib. 6. fol. 102. Bal. centur. 1. in Amphib. Holinsh. hist. of Scotland
in Chrak^nt. Veremund. apud Boeth. supr.

And so honored was he of that most worthy King of Scotland Chrathlintus,
that to show the honor he yielded to this holy Legate, and his companions,
and somewhat to behold the Religion of that time, the Scottish history thus
speaks unto us. (Hector Boeth. supr. Holinsh. hist. of Scotland in Chrah.)
Chrathlintus Rex sacram Antistitis aedem muneribus ornauit amplissimis,
calicihus, patenis candelabris, alijsque similibus ad sacrorum vsum commodis,
ex argento, auroque fabrefactis, altarique cupro and aere clauso: prouentus ad
ea ex agris in sacrae aedis vicini constituit. Fuit id templum omnium primum,
Christiano ritu, vbi Pontifex sacerque magistratus sedem haberet primariam,
inter Scotos, cuius nostri meminere scriptores dedicatum. King Chrathlint did
adorn the Holy House, of the Bishop Amphibalus, with most honorable gifts,
chalices, patens, candlesticks, and others seruinge for the use of Mass made
of silver, and gold, and an Altar, enclosed with copper and brass, and
appointed revenues for them out of the country adioyninge. That was the first
Christian church where a Bishop and holy magistrate had his chief See, among
the Scots, that is remembered by our writers. Thus were the Bishops and priests
consecrated at, and sent from Rome, honored in this nation at that time. When
we read further the Sea of Rome to have been here in such high honor, that
the British writer, and witness of S. Albans life, living then, writes.
(Compilator vitae S. Albani apud Capgrau. and M. S. antiq. in vit. eiusd.)
Romam proficiscor, vt illic veniam merear delictorum, libellum quoque islum
offeram Examini Romanorum: vt si quid in eo secus quam debuit forte prolatum
fuerit, hoc per cos dignetur in melius commutare. I go to Rome, that there I
may deserve forgiveness of my sins: and I will offer this book to the
Examination of the Romans, that if any thing be uttered therein otherwise then
it should, it may be amended.

And that all spiritual power and jurisdiction then in Britanie, was
subordinate unto, and dependinge of the Popes of Rome, in that time, the
Antiquities and Antiquaries, Protestants and others, both of Cambridge and
other places do plainly testify, who among other evidences for this
matter, produce unto us the ancient Bull of Pope Honorius, dated at Rome the
20. day of Februarij in the year 624. ( Bulla Honorij 1. Papae an. 624.20.
Februar. apud Caium l. 1. de antiquit. Cantabrig. Accad. p. 75 76.77.) Wherein
he affirms that he follows the example of Pope Eleutherius, of whom I
have spoken before: Pope Fabian who lived in this age, and others who beeinge
likewise holy Popes, had done the like which he did toward the university
or school of Cambridge, and concerning his power spiritual over all parsons
in this nation, thus it is.

Honorius Episcopus seruus seruorum Dei, dilectis filijs doctoribus and
scholaribus in vniuersitate Cantabrigiae studentibus Apostolicam benedictionem.
Dilectissimi in Christo filij, no^ absque labor, and plurima perturbatione
didicimus, quomodo nonnulli propriae salutis immemores luporum faucibus, and
vulpina facie, libertates and priuilegia, qua vobis and pradecessoribus in
eadem vniuersitate studentibus gratiose indulsit seeds Apostolica, moliuntur
eneruare: Ita quod plures ecclesiarum praepositi absque rationis Iure minus
just in vos iurisdictionem in. debitam, and insolitam vsurpantes, quamque non
consueuerunt hactenus, ad vniuersitatem vestram accedunt, materiam
perturbationis, and discordiae seminantes, correctionis, emendationis aut
reformationis ibidem officia exercentes, contra inhibitionem sedis Apostolicae.
Volentes igitur, vt tenemur iustitia suadente, paci and tranquillitati
vniuersitatis vestrae paterna sollicitudine salubriter prouidere.
Praedecessorum nostrorum Romanae, Ecclesiae Pontificum, Eleuthery, Fabiani,
Leonis, Simplicij, Felicis and Bonifacij vestigijs debite inhaerentes,
authoritate omnipotentis* Dei districtius inhibemus, sub poena
excommunicationis, quam veniens in contrarium ipso facto incurrat, ne quis
Archiepiscopus, aut eorum officiales, seu visitatores generales aut speciales a
Sede Apostolica deputati, audent in aliquem vestrum suspensionis vel
excommunicationis, seu interdicti sententias infer, aut vos familiares
vestros molestare praesumat.

Honorius Bishop, servant of the servants of God, to his beloved sons the
doctors and scholars of the university of Cambridge sends Apostolical
benediction. We have learned not without labor and much sorrow, most
beloved sons in Christ, how some unmindful of their own salvation, like
greedy wolves, and craftly foxes go about to weaken or euacuate the liberties
and privileges which the Sea Apostolic has granted graciously to you, and
your predecessors students in the same university. So that many Rulers of
churches without right of reason, usurping, unjustly over you undue
jurisdiction, and unaccustomed, and which hitherto they have not used, come to
your university, sowing matter of trouble, and discord, exercising there the
offices of correction, emendation, or reformation, against the inhibition of
the Sea Apostolic. We therefore willing, as we are bound by justice
persuadinge it, with a fatherly care safely to provide for the peace, and
quietness of your university, duly followinge the steps of our predecessors,
Popes of Rome, Eleutherius, Fabianus, Leo, Simplicius, Felix and Bonifacius, by
the authority of almighty God, do strictly forbid under pain of
excommunication ipso facto be incurred by the contrary doer, that noe
Archbishop, or their Officials, nor the visitors general or special deputed
from the Sea Apostolic, shall dare to inflict the sentences of suspension or
excommunication, or interdiction, against any of you, or presume to molest you,
or your servants.

By which it is evident, that in this age the Popes of Rome, exercised the
highest spiritual jurisdiction in this kingdom, limited (as they thought good)
the power of Bishops, and Archbishops, subiecting them to their ce^sures, and
made exemptions from them, and all others, except the Sea of Rome it self, and
had their visitors here to such purposes, except these Protestants do deceive
us. Which further testify, that this Pope Fabian, in that time miraculouslie
chosen Pope, and living and dying an holy Saint, made diverse decrees, generally
bindinge all Christians as: That every Christian should communicate thrice a
year, that is to say, at the feasts of Easter, whitsonday, and the birth of
our Savior, that priests should not be punished in profane courts. And the
like. Ed. Grymston. in Fabian. Pope. Rob. Barns l. de vit. Pontif. Romans in
Fabiano.

THE FOVRTH CENTVRIE OR HUNDRED YEAR.
THE VIII. CHAPTER. Wherein is proved likewise by the Protestant divines, and
Antiquaries of England, that the Popes of Rome, ever claymed and exercised,
this their highest power here in this Age.
NOw we are come to the fourth hundred year, in the beginning whereof,
Diocletian the persecutinge Emperor dyinge, although he had put even in this
Island, diverse thousands of Christians to death, and one thousand in one time
and place, Lichfeild, ( Theater of great Brit. l. 6. Stowe histor. in the Romans
in Coill.) (taking thereupon the name of a Field of Blood:) yet he was so
far from extinguishinge the name of Christ, that we had a continual
succession at that very time of Bishops, priests, religious, and other clergy
men, without intermission deudced from this Roman institution in this
kingedome. And this testified by the best Antiquities we have, S. Gildas, S.
Bid, and allmoste all after them both Catholics, and Protestants. ( Gildas l.
de excid. and conquet. Brit. cap 8.) The words of Saint Gildas ar these, as
Protestants publish him.

Bilustro supradicti turbinis necdum ad integrum expleto, emerces^entibusque
nece suorum Authorum nefarijs decritis, laetis luminibus omnes Christi Tyrones
quast post hyemalem ac prolixam noctem, temperiem lucemque serenam aurae
celestis excipiunt, renouant ecclesias ad solum vsque destructas, Basilicas
Sanctorum Martyrum fundant, construunt, persiciunt, ac velut victricia signa
passim propalant, dies festos celebrant, sacra mundo cord, oreque conficiunt,
omnes exultant filij gremio ac si matris ecclesiae consoti. When ten years or
the said persecution were not wholly expired, and the wicked decrees were now
void by the death of their Authors, all the souldiars of Christ with joyful
countenance, as it were after a winter long night, receive the temper and
clear light of the heavenly air, they renew their churches destroyed even to
the ground, they build churches of the holy martyrs, frame, and perfect them,
and as it were publicly set forth every where their victorious Ensigns,
they celebrate holy days, they perfect their sacrifices, or sacred things with
a clean heart, and mouth, they all do rejoice, as it were children fostered in
the lap of their mother the church.

The very same has S. Bid who adds ( Bed. histor. Eccl. l. 1. cap. 8.)
Progressi in publicum fideles Christi, qui se tempore discriminis, siluis ac
desertis, abditisque speluncis occultauerant. The faithful servants of Christ
show themselves now in public, who in the time of the danger had hidd
themselves in woods, and wildernesses, and hidden dens. And then he writes as
S. Gildas before. By which public and hierarchicall Acts and offices of
Bishops, and priests, as founding and dedicatinge churches, to the honor of
holy Martyrs, that had late suffered in that persecution, in institutinge and
celebratinge their festiuities, renewing and consecrating other defaced
churches, which none but Bishops might do, and saying Mass, which he
expressly by perfecting their sacrifices or sacred rites, with a clean heart,
and mouth, the preistly office and function, it is most evident, that diverse
both priests and Bishops, with other clergy men escaped in this persecution,
and so still continued the hierarchicall succession or Archbishops and
Bishops, so universally established here before by the Popes of Rome, and with
the same dependence which they had before. For noe history makes mention, of
any change, neither of our Bishops then putt to death, except S. Amphibalus,
unless we will conjecture without warrant, that S. Angulus suffered martyrdom
in this time. And notwithstanding so many losses, and desolations of our
Antiquities, we have testimony of some Bishops in particular then living, the
persecution being ended.

For who can think but some of those. which fledd into Scotland, whether the
persecution extended not, with S. Amphibalus, remained there still in the
Episcopal See of Mona, which king Chrathlinte, had so honorably endowed to
that purpose, and long after was an Episcopal See? I have named diverse of
these renowned men before, of whom some one in all probability after the
return of Saint Amphibalus into these parts, supplied that place and dignity
there. And here in England it is evident by those antiquities we have left,
that we had preserved from the fury of that persecution, many both Bishops,
and Archbishops. To exemplify in London, we have the names of Sixteen
Archbishops there, before the cominge of S. Augustine hither, as both Iocelin
of Furnes, the Protestants, Stowe, Godwyn and others collect them. ( Iocelin
Catalog. of British Bish. Stowe histor. in Lucius. Godwyn. Catalog. in London,
1. council. Arelat. in Subscript. tom. 1. council. Stowe and Godwyn supr.) And it
is manifest that either Restitutus which was Archbishop of London, and was
present at the council of Arles in France, in the year 326. soon after this,
or Thedred, or Hillary supposed to be his immediate predecessors, was then
Archbishop. And so because every Archbishop infers inferior Bishops under
him, that we had Bishops also. I will instance only in Winchester, where we
ar informed both by an old Manuscript Author, and a new Protestant Bishop. (
Godwyn Catalog. of Bish. in Winchest. 1. old M. S. apud eundem supr.) That one
Constans was Bishop there in this time, and in the year 309. or 310. did upon
the 15. day of march, hallowe and dedicate unto the honor and memory of S.
Amphibalus, that had suffered death for Christ in the late persecution, a
church there reedified with such wonderful forwardnes and zeal, as within one
year and thirty days, both it and all the edifices belonginge unto it, were
quite finished in very seemly and convenient manner. And that Deodatus was
Abbot of this new erected Monastery. Thus this Protestant Bishop from an old
Manuscript.

By which, and that which is spoken before in this chapter, it is evident, that
England this part of Britanie then had both Bishops, and Archbishops
continuinge in the same order and manner as they were first instituted here by
the Sea of Rome: neither did they now begin to depart or separate themselves
from obedience to that See Apostolic; for soon after this, the first general
council of Nice beeinge called, these Protestants have told us, we had Bishops
there, and most evident it is, that it was received in this kingdom. And yet
the canon of that council is so manifest for the Popes of Rome supreamacy, at
the least over this western world, wherein England is, both in the time of this
holy council, and before, that a Protestant Bishop does thus confess it. (
Field. l. 3. p. 60.61.) In the time of the Nicen council, and before, as
appears by the Acts of the council limitinge their bounds, there were three
principal Bishops, or Patriarchs of the christian church: namely the Bishop of
Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch. So writes the Protestant Archbishop Whitgift,
Fox and others, whereof one says. (Whitgift def. of the Answ. p. 331. Fox
tom. 1. page 12. Rob. Barns in vit. Pont. Romans in Siluestro.) Sollicitudinem
ecclesiarum, pro recepta consuetudine veterum habendam esse statuerunt. The
fathers of the nicen council did decree, that according to the custom
received from them of old, that the three chief patriarchs of Rome, Antioch,
and Alexandria, should have chardge of the churches.

So that if we would seek noe further then to these great enemies themselves
of the Roman See, yett they confess unto us, that it was not only decreed in
this nicen council, where, as our Protestants have told us, we had Bishops
consentinge, and our king and contriman Constantine the great Emperor also
submittinge himself unto it, but that it was the old custom and tradition of
the church, that the Bishop of Rome was the principal Bishop, and commaundinge
Patriarch of all western churches, among which this of our Britanie was ever,
now is, and of necessity must be one, and if we will be members of the
church of Christ, except we can remove Britanie from the uttermost part of
Europe, to lepp to Alexandria in Afric, or Antioch in Asia, we must needs by
this council as it is glossed by our Protestants, be subject to Rome, as we
ever were by the old custom before that council. The words of these
Protestants Whitgift and Fox are these. ( Whitgift Def. page 331. Fox tom. 1.
page 12.) The council of Nice which was the year of our Lord 340. and in the
sixth canon of the said council we find it so decreed, that in every
province, or precinct some one church or Bishop of the same, was appointed and
set up, to have the Inspection and Regiment of other churches about him,
secundum morem antiquum, that is after the ancient custom, as the words of
the council do purport. So that the Bishop of Alexandria should have power
of Libia, and Pontapolis, in Egypt, for as much as the Bishop of Rome has the
like or same manner.

Therefore seeing there is none named either by the council, or custom
related by that council, but the Bishops of Rome, Antioch, and Alexandria to
have this high Regiment and power over the churches, we must needs adhere and
appeal to Rome by these men, as we ever did by the old custom from the
beginning of our first life in Christ: otherwise we shall fall into errors
and conclude inualidate things even in the highest matters, these men assuringe
us, that at this time there were but three chief Metropolitan churches before
recited, and that to use their words. ( Whitgift def. page 359.) The church of
Rome is called all that is subject to the Bishop of Rome: And ( Whitgift
Answer to the Admonit. cap. 2.17. division.) that notable and famous council
of Nice must be, and is of all wise and learned men next unto the scriptures
themselves reverenced, esteemed and embraced, in the sixth canon of that
council it is thus written: This council does determine him to be noe
Bishop, which is made without the consent Metropolitani Episcopi, of the
Metropolitan. Which chief Metrotropolitane to us then as these men have told
us, was the Bishop of Rome; so that it is evident by them, that we could not
here have any Archbishop, or Bishopp mane without his allowance.

And yett these our Protestant Bishops (...) Doctors must needs eleuate this
power spiritual higher, then to make it only chief over Britanie, those West
nations and Europe, and give, it the highest place in the whole church of
Christ, for so all that can be pretended by these Protestants, to have had
interest in such things at that time, whether the Pope himself S. Siluester
and others, our king and Emperor Constantine, or the Bishops of Britanie, and
other nations; for all these in those days acknowledged the Supreamacy in the
Roman See over all churches. S. Siluester Pope with the consent, and
Subscription of the Emperor Constantine his Mother S. Helena, and 284. western
Bishops, and 45. priests, decreed. ( Council. Roman. su^ Syluestro can. 20. to.
1. Council.) Nemo ^uduabit primam sedem: quoniam omnes seeds a priuia sede
desider^nt temperari, neque ab Auguste, neque ab omni clero, neque a Regibus,
neque a populo Indox indi. abitur. Noe man shall judge the chief See (of
Rome): because all Sees desire to be governed by the chief See. The judge
(Pope of Rome) shall not be judged, neither by the Emperor, nor by all the
clergy, nor by kings, nor by the people. Where we see the Pope of Rome to
be by all consent the highest judge, and subject to noe others judgment,
whosoever. The honor and reverence which Constantine yielded to Saint Siluester
then Pope, is sufficiently known by Eusebius in his life and others. ( Eusebius.
de vita Constantini.) I will only exemplify by the warrant of an english
Protestant Bishop, how this great duty and Reverence of him to that holy
Pope, and endowinge that Apostolic See with honor and riches, was such, that
it was long before foretold by an Angel from heaven, to S. Blasius. saying (
l. 1. de Act. Romans Pontif. in Syluestro.) That in the time of Constantine,
Idolatry should cease by his means, and this Constantine for his honor to the Sea of Rome, should translate the seat of his Empire from thence, into
Thracia, and there settle it at the mouth of the River Bosphorus, and leave
Italy and Rome to the Pope, Christ's vicar there. Adueniet Princeps, sub quo
pacabitur orbis: and finem accipiet veteram cultura deorum. Constantinus apud
Thraces, qua Bosphorus aequor Thracius Euxinis Aegaeum ingurgitat vndis,
constituet sedem Imperij: latiumque relinquet Christo and Romuleam septem in
collibus vrbem.

Now for the Bishops of Britanie there can be noe question, but they gave this
primacie to S. Siluester: for first it is most probable some of them were
present at this Roman council, so great, consistinge of the western Bishops.
Secondly in all Judgments they must needs acknowledge this supreamacy either in
the Pope, or Emperor; But not the Emperor which yielded it to S. Siluester.
Thirdly because the next Pope Saint Mark, who was Pope but three years,
claimed for the Roman See to be, matter omnium ecclesiarum, the mother of all
churches, and privileged from heresy. ( Marcus epist. ad Athanas. and caeter.
Egipti Episcopos.) And as these Protestants tell us, his successor S. Julius
appointed appeals to the Sea of Rome, and taught noe council could be kept
lawfully without his consent. (Rob. Barns in vita Pontif. Roman. in Iulio.) And
two other Protestant Bishops speaking of this time affirm: The cano^ of the
primative church made every thing void that was done without the Bishop of
Rome. (Bilson true differ. page 66.67.) And again: The canon of the primative
church forbad any council to be called, without his consent. (Morton Appeal
page 286.) And to make all sure in this matter, that the whole clergy of
Britanie and Christians under them, at this time attributed this spiritual
supreamacie to the Pope of Rome, our Protestants have told us before, which
ancient Authorities also affirm ( Theater of great Britanie l. 6. Sulpit.
Sever. sacr. histor. lib. 2. Athan. apol. l. 1. cont. Ar. Council. Sardic. can.
4.7.) that we had of this nation diverse Bishops in the general council of
Sardis, a city of Lydia in Asia with 300. Bishops; and therefore this kingedome
with the rest, acknowledged the supreamacie of the Pope of Rome in all places,
and that Appeals were to be made to him as highest judge.

And whereas the council of Arles in France in the time of S. Siluester, in
the subscription of the Bishops there, many Protestants and other Antiquaries
assure us, ( Council. Arelat. in subscript. Theater of Brit. lib. 6. Stow
histor. in Lucius. Godwyn. catalog. in London. 1.) that Restitutus our
Archbishop of London was present there, and subscribed for this nation, that
place beeinge so remote from London, we must needs say, that he was called
thither by the Pope of Rome, or do that, which never any yett would allow, to
grant a superiority unto the Bishops of France over them of this kingedome.
And so for those our Bishops which were at the council of Ariminum in this
time, for noe others meddled in these affairs in those days. Which we are
further taught by the Example of our holy Bishop S. Ninian, ( Capgrau. in
Catal. in Ninian. Bed. hist. Anglic. Theater of great Britanie. lib. 6. Bal.
centur. 1. de script. in Niniano Bernini.) who toward the later end of this
centurie of years, was made Bishopp at Rome by the Pope there, and by him sent
Apostle to the Western parts of Britanie, to people there which had not yett
received the faith of Christ. Where he converted the nation of the Picts,
preached the gospel through the contryes of the Britans, Scots, and Picts,
ordained there priests, consecrated them Bishops, and divided the contry into
parishes, as both Catholics and Protestants are witnesses. Audicus Pontisex
Romanus quosdam in occiduis Britanniae partibus necdum fidem Christi
suscepisse, ad Episcopatus gradum Ninianum consecrauit. Concreditum a Deo
talentum per Britannorum, Scotorum, australium Pictorum terras, ad senium vsque
latissime profudit. Ordinauit presbyteros, Episcopos consecrauit, and totam
terram per certas parochias diuisit. And living in this preachinge until he
was very old, as a Protestant Bishop writes, ( Bal. centur. 1. in Ninian.
Palladio Patricio.) he died in the year of Christ 432. before which time S.
Palladius, S. Patricius, SS. Germanus and Lupus were sent hither by S.
Celestine Pope of Rome. And yett that he came hither in the fourth century, it
is evident: for in his cominge hither from Rome, he came by S. Martin Bishopp
of Tours, in France as Capgraue and others writ, ( Ioh. Capgr. in S.
Ninian.) and yett by Sigebert and others, S. Martine died within the first 400.
years. ( Sigebert. in Chronic. ad an. 399.) In which time also we had
Coelius Sedulius of this nation, scholar (as a Protestant Bishop writes) to
Hildiberthus a learned Bishop of Scotland, ( Ioh. Bal centur. 1. in Coel.
Sedul.) after whose death he travailed many nations for learning sake, as
Spain, France, Italy and Asia, and beeinge excellently learned returned to
Rome, where he long time continued, and was so learned holy and grateful a
man to the Popes of Rome, that Pope Gelasius (to use the Protestants words) in
the decrees distinct 15. calls him, venerable Sedulius, and much prayseth his
writings.

Neither can we think otherwise of his Master, Bishop Hildibertus, of whom
he was instructed, and directed in these courses. And this Sedulius himself
also was a Bishop, as both Sigebertus, and Bostius our contryman, and the
Protestant Bishop Bale from them, are witnesses. ( Sigebertus and Bostius apud
Bal. centur. 1. de Script. in Coel. Sedul.) In which time also lived S. Kebius
our Cornish Bishop, successor, though perhaps not immediate, to S. Amphibalus
in the Bishopric of Mona. ( Ioh. Capgrau. in S. Kebio. Harpesf. histor. page
26. Pits. in Kebio.) Who lived long time with S. Hilary Bishopp of Poicters
in France, that worthy pillar of the true Catholic faith, and honor of the
church of Rome, and Successor of Saint Peter there, that he calls him. (
Hilar. ad Psalm. 131. and in Matthew. can. 16.) Ecclesiae fundamentum, caelestis
Regni Ianitor, cuius arbitrio aeterni aditus traduntur, cuius terrestre
iudicium praeiudicata authoritas sit in coelo: Foundation of the church, porter
of the kingedome of heaven. The happy foundation of the church, the blessed
porter of heaven, to wose will the eternal passadges are committed, whose
judgment on earth is preiudicate authority in heaven.

Such a tutor, pedagoge, and consecrator also had this our happy contryman
Saint Kebius, in those turbulent heretical times of the Arrians, and their
opposition against the Roman church, a great means by this our holy Bishop,
S. Restitutus, Fastidius, Priscus, our Archbishops then, and other godly
Bishops of this nation, to preserve this kingedome in the true faith, and
obedience to the Pope of Rome, in so much that S. Hilarie himself, ( lib. de
Synodis aduersus Arr.) commends the Bishops of Britanie for the sincerity in
those times, to their eternal honor. He dyed, as our Protestants write, in
the year of Christ, 370. And in this age also was that renowned S. Vrsula,
with her glorious company of Bishops, other clergy men, Virgins and others,
as those Protestants ar witnesses, who as both Ptolomaeus Lucensis, Capgraue,
the Antiquities of Collene, and the German histories testify ( Baleus centur.
1. in Vrsula. Cynosura an. 390. Stowe histor. an. 394. in Theodosius.
Martyrolog. Roman. die 21. and 22. October. and Beda hac die and Vandelbert.
Baron. in annot. Ptolom. Lucens. in S. Vrsula. Capgrau. in S. Vrsula. and
Annal. Coloniens. etc.) made that their most holy pilgrimadge to Rome, and at
their return received the crown of Martyrdom at, or near Cullen in
Germany, where, as also in the whole Christian world, and both to their honor
and the glory of our country, they are celebrated in the most ancient
Martyrologes, in which sacred company, as Capgrauius and diverse others
testify, there were many Bishops of this kingedome, as namely Willielmus or
Michael, Columbanus Ywanus, Eleutherius and Lotharius. Which I rather name,
that we may know, how this kingedome at that time, both was so replenished
with Bishops, that it might spare so many to be sent from hence, with those
holy Virgins, and to give evidence how devoted and respective, the Bishops and
clergy, with the rest of the Christians of this kingedome, were toward the Sea of Rome, in these days.

THE FIFTE CENTVRIE OR HUNDRED YEAR.
THE IX. CHAPTER. Shewinge by these Protestants of England, how both the Popes
highest spiritual power, was still here continued, and a perpetual succession
of our Bishops and Clergy also in Britanie from the Sea of Rome, as in the
other Ages before.
NOw we are come to the fifth Century, in the beginning whereof the first
Fathers of Heresy, and Opposers against the holy Apostolic See of Rome, which
I find to have been of our British nation, were the monstrous rebellious
Heretics Pelagius and Timotheus, not that I find them more formally and
directly opposite to the Sea Apostolic then other Heretics were, but as the
nature and necessity of heresy is, to be ever contrary and disobedient to
their chief judge, and commander in such cases, the Pope of Rome, with
councels assembled: for as our Protestants tell us, diverse Popes of Rome both
by themselves, and in councels had condemned Pelagius for an heretic, and
yett he obstinately persisted in his condemned errors. Innocentius the first
condemned, Pelagius the monk, and Coelestius of heresy, for preferringe free
will before the grace of God, and said the vvil of man by it self, was
sufficient and able to fulfill the commandments of God, and took away the
necessity of Baptism and faith in Christ. (Rob. Barns in vit. Pont. Rom in
Innocent. Bal. centur. 1. de Scriptorib. in Pelagio heresiarcha) Innocentius
primus Pelagium monachum, and Coelestium haereseos damnauit: quod liberu^
arbitrium gratiae Dei praeferrent, dicerentque voluntate^ per se sufficere, ad
implenda Dei ma^data, praesul ordinatus Pelagius sui nominis haeresim
fabricabat, asserens hominem sine peccato nasci, ac solo voluntatis imperio
sine gratia saluari posse, vt ita nefarius baptismum ac fidem tolleret.
Pelagius after he was made a Bishopp, framed an heresy of his name,
affirminge that man was borne without sin, and by the only command of his
will, without grace by Christ, might be saved, that the wicked man might so
take away both baptism and faith.

Pope Sozimus also, as these men tell us, condemned this heretic, and to use
their words. (Rob. Barnes sup. in Sozimo Papa.) That Sozimus might declare,
that nothing was in any place ratified, that was done in holy things, except
it were done by the Popes authority, he sent Faustinus a Bishop, and two
priests, to the council of Carthadge. The decrees of the council were brought
to Pope Sozimus, which beeinge by him approved, the Pelagian heresy was
condemned every where. Vt Sozimus declararet, nihil vsquam ratum fore, quod in
rebus sacris ageretur, nisi id Romani Pontificis authoritate fieret, Faustinum
Episcopum, and duos presbyteros, ad Cathaginensem Synodum misit. Synodalia
decreta ad Sozimum perlata sunt: quibus approbatis, Pelagiana haeresis passim
damnata est. Thus we see by these Protestants, that the Popes of Rome, even in
this time, when they were most afflicted, and Rome it self taken, and sacked
by Goths, in the time of this Pope, (Barns supr,) beeinge Pope but one year
3. months and twelve days, Sozimo Pontifice, Roma a Gothis capta est: They
still exercised and practiced this highest spiritual power in all places, even
in Africa, as these Protestants assure us, and not only in Europe where our
Britanie is: In which they showed, and exercised this their highest supreamacy
in many and diverse matters in that time.

And first in this Business of Pelagius, the monk or Abbot of Bangor, in Wales;
Thus writes a Protestant Bishop with consent of Antiquities. ( Bal. centur. 1.
de Scriptor. in Palladio Graeco. Hector Boeth. hist. Scotor. l. 7. fol.
132.133. Holinsh. histor. of Scotland. Ed. Grymston cap. Relig. of Scotland
page 20. Prosper. in Chronico.) Palladius Graecus a Caelestino Romanorum
Pontifice Antistes mittebatur, vt Pelagianam haeresim, quae tunc magnam
Britanniae partem inquinauerat, a Britannorum gente arceret, atque Scotorum
populum ad veram pietatem, a qua continua bellorum atrocitate paulum aberrarit,
rite reduceret. Hunc ferunt concionibus pijs a quibusdam gentilium
superstitiu^culis ecclesias illas purgasse, atque ob id in hodiernum vsque
diem, Scotorum Apostolus appellatur. Palladius a Grecian was by Celestine Pope
of Rome, sent a Bishop, to drive from the nation of the Britans, the Pelagian
heresy, which then had defiled a great part of Britanie, and rightly to reduce
the Scots to true piety, from which by the continual cruelty of wars they
had erred. The saying is, that with his godly sermons, he purged those
churches from some superstitions of the gentiles, and so is to this day called
the Apostle of the Scots. Here we see it first left to the Popes Judgment,
what was heresy to be condemned, what was error to be recalled, superstition
to be reformed, and in his power spiritual (the temporal Roman then having
nothing to do in any part of this Island) to assign, and send a BiBishop, and
Apostle to that nation, which was never subject, either in temporal respects,
to the Roman Emperors, who so performed the highest sacred duties, and
authority in that church, that, as before, and by all writers he is called.
Scotorum Apostolus, the Apostle of the Scots: as justly he deserved it,
settling all things there, by his legatine power, making a Bishop, an
Archbishop, and the like matters of greatest Jurisdiction, as namely S.
Seruanus Bishop of the Orchads, and S. Teruanus Archbishop of the Picts,
Palladius Seruanum Episcopum ad Orchadas Insulas missum, vt Populum rudem
christiana pietate institueret, creauit, and Teruanum quem Infante^ lustrico
lauerat font, Pictoru^ Archiepiscopum constituit. Palladius created Seruanus a
Bishopp, and sent him to the Orchads Islands, to instruct the rude people, in
the christian faith, and he appointed Teruanus, whom he baptized when he
was an Infant, to be Archbishop of the Picts. Hector Boeth. hist. Scotor. l.
7. folio 133. page 1. Georg. Buchan. Rerum Scoticar. l. 5. Rege 42. page 146.
Polidor. Verg. hist. Anglic. l. 3. page 58.59.

Thus the Scottish histories teach us. By which it is evident, that the whole
state of the church of Scots, and Picts also, was then settled by the
Authority of this Roman Legate, and that the other Governors which he
appointed in it, were also sent from Rome, for, if Teruanus whom he appointed
Archbishop of the Picts, was baptized when he was but an Infant, as these
Scottish historians tell us, he was baptized at Rome or those parts where S.
Palladius then lived, and not in this kingdom, where it is confessed by all
antiquities, that S. Palladius lived a very short time. And S. Teruanus
beeinge made by him an Archbishopp among the Picts, it both informs, that
there were other Bishops there under him, else he could not be Archbishop,
chief of the Bishops there; and makes probable, that S. Ninian, who as a
Protestant Bishop writes, ( Bal. cent. 1. in Ninian. Bernic.) died about this
time, was also Archbishopp there, and now dyinge Teruanus was by Palladius his
legatine power ordained his successor: or that both these were Archbishops of
York, so appointed by the Sea of Rome, and named Bishops of the Picts,
because they with other provinces, were subject to the Archbishops See of
York, a subordination neither altered by S. Celestine or any other Pope until
such time, as I have before declared, except in such extraordinary cases, of
special legates sent immediately from Rome, with chief authority, such as S.
Palladius was, who by that prerogative exercised this jurisdiction
extraordinarily, in consecrating and instituting Bishops, within the limitts of
the Metropolitan of York, which ordinarily belonged unto his See, by the
order of Pope Eleutherius from the beginning of our public receiving of the
faith of Christ. And the same care and chardge which S. Celestine then Pope of
Rome took of the Scots, and Picts, at this time, the same also he had, and
as chief pastor performed, both to this kingedome of Britanie, and Ireland
also.

Concerning Britanie, these Protestants assure us, that when Pelagius was dead
before, and his heresies by many Popes and counsels condemned, yett it being
maintained here by Leporius Agricola, a very learned Heretic. ( Bal. centur.
1. de scriptor. in Leporio Agricola and l. 2. de Act. Pontif. Romans in
Celestino. Rob. Barns l. de vita Pontif. Roman. in Caelestin.) That Saint
Palladius of whom I have spoken, the Popes Legate in Scotland, informed S.
Celestine Pope hereof, who therevppon sent the twoe french Bishops, Germanus
and Lupus hither to strengthen the Britans in the true doctrine of heavenly
grace, and to confute the wicked doctrine of the sufficiency of man's works
without the grace of Christ. Quod per Palladium audie^s Caelestinus Pontifex
Romanus, Germanum Antissiodorensem, and Lupum Tracafessum, Gallicanos Episcopos
illuc misit vt Britannos, in fide gratiae caelestis solidarent, and impiam
atque Hipocriticam humanorum operum doctrinam confutarent. And that we may be
fully informed, that S. Celestine the Pope did not send these two holy Bishops
into Britanie only to suppress the pelagian heresy, but to supply the
spiritual wants in this kingdom, this Protestant Bishop and greatest enemy to
the Sea of Rome, will tell us more plentifully, where he describes that holy
Pope and his doctrine in this manner. (Balaeus l. 2. de act. Pontif. Romans in
Coelestino. Robert. Barns in vit. Pont. in Coelestino.) Caelestinus Campanus,
Introitum graduale, Responserium, tractum, and offertorium papisticae missae
inseruit: atque vt Sacerdotes pontificum Canones scire^t, arcte praecepit.
Germanum in Britanniam, Palladium in Scotiam, and Patricium cum quodam Segetio
in Hiberniam, vt pelagianas haereses extirparent, Episcopos misit, obijtque
anno Christi 435. Confessorum numero asscriptus. Pope Celestine borne in
Campania, did put to the Papisticall mass the introite, graduale, responsorie,
tract, and offertorie; and straightly commanded, that priests should know the
canons of the Popes, he sent Bishops, Germanus into Britanie, Palladius into
Scotland, and Patricke with one called Segetius into Ireland, to root out the
Pelagian heresies. And he died in the year of Christ 435. in the number of
Confessors.

An other interpretinge this addition he made to the mass, says. (Barns
supr.) In initio sacrificij, vt Psalmus Iudica me Deus and discern causam meam
etc. a sacrificaturo diceretur, ordinauit. Graduale in missa ordinauit, vt
Sacerdotes canones sacros tenerent, praecepit. Pope Celestine ordained, that in
the beginning of the sacrifice, when a priest was to sacrifice, he should say
the psalm which begins, Judge me o God, and discern my cause etc. he did
order the graduale in the Mass, and commanded that priests should understand
or keep the holy canons as before. And the Protestant Archbishopp Whitgift. (
Whitg. Answer to the Admonition page 44. sect. 1.2.) Speaking of this holy
Pope writes: Celestine was a godly Bishop, and the church of Rome at that
time, had the substance of the Sacraments: according to gods word: neither was
there any superstition mixed with them, the Introite that he appointed, was
one of the psalms. The like has Master Fox, ( Fox tom. 2. in Queen Mary
page 1401.) who affirms, this use of a psalm before the Mass was used
long before in the Greek church. And it is the common opinion of our English
Protestants, their Bishops, Antiquaries, and doctors that the Religion which
these holy Legates of Rome SS. Germanus and Lupus taught here, was in all
things, veritatis praedicatio, doctrina sincera, sincerissima, purus Dei
cultus, qualis ab Apostolis mandato diuino Christianorum Ecclesiis traditus
erat. The preaching of truth, sincere doctrine, most sincere doctrine, the
pure worship of God, such as by the commandment of God, was by the Apostles
delivered to the churches of Christians: and so it continued here in this
purity long after. Matthew. Parker Antiq. Britan. page 6.45.46. Goscelin.
histor. Bal. l. 2. de act. Pontif. Romans in Greg. 1. and l. de Script. centur.
1. in August. Dionatho. Godvvyn. Conuers. of Brit. Povvel. in annot. in lib.
Girald. Cambr. de Itinerar. Cambr. c. 1. Fox page 463. edit. an. an. 1576.
Fulk. Answ. to a count. Cathol. page 40. Midleton Papistam. page 202. Stovve
histor. in Ethelb. Holinsh. histor. of Engl. cap. 21. page 102.

Therefore we may not now make any doubt of any thing, done here by these
holy Bishops, by power from the Pope, either in causinge the decrees and canons
of the Popes so much dignifyinge the highest spiritual power in the Sea of
Rome, generally to be used and received here, by all priests, and clergy
men, as this holy Pope had commanded, nor in consecratinge Bishops, and
Archbishops, with limitation of their Jurisdictions, and the like, but they
were most Justly, and religiously performed. ( Matthew. West. an. 446. Matthew.
Park. antiq. Brit. Holinsh. hist. of Engl. Sigibert. an. 428. Stowe and Howes
histor. in Theodosius. Bal. centur. 1. in Leporio Agricola.) And yett besides
their powerable, and authoritatiue condemninge of the Pelagian heresies here,
together with the Timothean Heretics, they ordained and consecrated so many
Bishops in this nation, that some writers among Protestants. ( Godvvin
Conuers. of Britanie page 25.) are of opinion, their number was greater then of
those that were consecrated here in the time of King Lucius: among whom a
Protestant Bishop writteth in this manner: I cannot but rest persuaded, that our
Britanie had very few Bishops until the cominge over of Germanus and Lupus, to
suppress the Pelagian Heresy: concerning which matter, I think it not
amiss to offer unto the Reader, what I find in our history of Landaff.
Postquam praedicti Seniores (Sanctus Germanus Episcopus and Lupus) Pelagianam
heresim extirpauerant, Episcopos pluribus in locis Britanniae consecrauerunt.
Super omnes autem Britannos dextralis partis Britanniae, beatum Dubricium,
summum Doctorem, a Rege and ab omni parochia electum Archiepiscopum
consecrauerunt. Hac dignitate, ei a Germano and Lupo data, constituerunt ei
episcopalem sedem, concessu Monrici Regis, Principum, Cleri and populi, apud
podium Lantaui, in honor S. Petri Apostoli fundatam, and cum finibus istis
etc. Which thus he englisheth: After the said elders (S. Germanus Bishop, and
Lupus) had rooted out the Pelagian Heresy, they consecrated Bishops in many
places of Britanie. Over all the Brittans dwellinge on the right side of
Britanie, they consecrated for Archbishop, S Dubritius, who was chosen for the
supreme doctor by the king and all the Diocese. This dignity being
bestowed upon him by Germanus and Lupus, they with the consent of Monric the
king, the nobility, clergy and people, appointed his See to be at the
manner of Lantaui, and founded the same there, to the honor of S. Peter,
boundinge the territories thereof in this wise. etc. Then he adds
immediately: This was about the year of Christ 430. about which time also,
Palladius did first appoint Bishops and ordeine Bishoprics in Scotland, as
Buchanan has delivered. The words of Buchanan the puritan are these. (Georg.
Buchan. l. 5. Reg. 42. page 146. Rer. Scotic.) Creditur Palladius primus
Episcopus in Scotia creasse. Palladius is thought to be the first that created
Bishops in Scotland.

Where we are taught, by these great Protestants themselves, that the first
Bishops, that ever were in this Island, whether Scotland, or this other part of
England, and Wales, were instituted together with their Sees, Jurisdictions,
and limitts by the Popes authority, and this Protestant Bishop in translating
his Antiquity has abused his reader, that is ignorant of the latin tongue,
for where he translateth. ( who was chosen for the supreme doctor by the
king and all the diocese:) there is noe such thing in that antiquity, as
he himself alleged it, but only that the king consented with the diocese
to his consecration in Archiepiscopall dignitye by the Popes Legates, or at the
most that they did choose him rather then any other: for that he was a chief
doctor here long before, and that by the Popes approbation, I will show
herafter. And it seems to be certain, both by himself, and others, that
this Protestant Bishop where he speaks of the kings and peoples election,
did add it of his own Invention, for both by others, and himself also in
other places, there is no such thing in this narration. John Capgraue whom
this man much commends, thus relates this history. ( Godwin Conuers. of
Brit.)

Cum Sanctus Germanus and Lupus haeresim illam (Pelagianam) extirpassent:
Episcopos in pluribus locis Britanniae consecrarunt: and dextralis partis
Britanniae beatum Dubritium, summum Doctorem and Archiepiscopum statuerunt: and
Landauensem ecclesiam in honor beati Petri fundatam, sedem cathedralem
collocarunt: collatis autem ecclesiae Landauensi a Rege multis possessionibus
and ecclesijs, Dubricius discipulos per ecclesias diuisit, quasdam nouas
ecclesias fundauit, Danielem in Episcopum Bangerensem, and Sanctum Iltutum in
loco ab illo Lanitut, id est Ecclesia Iltuti vocatum ordinauit. (Ioh.
Capgrauius in Catalog. in S. Dubritio.) When S. Germanus and Lupus had rooted
out that (Pelagian) heresy, they consecrated Bishops in many places of
Britanie: and they appointed blessed Dubritius, chief Doctor, and Archbishop
of the right hand part of Britanie, and placed the church of Landaffe founded
in honor of S. Peter the cathedral See, and many possessions and parishes
being given by the king to the church of Landaffe, Dubricius divided his
disciples by the churches: builded some new churches. He ordained Daniel
Bishop of Bangor, and S. Iltutus in a place called of him Lanitut, that is, the
church of Iltutus. The very same words without any word added or detracted, ar
in the life of S. Dubritius, in the great old Manuscript of many Saints,
written diverse hundreds of years since. ( Manuscript antiquum and permagnum
pr. gloriosi ac Deo dilecti. in S. Dubricio.) And both these Antiquities teach
with all others, that Aurelius Ambrosius king, was here at that time, with
general command, and that he with the whole clergy, consented to have S.
Dubritius Archbishop of Wales, and S. Sampson of York, their words be: Sancti
Episcopi praedicti consentiente Rege Ambrosio Aurelio, necnon and omni clero,
Dubritium Archiepiscopum consecrarunt. The twoe holy Bishops (S. Germanus and
Lupus) the king Ambrosius Aurelius, and all the clergy consentinge,
consecrated Dubritius Archbishop, and again: Impositum est Diadema capiti
Regis Aurelij Ambrosij, and de communi consensu sedem Eboracensem contulit
Sampsoni viro Sancto, vrbis vero Legionum Archiepiscopatum inclito Dubritio
dedit. Aurelius Ambrosius was crowned king, and by common consent (of the
Legates and clergy) he bestowed the Sea of York on Sampson an holy man, and
the Archbishopric of Caerlegion on renowned Dubritius.

So that it clearly appears, that if there was any such king, as Monric at
that time, he was but a little Regulus in the co^try about Lantaui, and perhaps
temporal Lord of that place, and so his consent for the settlinge of the
Archbishops See there, by the Legates was requisite, and granted, and in noe
other sense. For this Protestant Bishop himself. (Godwin Catalog. in S.
Dauies. Roger Houeden. Matthew. Parker antiquit. Britan.) Producer of this
Antiquity, is wittnes, with all writers, that at this time, and at the cominge
of S. Augustine so long after, the Bishoprics of Exeter in Devonshire, Bathe
in Sommersettshire, Hereford, and Worcester, which could not belong to any
petty Prince or Regulus, were subject to that Archiepiscopall See, therefore
such things were rather done by the direction, or command of the Legates,
Iubente Sancto Germano, as our Protestants publish in their British history. (
Galfrid monum. histor. Reg. Britan. lib. 6. c. 14.) And as much confessed by
this Protestant Bishop himself, in diverse others places, and in these plain
terms. (Godwin Catalog. in S. David's in Dubritius.) Dubritius was made
Archbishopp of all Walls, by Germanus and Lupus, twoe Bishops of France that
were entreated by Aurelius Ambrosius, the King, or Ruler of Britanie, to come
over, and yield their best help, for extinguishing the Pelagian heresy, that
had then taken great root in this contry And they appointed his See to be at
Landaff, which soon after was removed to Caerlegion upon Vske in
Monmoutshire. And in an other place thus he writes. (Godwyn. Catalog. in
Landaff. 1. in Dubritius.) The cathedral church of Landaffe is reported to have
been first built in the time of Lucius, about the year of Christ 180. But I
perceive not, that any Bishop satt there before Dubritius, that by Germanus
Bishop of Altisiodore, and Lupus of Trecasia (two Bishops of France) was
first consecrate Archbishop of those parts, and sat sometimes at Caerleon,
sometimes at Landaffe. Where he quite forgets his king Monric,
attributinge all to the Popes Legates. And a little after, citinge the very
same book of Landaffe which he did before, he produces many Bishops of that
See, to have excommunicated the kings or princes of that contry; of which
hereafter. Godvvyn. Catalog. of Bish in Landaff. page 518.520.521.523. and
edit. an. 1615.

So that there is not the least suspicion left, either by the book of
Landaffe, or any antiquity, but the chief spiritual power and jurisdiction
in this kingedome, was ever acknowledged generally, to be in the holy
Apostolic See of Rome, and at this time executed here by those holy Legates
from thence. Which more appears in this holy Archbishop S. Dubritius, who
was not only thus consecrated and disposed of in those highest spiritual
affairs, by authority from Rome, but was also himself the Popes Legate here
in Britanie, as Robertus Caenalis the french Bishop, the British history and
other witters say. (Robert. Caenal. Gallic. hist. l. 1. perioche 6. Galfr.
monum. l. 9. cap. 12. histor. Brit.) Ex Vrbe Legionu^, Dubritius hic Britaniae
primas, and Apostolicae sedis Legatus, tanto religione clarebat, vt quemcumque
langore grauatis orationibus suis sanaret. Dubritius Archbishop of Caerlegion,
Primate of Britanie, and legate of the Sea Apostolic, was so holy, that he
healed all sick parsons by his prayers. Therefore being the Popes Legate, and
living here so long until the year of Christ 522. as two Protestant
Bishops tell us. Godwyn sup. Bal. centur. 1. in Dubricius.) And Primate of
Britanie, there can be noe doubt of the Popes power here in this time, if we
had noe other instances and Arguments to Insist upon in this matter for those
days.

But these Protestant Antiquaries. Galfrid. monum. histor. Reg. Britan. l. 6.
c. 13. Io. Capgrau. Catal. in S. Dubritij Manuscript. of Saints old in Dubrit.)
and others tell us, that these Legates thus sent from the Pope, did not come
hither only to extirpate those heresies, but to preach the true Religion in
all other things, for the christianity of the Britans was then corrupted, not
only by the Pelagian heresy, but by the Pagans which the king had brought
hither, and by the preachinge of these blessed men (the Popes Legates) the
Religion of true faith was restored among them. In tempore illo venit S.
Germanus Antissiodorensis Episcopus, and Lupus Trecensis Episcopus vt verbum
Dei Britonibus praedicarent, corrupta namque fuerat christianitas eorum, tum
propter Paganos quos Rex in societatem eorum posuerat, tum propter Pelagianam
haeresim. Beatorum igitur virorum praedicatione, restituta est inter eos verae
fidei Religio. And in particular besides the common Pelagian heresies against
the necessity of Baptism, and grace of Christ, it seems the Pelagian
priests and Bishops, contrary to christian Religion, in all churches, had
women, whom they called their wives, for we read that Leporius Agricola, the
great promoter of that heresy here, was the son of Seuerianus a Pelagian
Bishop, says one Protestant. (Stowe histor. in Theodosius the younger.) Seueri
cuiusdam Pelagianorum Sacerdotis in Britannia filius, the son of one Seuerus
a Pelagian priest in Britanie, says an other. Io: Bal. centur. 1. de Scriptor.
in Leporio Agric.) And the king Vortiger so countenanced the Pagan Saxons,
that we hear, that many christians intermarried with them, as the king
himself had done, although he had then alive his christian wife, by whom he
had three sons, to wit Vortimer, Catigern, and Pascentius, yett he married
the Pagan daughter of Hengistus the Pagan, named Rowenna, and so advanced the
Infidels, that the whole kingedome was endaungered, and to aggrauate these
sins, this king kept in wicked manner his own daughter which he had by
his Christian wife, and begott a child a daughter of her. (Mattheus
Westminster. anno 450.) Generat etiam ex eadem coniuge filiam, quam in
societatem thori suscipiens, filiam ex ea proceauit. Whereupon (to speak in
Protestant words.) (Stovve and Hovves histor. in Vortigern.) Vodine
Archbishopp of London, a man of singular devotion, and good life, by the advice
of Vortimer (the kings eldest son and next king) went to Vortiger, and said
to him, that he had not done as a Christian prince, in departinge from his
lawful wife, and taking an other woman, whose father was an enemy to the
Christian faith, and also went about to conquer the crown of Britanie.
Hengist hearing Vortiger make lamentation, forthwith slew the good Archbishop
Vodine, and many other priests, and Religious parsons, all the churches in lent
were polluted with blood, the Nuns with other religious parsons, were by
force putt from their howses, and goods, and constreined to pollutio^ of their
bodies. The Britta^s consideringe the daily repair of the Saxons into this
Realm, showed to their king the Ieoperdie that might thereof ensue, and
advertised him of the danger, but all was in vain: for Vortiger by reasons of
his wife, bare such favor to the Saxons, that he would in noe wise hear the
counsel of his subjects. Thus far these Protestants.

But Nennius in his manuscript history writing as a Protestant Bishop says.
Io: Bal. centur. 1. in Nennio Bamachorensi. Nennius in M. S. histor. in
Guorthigirno Rege.) a thousand years since, writes plainly, that among
other wickednesses of this king, he took his own daughter for his wife, and
had a daughter by her. Which when it was proved to S. Germanus (the Popes
Legate) he came with all the clergy of Britanie to correct the king: And
when a Synod of the clergy and nobility was assembled. The king arose and
was very angry, and sought to fly from the face of S. German, and he was
accursed, and condemned by blessed German, and all the council of the Britans.
Super haec omnia mala adijciens Guorthigirnus, accepit filiam suam propriam in
vxorem sibi, quae peperit ei filiam. Hoc autem cum compertum esset a Sancto
Germano, venit corripere Regem, cum omni clero Britannum: and dum conuenta
esset magna Synodus Clericorum in vno concilio, ipse Rex surrexit, iratusque
est vehementer, and vt a facie Sancti Germani fugeret, quaerebat, and
maledictus est, and damnatus a beato Germano, and omni concilio Britannum. Our
english Protestants in their Matthew of Westminster, as he is published by
them, ( Matthew. Westminster. an. 450.) Thus tell us: A S. Germano and ab omni
Episcoporum conuentu est excommunicatus. Vortiger was excommunicated by S.
German, and the whole assembly of Bishops, yet this notwithstanding, he also
went about to overthrow both christian Religion, and the kingdom, ioyninge
with the Pagan Infidels, and having three wives of which one an Infidel enemy
to the land, the other his own daughter* which and such things noe christian
could or would do, yet it does not appear by Ne^nius. ( Nennius supr) That
he was deposed, but straungly punished by God, neither does the British
history or Matthew of Westminster say he was deposed, but descruerunt eum. The
Britans forsook Vortigern, ioyninge with their enemies the Saxons Infidels,
whereby he rather relinquished to be their king, then they deposed him,
although afterward they say, Vortimerum filium eius in Regem erexerunt, they
made Vortimer his son king to defend the kingedome, being driven to those
extremities. ( Galfrid. monum. l. 6. c. 13. Matthew. Westminster. But our English
Protestants, (noe unlearned scholars in deposing kings) write confidently: The
Brita^s with one mind deprived him of his royal dignity, when he had
reigned six years, and ordained to be their king, Vortimer his eldest son.
(Stow and Hov hist. in Vort. Hol. hist of Eng. Matthew. Park. ant. Brit. p. 78
prot. a^not. in Matthew. Westminster. in Mer. a^. 454.

And these men are so far from findinge fault herein, that generally they
applaud, and much commend the fact. I will Instance only in one their first
Protestant Archbishop, which relatinge the continual preseruinge of true
Religion inuiolate by the Britans, does exemplify in this as an heroical Act
in that kind, his words be these. ( Matthew. Parker. antiquit. Britan. page
7.8.) Magnum est Britannorum perfectae in Christum fidei argumentum, illa
expostulatio and Querela, qua in Vortigernum suum Regem vehementer egerunt:
quod Hengisti Infidelis filiam matrimonio sibi iunxisset. Quare Incensi
proceres, V^rtigerno regia potestate abdicato, Vortimerum eius filium Regem
creabant. It is a great Argument of the perfect faith in Christ of the Britans,
that their expostulation and quarrel by which they dealt vehemently against
Vortigern their king, because he had martyred the daughter of Hengist an
infidel; wherefore his noble men being offended, deprive him of his kingly
power, making Vortimer his son their king. This is our Protestants
Relation, and construction of this matter. Who propose unto us an other like
example, of the same S. Germane in the case of Bulie, king of Powsey, in
walls. (Holinsh. histor. of Engl. l. 5. page 84.) Who contemninge the
preachinge of S. German, was miraculously punished with death, and a mean man
a christian called Ketell, by Nennius, placed in that dignity, and they cite
Ranulphus Higeden, who as they write cites Gildas for the same history. But
Ne^nius has it at lardg, and says of this Ketell, so erected. (Nennius M. S.
in S. German.) Et omnes filij eius facti sunt Reges, and a semine eorum omnis
Regio Prouisorum regitur vsque hodiernam diem. And all his sons after him
were kings, and from their seed the whole Region of Pouis is ruled to this
day. From the time of S. German to the writing of Nennius.

And it is evident by Nennius, the Relator of this history, that S. German was
not a deposer of this wicked king. For first it is manifest by the history,
that he was a pagan, which was in noe wise subject to Christian discipline, or
coercion, secondly he and his kindred were miraculously destroyed and consumed
by God, and noe heir left of that linadge to inherit. Then if S. German man
with the consent of the nobles, and people, now destitute of a Ruler, gave way
to the election of an other, a worthy and holy man, what wrong or injury in
any opinion was here committed by him? none at al, but an action which all
Religions does allow, and commend unto us.

But to leave these things to Protestants, as their property quarto modo in
all places, and times, when they have prevailed, and which I would not have
mentioned, but beeinge thus called upon, by them, we are further taught by
them, that in this time our dependence here in Britanie, was so great on the
Popes of Rome, that not so much as as a public schole was here kept without
his allowance, and the audience of other matters was referred to him. These
things appear to be so, in the case of the schole of Cambridge, privileged
by the holy Popes S. Leo, and Simplicius in this age, and S. Iltutus, that
renowned Master of many most Learned Scholars. (Honor. Papa. supr. Caius
Antiquitat. Cantabrig. l. 1. p. 147. lib. vit. Sanctorum Wall. in Iltuto.) To
whom, magistralis cura concessa est a Pontifice: The magistrall chardge was
committed by the Pope. How renowned this man was in this kind, as also S.
Dubritius in the like case, having a thousand scholars, as our Protestant
testify. ( Caius supr. p. 145.146. Bal. l. de script. centur. 1. in Dubrit.
and Iltuto. Godvvin Catalog. S. David. 1. Bal. cent. 1. in Macceo.) And Macceus
a disciple of S. Patricke beeinge accused at Rome, was constrained to purge
himself there, edito libello Romanae vrbis Pontifici satisfecit, and satisfied
the Pope of Rome in his book published to that purpose.

Neither without great cause, were these duties performed to the Pope from
hence, or he did require them singularly of the Britans in this time: for
these our Protestants assure us, that the Pope in those days, claimed and
exercised that their highest spiritual power, over all churches, and parsons
how eminent soever, temporal or spiritual, For to insist in these men's very
words. (Io: Bal. l. 2. de Act. Romans Pont. in Hilario. Rob. Barns in vit.
Pontif. Romans in Hilar.) Hilarious decreta synodalia fecit, and per vniuersum
mundum seruanda, publicauit. Pope Hilary (about the year 142.) did make
synodall decrees, and published them to be kept throughout the whole world.
Faelix Acha^iu^ Co^stantinopolitanum episcopum vna cum Petro Eutichiano
excommunicat, quod Eutichianum exilium propter haeresim pulsum, reuocauerat.
Pope Faelix the third, did excommunicate Achatius patriarch of Constantinople
with Peter an Eutichian heretic, because he had recalled an Eutichian, that
for heresy was exiled. Gelasius Anastasium Imperatorem a coetu Christianorum
exclusit, quod Achatio and alijs haereticis faueret. (Idem in Gelasio) Gelasius
the Pope, did exclude Anastasius the Emperor from the company of Christians,
because he favored Achatius and other heretics. And they further tell us, (
Balaeus and Barns in Anastasio 2.) how Pope Anastasius the second, did also
excommunicate the same Emperor for the like. So it is evident by this our
English Protestants, that the Popes of Rome in all this age both claymed, and
exercised this their supreme spiritual power and command in this kingedome
of Britanie. And because the kingedome of Ireland is now belonging to the
crown of great Britanie, and S. Patricke (generally called the Apostle of
that nation) was borne in this our Britanie, and sent to Ireland by the same
Pope Celestine, who sent S. Palladius Germanus and Lupus hither, I must say
somewhat of him, and his proceedings in this matter.

The very name of the Apostle of Ireland which is given unto him in all
Antiquities, and that he was thus sent from the Pope of Rome, Saint Celestine,
with that high spiritual power requisite in such a case of the conversion of
so great a contrye, will sufficiently warrant the dependence of the same in
spiritual things of the Apostolic See of Rome. For to speak nothing of his
miraculous and powerable proceedings with great opposites unto him, remembered
by the writers of his life and others, Nennius himself is thus far a witness
for this renowned Saint and Irish Apostle. (Nennius in manu-scripto codice
antiq. in Patricio.) Sanctus Patricius Euangelium Christi externis nationibus
per annos 40. praedicabat, virtutes Apostolicos faciebat, caecos illuminabat,
leprosos mundabat, surdos audire faciebat, daemones obsessis corporibus
fugabat, mortuos numero vsque nouem suscitauit, captiuos multos vtriusque sexus
proprijs donis redemit, scripsit Abegetoria 300. sexaginta quinque, aut
amplius, ecclesias quoque eodem numero fundauit, trecentas sexaginta quinque,
ordinauit Episcopos 365. aut amplius, in quibus spiritus Dei erat, presbyteros
autem vsque ad tria millia ordinauit, and duodecim milia hominum in vna Regione
Conachta ad fidem Christi conuertit, and baptizauit, quadraginta diebus
totidemque noctibus in cacumine montis Eile ieiunauit. S. Patrick did preach
the gospel of Christ 40. years to externe nations, he wrought Apostolical
miracles, he made the blind to see, cleansed lepers, caused the deaffe to
hear, drove away devils from possessed bodies, he raised to life nine dead
parsons, he redeemed many captives of either sex, with his own goods, he
wrote Abegetories 365 or more, he founded churches in the same number, three
hundred sixty five, he ordained three hundred three score and five Bishops or
more, in whom there was the spirit of God, he ordained priests to the number
of three thousand, and he converted to the faith of Christ and baptized,
twelve thousand men in one Region called Conacht, he fasted forty days and
so many nights in the topp of the montaine Eile.

Thus this ancient British Author comparinge this holy Bishop S. Patrick, to
Moses in four things: first for his speakinge with an Angel, in rubo, in a
bushe: secondly for his fast of forty days and nights: thirdly for the
years of his age 120. fourthlie for the place of his burial unknown. By
which narration of Nennius so ancient, and recommended an Author, that S.
Patricke did consecrate so many priests and Bishops, especially aaboue three
hundred and threescore holy Bishops, when the fourth part of them could not be
employed for these Islands of Britanie and Ireland, it is an evident argument,
that his legatine power from the Sea Apostolic of Rome, did not confine it
self in these Islands, but extended it self to other parts far off, which we
now call America, because neither France nor any nation in the old continent,
was then subordinate to Britanie, or Ireland, to receive Bishops and preachers
from them. And this Nennius seems to insinuate, when he says Saint Patricke
preached the gospel, externis nationibus, to externe and strange nations,
the Popes power spiritual rechinge unto all Regions, and this is confirmed by
the writers of the life of S. Brendan, who as both an old manuscript which I
have seen ( an old manuscript in the life of S. Brendan.) written diverse
hundreds years since; and John Capgraue, ( in Catal. in S. Brendan.) who
wrote long before, (and was published in print an. 1516.) the late discovery
of America, are witnesses, found in diverse places, many days saylinge from
Ireland, in America and Islands belonging unto it, diverse religious Christians
that came thither in the time of S. Patricke, and sent or brought thither by
him. And the Island called still S. Brendan, in those parts, may seem to have
taken, and still to keep the name from that holy Saint, beeinge there in those
his holy travails. Insul. Sancti Brendani in descript. Amaric. apud Abrah.
Ortel. and alios.

And yet to conclude the labors of Saint Patrick, and his testifyinge the
spiritual prerogative of the Roman See here in Britanie, where he was borne,
these Protestants have before recommended his epistle unto us, wherein he
declares, that as Saint Phaganus, and Deruuianus (Damianus by others) obtained
ten years Indulgence of S. Eleutherius for the holy place of Glastenburie. (
Antiquit. Glasten. apud M.S. antiq. Ioh. Capgrau. and al. in S. Patricio.) so
he obtained of S. Celestine Pope, who sent him into these parts, twelve
years of Indulge^ce for the same place. Et ego frater Patricius, a piae
memoriae Caelestino Papa duodecimo annos Indulgentiae acquisiui. And to make
all clear, that neither S. Palladius, S. Germanus, and Lupus, or S. Patricius
did any thing in these parts, nor any under them, but by the Popes actual or
virtuall approbation, or allowance, thus it is testified by our Protestant
historians in these words. ( Raphael Holinsh. John Hooker histor. of Ireland
page 53.) Palladius Landed in the North of Ireland, whence he escaped right
hardly with his life, into the Isles adioyninge, where he preached the
gospel, and converted noe small number of Scots to the christian faith, and
purged that part which was christened from the infection of the Pelagians. He
was required by the Scots that inhabited here in Britanie, to leave the Isles,
and come over unto them, there to Instruct the people in the way of true
salvation, to the which with the Popes License, he seemed willinge enough, and
the Bishop of Rome the more redily condiscended thereunto, for that in the
instant time, when Palladius was to depart, and Patrick attended at Rome,
suinge for license to be sent into Ireland, the Pope therefore granted that
Palladius might pass over to the Scots in Britanie, and appointed Patricke to
go with authority from him into Ireland. Thus we see all ecclesiastical
things, ordered and disposed here by the Popes authority in this age.

THE SIXTE CENTVRIE OR HUNDRED YEAR.
THE X. CHAPTER. Wherein the same highest spiritual power of the Popes of
Rome, is still by these English Protestant Divines and Antiquaries continued,
in this kingedome.
IT is evident by that which is entreated before, that in the beginning of
this sixth hundred years, and long after, the susupreame papal power continued
inuiolably in this kingedome; for S. Dubritius the Popes Legate lived until
the year 522. And many or most of the renowned men in this age in Britanie
were his Scholars, taught, and instructed by him: thus the Antiquarie of
Cambridge writes. ( Ioh. Caius antiquit. Cantabrig. l. 1. page 148. Catal.
Sanct. Wall. in S. Dubrit. In vetusto codice, cui titulus est de vitis
Sanctorum Wallensium, in vita S Dubritij ista lego: creuit illius (Dubritij)
fama cum vtriusque legis notae and veteris peritia, pertotam Britanniam, ita
quod ex omni part totius Britanniae Scholares veniebant, non tantum rudes, sed
etiam viri sapientes, and doctores ad eum studendi gratia confluebant. These I
read in an old book entitled of the lives of the Saints of Walls, in the
life of Saint Dubritius: The fame of him (Dubritius) with his knowledge both of
the new and old law, so increased throughout all Britanie, that out of every
part of all Britanie scholars came unto him, not only the ignorant, but wise
men and doctors, flocked unto him to study: cheifely S. Helian, Sampson his
disciple, Vbelinus, Merchiguinus, Elguoredus, Guninus, Longual, Artbodu,
Longur, Arguistus, Iunabin, Conbram, Goruan, Guernabin, Iouan, Elhebarn,
Iudnon, Curdocui, Aidan, Cinnarh, and with these he had a thousand clergy men
seven years together, in the villadge Hentlan, upon the river side of Guy, in
the study of divine and humane learning, giuinge them example in himself, of
a religious life and perfect charity. Therefore these so many renowned men
out of all parts of Britanie, and scholars to a Master the Popes Legate, and
primate of Britanie, and many of them by the same authority, after made Rulers
in the church of Britanie, and one of them S. Sampson Archbishop of York, they
could not in any equal judgment, be otherwise affected to the Sea of Rome,
then that their so glorious and renowned Master, and instructor was; for
otherwise they could not have be named his scholars, and being so many a
thousand and more in number, it is not credible but all, most, or many of
them, followed him in this, as in other doctrines.

Like was the case of S. Iltutus of whom I have breiflye spoken before, he
also lived long after this time, as a Protestant Bishop wittnesseth, in the
year of Christ 520. Bal. l. de Script. centur. 1. in Ilchat. Morgan. fol. 29.)
Egregius iste Britannorum Magister (inquiunt Vincentius and Antoninus) ex
discipulis erat diui Germani. Qui omnium scripturarum, veteris ac noui
testamenti, and omnium artium philosophiae, cunctorum suae gentis
scientissimus, futura Dei dono praenouit. In magno numero discipulos iste
habuit, tam Gallos quam Brita^nos, quorum fuere praecipui Sampson, Paulinus,
David and Gildas Badonicus. This excellent Master of the Britans (say
Vincentius and Antoninus) was one of the disciples of S. German (the Popes
Legate) who among all of his nation, was the most skillful in all scriptures,
both of the old, and new testament, and in all arts of philosophy, and by the
gift of God knew things to come. This man had disciples in great number,
as well French men as Brita^s of the which the chiefest were Sampson, Paulinus,
David, and Gyldas Badonicus. The same is proved unto us by other Protestants. (
Merchiannus Rex in Dipl. apud Caium antiq. Cantabr. l. 1. page 147. Catalog.
Sanct. Wall. in S. Iltuto.) And how the Pope granted him this privilege of
such public teachinge: Magistralis tibi cura a Pontifice concessa est, as the
king of those parts in his princely grant with others witness. Therefore if
the greatest doctors and teachers of others in Britanie in these times, were
thus licenced by the Popes, their Legates, and scholars of their legates, we
cannot question, but such as the Masters, such likewise the scholars and
disciples were, especially when we find their chiefest Scholars S. David, S.
Sampson, made Archbishops by the Poopes Authority, and this former primate of
all Britanie, by the Popes grant as hereafter. Matthew. Westminster. ad An. 727.

And that the scholars of Britanie were not then allowed, without the Popes
privilege, does further appear by our Protestants, Hardinghe, Lydgate, and
others. ( Ioh. Hardinge apud Bal. in praefat. ad l. de Script. Stow histor.
Ioh. Caius l. 1. antiq. Cantabrig. Brian Twin. apol. Oxon. l. 1.) testifying,
that in the time of S Gregory, the universities or public Schools of
Stamford, Caerlegion and perhaps some others, were interdicted by the Pope for
some errors they held at this time. The Antiquaries of Cambridge contend (
Caius sup. l. 1.) that their university was then Innocent, and so preserved
and privileged. ( Brian. Twyn. apol. l. 2. page 143.) They of Oxord seem to
grant and glory in it, that S. Germanus the Popes Legate, did confirm the
orders and constitutions of the university of Oxford, and allege Asserius
Meneuersis to that purpose. (Asser. Meneu. apud Brian. Twyn. supr.) Diuum
Germanum Oxoniam aduenisse, annique dimidium illic esse moratum, qui ordines
and instituta illius loci mirum in modum comprobauit. Saint German came to
Oxford, and stayed there half a year, and greatly approved the orders and
institutions of that place. And to prove that all the Christians of this
Britany then in this age, acknowledged this power, of the Pope of Rome, and
their dependence of him in spiritual things, the Archbishops See of London
beeinge wasted and persecuted by the pagan Saxons, most swayinge in the
provinces subject unto it, we do not read of any Archbishop of London after
the martyrdom of S. Vodinus, until Theonus Bishop of Gloucester took charge
thereof in the year 553. as a Protestant Bishop writes in this manner.
(Godwyn Catalog. of Bish. in Land. in Vodinus and Theonas. Stow. histor. in
Lucius.) I find only one of them named, viz. Theonus, that being first
Bishop of Gloucester, forsook it, and took the chardge of London upon him, in
the year 553. so write other Protestants. Therefore we must now seek to the
other two Archiepiscopall Sees, Caerlegion and York. For S. Dubricius, he was
both consecrated by the Popes Legate, S. Germanus, and he himself also both
the Popes Legate, and Primate of all Britanie. Britanniae Primas, and
Apostolicae sedis Legatus. (Galfrid. Monum. hist. Reg. Brit. l. 9. cap. 12.
Godwyn. Catal. in S. David's 1. and Landaff. 1.) So that there is noe question
of him, but he acknowledged this highest spiritual power in the Sea of Rome,
whose Legate he was then in this kingedome.

Neither can there be any doubt of the Archbishop of York in this behalf, at
this time, for S. Sampson was then Archbishop there, who as before, was both
scholar to S. Dubritius, so earnest a patro^ of the Roman See, and also of
S. Iltutus, as before, scholar to S. German, the Popes Legate, and warra^ted
to be public professor, and teacher here, by the Popes allowa^ce, and to give
more certaynety herein, this holy man S. Sa^pson was miraculously chosen of
God, as Capgraue and others write, to the Archiepiscopall See of York, ( Ioh.
Capgrau in Sampsone.) and was consecrated by S. Dubritius the Popes Legate, and
primate of Britanie. Therefore there cannot be the least suspicion, but that
both he, and the provinces both of the North of England, and Scotland also,
then under his jurisdiction, were of the same opinion in this matter. And if
the Metropolitan See of London a little before destroyed, as our histories tell
us. ( Galfrid. mon. histor. Reg. Brit. l. 8. cap 9.) by the pagan Saxons, with
other churches of that province, had then any Archbishop, whose name is not
remembered, noe man of indifferent judgment will think, that he differed in
opinion in this matter, from those glories of this kingedome, and church
thereof, S. Dubritrius the Popes Legate and S. Sampson consecrated by him, by
whom also, and whose authority from the Sea of Rome, if London then had any
Archbishop at this time, he was likewise consecrated, noe others then being
to intermedle in that business. And our kings of that time Vortimer, Aurelius
Ambrosius. Other Pendragon and Arthur crowned kings by these holy Archbishops,
Legates, patrons and known mainteyners of the privileges of the Apostolic
See of Rome. King Vortimer belonged to the age before, therefore I only here
say of him, as I am directed by our Protestants in the Brittishe history, as
they approve it. ( Galfrid. Monum. l. 6. cap. 14. Matthew. Westminster. an. 454.) That
after he was chosen king and obtained victory of the pagans, so soon as it
was in his power, he did all things, especially apperteyning to Religion, by
the direction or rather command, as the words be, of S. Germanus the Popes
Legate: Victoria potitus Vortimerus caepit reddere possessiones ereptas
ciuibus, ipsosque diligere ac honorare, and Ecclesias iubente Sancto Germano
renouare. Vortimer having obtained victory, began to restore the possessions,
that were taken from the citizens, and to love, and honor them, and by the
commandment of S. German to renew the churches.

Neither can we make it a strange thing, if we will follow so many
Protestant guides to lead us, as before, that king Vortimer followed the
commandment of Saint German the Popes Legate, in such affairs, when they
have assured us, that by his direction and order, both his Father Vortigern
king before him, was deposed, and this man by the same power, and order was
chosen and erected to be king. And the same is the condition and case of
Aurelius Ambrosius, by the same power and proceedings made king, as these
Protestants tell us, when Vortigern was deposed the second time. ( Protest.
Catalog. Regum Britan. Stowe histor. in Vortiger. Aurel. Ambros. and Vterp.
Holinsh in eisd.) So likewise of Vterpen-dragon his brother both of them made
kings by common consent of the clergy, and nobles, the line of Vortigern
beeinge quite disinherited, and he himself (to write in Protestant words
(burnt in his castle in Wales by Aurelius Ambrosius and his brother Vter.
(Galfrid. monum. histor. Reg. Brit. l. 8. cap. 2.17.) But Nennius writes, that
one opinion is, which is in libro S. Germani, in the book of S. German, that
he with his wicked wives or concubines, was burned with fire miraculously from
heaven. An other opinion there is, that he wandered up and down vagrantly,
and his heart burst in sonder. The third, that the earth miraculously opened
and swallowed him up alive. All agree that for betraying the country to the
Infidels, and his other most horrible sins, he was justly and grievously
punished by God, and died miserably with eternal infamy: and the others were
renowned patrons and obedient children to the church of God, which had
advanced them, to the regal dignity. Matthew. Westminster. an. 465.466.488.490.498.
Nennius in M. S. histor. in Guorthigurno.

And if we will follow Nennius the best Author we have of these things, S.
German omitted noe means to procure king Vortigern to penance, and when
nothing would prevail, notwithstanding the most horrible sin of him with
his own daughter, he baptized the son so begotten naming him Faustus, he
brought him up and so instructed him in piety, that he was a glorious Saint.
(Nennius supr.) Quartus filij Guorthigirni fuit Faustus qui illi de filia sua
natus est, quem Sanctus Germanus baptizauit, enutriuit, atque docuit: vnam
habuit filiam quae vt diximus, matter fuit Sancti Fausti. Next to these was
king Arthur, who allthough he was by birth disabled, as our Protestants say,
ex furtiuo concubitu Vtheri and Dulcissae Cornubianae natus. Yett to speak in
Protestants words. ( Protest. Index in Galfrid. monum. V. Arthurus. Galfrid.
mon. histor. Reg. Brit. l. 8. c. 19. Stowe histor. in K. Arthur.) Arthur the
son of Other, at the age of fifteen years, was crowned king of Britanie by
Dubritius Archbishop of Legions, the Popes Legate, as before. And this was not
the sole Act of that Saint, but of all the Bishops, and nobles of the
kingedome: Defuncto Rege conuenerunt Pontifices cum clero Regni, and populo,
ipsumque more regio humauerunt. Quo facto Dubritius vrbis Legionum
Archiepiscopus, sociatis sibi Episcopis, and magnatibus. Arthurum filium eius
iuuenem quindecim annorum, in Regem magnifice exercuit. (Matthew. Westminster. an. 516.
Galfrid. mon. lib. 9. cap. 1.) King Other being dead, the Bishops assemble
together with the clergy and people of the kingedome, and bury him in kingely
manner. Which beeinge ended Dubritius Archbishop of the city of Legions, the
Bishops and Nobles being associate unto him magnificently erect for
king-Arthur his son, a young man of fifteen years old.

And yett this worthy prince so by birth by himself disabled, and for age
unfit to manadge so many and great matters, yett made king by the power I
have related before, and followinge the direction of the Pope in matters
requisite, and his Legate, and Bishops here, became so renowned and glorious a
king as all histories report. This king, besides the common benefits he
bestowed on the church of Christ in Britanie, then allmoste desolate by the
rage of the pagan Saxons, he did in particular, to show his grateful and due
dependence on the Popes of Rome, With the consent and counsel of all the
Bishops and peers of the kingedome, and with license of the Sea Apostolic,
grant privilege to the school of Cambridge, to be exempt and free from
public vectigals and burthenous works, and this he did for the love of the
heavenly kingedome, and remedy of the souls of his Ancestors: as the
Protestants of Cambridge produce unto us out of his own charter beginning
thus. Charta Regis Arthuri de priuileg. Cantabr. apud Ioh. Caium lib. 1. de
antiquit. Cantabr. page 68.69.) Arthurus regali a Deo fultus dignitate, omnibus
suis salutem pro amore caelestis patriae, remedioque animarum antecessorum
meorum Britanniae Regum, pro augmentatione insuper Reipublicae Regni mei
Britanniae, ac profectu spirituali Scholarium in lege Domini iugiter
Cantabrigiae studentium, consilio, and assensu omnium and singulorum
Pontificium, and Principum huius Regni, and licentia sedis Apostoli^ae, statuo
praesenti scripto, and firmiter decerno, vt ciuitas Scholarium praedicta, a
publicis vect. galibus and operibus onerosis absolua^tur. Where we see the
Popes license requisite, and first obtained of this king, even from freeing
that schole in temporal respects.

This license as it seems, being obtained from Pope John the second, for the
Charter bears date, anno ab Incarnatione Domini 531.7. die Aprilis, in
ciuitate Londoni, the year of Christ 531. the seventh day of April in the
city of London, at which time John the second, is commonly thought to have
been Pope. How many Popes confirmed that schole and exempted it from all other
jurisdiction but the Sea Apostolic I have written before, and now add from
Pope Sergius the first, ( apud Caium lib. 1. de antiquit. Cantabr. accadem page
78.79.80.) shewinge how his predecessors in the Sea Apostolic had done the
same: Sergius Episcopus seruus seruorum Dei, praesentium authoritate
decreuimus, vt nulli Archiepiscopo, seu Episcopo, alijue ecclesiasticae
personae, vel seculariliceat, vniuersitatem vestram, aut aliquem vestrum
suspendere, seu excommunic^re, vel quolibet sub interdicto ponere, absqu^ summi
Pontificis assensu, vel eius mandato speciali: prohibemus infuper, ne quis
priuilegia, a sede Apostolica gratiose concessa, vel indulta, ausu temerario
infringere, seu restringere praesumat, vel attemptet, nulli igitur heminum
omnino liceat, hanc paginam nostrae concessionis, and exemptionis infringere,
vel ei quouismodo contraire. Si quis autem hoc attentare praesumpserit,
indignationem omnipotentis Dei, and beatorum Apostolorum Petri, and Pauli se
nouerit incursurum. Sergius Pope servant of the servants of God. We have
decreed by the Authority of these presents, that it shall be lawful for noe
Archbishop, Bishop, or other parson spiritual or secular to suspend, or
excommunicate, or any way to interdict your university, or any of you, without
the Popes assent, or special commandment We further forbid, that noe man by
temerarious boldness, presume or attempt to infringe, or restrict the
privileges graciously granted and given by the Sea Apostolic. It shall be
lawful for noe man at all, to infringe or contradict, the tenure of this our
grant and exemptio^, if any man presume to attempt it, let him know that he
shall incurr the indignation of almighty God, and the blessed Apostles Peter
and Paul. Where we see all parsons in Britanie then, subject and subordinate
in spiritual jurisdiction, to the Pope of Rome.

And this testified by our Protestants themselves. ( Will. Lamb. in l. de leg.
Reg. in Legib. Edward. fol. 126. Ingulph. histor. in fine.) Who go furher in
such things, and assure us from the common laws themselves of our ancient
kings S. Edward the confessor, and others, and confirmed by king William the
first, both as Ingulphus and our Protestant antiquaries acknowledge, that this
kingdom at that time, and kings thereof, did acknowledge as great power in the Sea of Rome in matters concerning this nation, as any catholic now may yield
unto it: for our ancient public laws warranted by our Protestants thus
Instruct us ( Leges S. Eduardi titul. de iure and appendicijs coronae Regni
Britanniae. Guliel. Lamb. sup. p. 137.138. Hackluit book of travails, page
244.) Impetrauit temporibus illis Arthurus Rex a Domino Papa, and a Curia
Romana, quod confirmata sit Norweia in perpetuum coronae Britanniae, in
augmentum Regni huius, vocauitque illam Arthurus Cameram Britanniae. Hac vero
de causa dicunt Norwegienses se debere in regno isto cohabitare, and dicunt se
esse de corpore regni huius, scilicet de corona Britanniae. Thus in english by
a Protestant minister. king Arthur obtained in those days of the Pope, and
Court of Rome, that Norway should be for ever annexed to the crown of
Britanie, for the enlardgment of this kingdom, and he called it the chamber
of Britanie. For this cause the Norses say, that they ought, to dwell with us
in this kingedome, to wit. that they belong to the crown of Britanie.

And if we would be as little beholding to the Sea of Rome, for confirming
Norway to this kingedom, as to Pope Eleutherius before, to the Islands, and say
king Arthur claymed Norway, by a former Title, as De^marke was before, or
Iurebelli, as a conqueror, and the Pope did nothing, but confirm these, or
one of these Titles, it suffices to asscribe the judgment of that question to
the Sea Apostolic.

This seems to me, to confess and acknowledge great, and ample prerogative
in the Pope of Rome in spiritual matters, and directing also of temporal to a
spiritual end, as Catholics now attribute unto him, or he demand. And yett
we are by these Protestans (who freely acknowledge the Popes and church of
Rome then to have been holy) assured that the holy Pope and court of Rome, so
practiced it. That our king, Christianus optimus fuit, king Arthur was an
exceeding good christian, who sought, and accepted it, and both he the Bishop
and clergy and the whole kingedome so approved thereof, that it was by
public authority received for a law in this nation, and ratified both by our
Brita^s, Saxons, and Normans after them. For it is set down in this law
before, that from that time the Norses or Norwegians claymed privilege to be
free here, by those proceedings. Which is more plainly expressed afterward in
the same law in these words by Protestants translation: The people of Norvvay
may, and ought from henceforth, dwell, and remain in this kingdom, with us,
as our louinge and sworn Brethren. Qua de causa possint and debent praedicti
de caetero nobiscu^ cohabitare, and remanere in regno sicut coniurati fratres
nostri (Guliel. Lamb. in leg. Eduardi sup. Richard Hackluyt p. 245.) And the
motive whereupon the Pope then so proceeded, in annexing and confirminge the
kingdom of Norway to the crown of Britanie, seems to be the very same, the
spiritual good both of that contrie, this kingedome also, and the church of
God, in ordine ad spiritualia. Which the present Pope and Catholicque divines
allege ordinarily, for privileges of the Sea Apostolic, in such causes,
the spiritual good and help of all, or many, and hurt of none at all.

For besides many histories of those times so testifyinge, and to be passed
over, it is recorded in these very laws themselves so warranted by
Protestants and antiquities. (Leges S. Edwardi supr. titul. de Iure and
Appendicijs.) Fuerunt gentes ferae, and indomitae, non habuerunt legem Dei, nec
proximi, fuerunt autem ibi Christiani occulte. Arthurus autem Christianus
optimus fuit, and fecit eos baptizari, and vnum Deum per totam Norweiam
venerari, and vnam fidem Christi semper inuiolatam custodire. caperunt vniuersi
proceres Norweiae vxores suas de nobili gente Britonum tempore illo, vnde
Norwegienses dicunt se exijsse de gente, and sanguine regni huius. They were
wild and barbarous nations. They had not the law of God, nor neighbor, but
there were Christians there secretly. But king Arthur was an exceeding good
Christian, and caused them to be baptized, and throughout all Norway to
worship one God, and to receive and keep the faith of Christ inuiolably, all
the noble men of Norway took wives of the noble nation of the Britans.
Whereupon the Norwegians say, that they are descended of the race and blood of
this kingedome. And then immediately follows that which is cited before: The
aforesaid king Arthur obtained in those days of the Pope and Court of Rome,
that Norway should be for ever annexed to the crown of Britanie. Whereby it
seems by these Protestants, the motive of the Pope to join Norway to the
crown of Britany, was the spiritual good of both kingdoms, and the church of
God, king Arthur so worthy a christian, having procured so strange and
happy an alteration in the kingedome of Norway; his victories there against the
barbarous giving free liberty and access to such christian preachers, as by
the Popes license, and allowance were directed thither. For S. Kentegern, made
Bishop by S. Palladius the Popes Legate, if we may believe the puritan
historian of Scotland: went seven times to Rome, and the Pope sent him to
perform the work of the ministry enjoined him by the holy ghost. Vir Dei
septies Romam adiens, sanctus Papa illum virum Dei and Spiritus sancti gratia
plena intelligens, in opus ministerij a Spiritu sancto illi iniuncti
destinauit. Georg. Buchan. Rerum Scotic. l. 5. Rege 42. page 146. Ioh. Capgr.
in Catal. in S. Kentegerno.

And as our Protestants with others testify this Apostolic man, thus
warranted and privileged, sent of his disciples some to the Orchades, to
Norway, and Island, that they might receive the light of faith by their
instructions. For he had in his college at Elguel in Walls, three hundred,
sixty, and five learned men, always so prepared to preach. (Bal. l. de
Scriptor. centur. 1. in Kenteger^ Elguensi. Cap. supr. cod. Hector Beeth. Scot.
hist. l. 9) Ex discipulis suis quosdam ad Orchadas, ad Norwegiam and Islandium
mis^t, vt eorum instructionibus fidei lumen reciperent, nam in Elguensi
collegio, trecentos and sexaginta quinque literatos viros ad id semper paratos
habebat. And to add further to the honor of the Sea Apostolic of Rome, by the
example of this most blessed man S. Kentegern, he never being but an
ordinary Bishop sometimes in Walls, sometimes in Scotland, yett by the
privilege he had from the Popes of Rome in that kind, besides his labors
here in Britanie, Norway, and the remembered other places, to write in a
Protestant Bishops words. (Ioh. Bal. centur. 1. in Kentegerno in Elguen.)
Formam primitiuae seruauit Ecclesiae, Apostolico more pedes ad praedicandum
porrexit, plaerosque ad fidem conuertit, Apostatas reuocauit, Pelagianos
eiecit, nondum renatos baptizauit, simulachra subuertit, Ecclesias construxit,
aegrotis ministrauit, languores curauit, atque in magna vixit abstinentia,
praedicabat ad flumen vsque Fordense, and ad mare Scotium, Caledonos, Athalos,
Horestos ac vicinarum Albainae regionum Incolas, docendo, mouendo, hortando, ad
verae pietatis obseruationem instigauit. He kept the form of the primative
church, after the manner of the Apostles goinge on foot to preach, he
converted very many to the faith, recalled Apostats, cast forth Pelagians,
baptized those that wanted baptism, overthrew the Idols, builded churches,
ministered to the sick, cured diseases, and lived in great abstinence: he
preached even to the river of Ford^ne, and the Scottish See, he incited by
teaching, admonishinge, and exhortinge to the observation of true piety, the
Caldonia^s, Athals, Horests, and the inhabitants of the Regions near to
Albania. This holy Bishop being first Bishop of Glascow in Scotland, came into
Walls about the year of Christ 560 and there settled an episcopal See, he
being the first Bishop thereof by the river Elwy, and notwithstanding he was
at the first resisted therein by Malgo, or Malgocunus a British king in that
contry, yett his authority and power so prevailed, that to speak in a
Protestant Bishops phrase. ( Hector Boeth. hist. Scot. in Kentigern. Godwin.
Catalog. in Assaph. 1.

The king at last was content to allow the same church to be an episcopal
see, and moreover to bestow upon it, diverse Lordships, manners, immunities,
and privileges. Kentegern having stayed here some number of years gave over
his Bishopric unto a disciple of his named Assoph, a man of great virtue and
learning, who writ the life of his Master Kentegern; and besides that he was
disciple to so great a patron of the Apostolic Roman See, to give Evidence
that he himself was so also affected, notwithstanding there were then many
Bishops, and Archbishops also in Britanie, yett a Protestant Bishop writes. (
Bal. centur. 1. in Asapho.) a Pontificis Romani discipulis Angliam
aduentantibus, authoritate and vnctionem accepit. He received both authority
and consecration from the disciples of the Pope of Rome, that came into
England, and lived until the year of Christ 590. claruit anno a communis
salutis origin 590. Within four years of S. Augustines coming hither. Before
which time also and in this age S. Iuo a Persian by birth, and an holy
Archbishop, was sent by the Pope of Rome into this our Britanie or England,
together with Sithius his Nephew, Inthius his Kinsman, and others of whom the
Town yet called S. Iues in Huntington shire, where about he most lived took
the name, dyinge after many years in the year of Christ 600. or there about,
beeinge here long time by the Pope of Rome his mission before S. Gregory his
sendinge S. Augustine hither. John Capgrau. in S. Iuone. Flor. Wigorn. an. 600.
Andr. Leucand. and Gotzelin. in vita eius.

Neither were our own Archbishops that lived in this age after S. Dubritius,
Vodinus and Sampson otherwise affected in this matter. First S. Sampson being
driven by the pagans from York, Pyramus, or Pyrannus, chapleyne to that great
friend of the Roman See, king Arthur was Archbishop there, conuocato Clero
and populo, with common consent, and consecrated by S. Dubricius the Popes
Legate, and primate here then, noe other being to consecrate him. ( Galfrid.
Monum. histor. Reg. Brit. lib. 9. cap. 8. Matthew. Westminster. an. 522.) The immediate
successor to S. Dubricius, both in his legatine power from the Sea of Rome,
and primate Metropolitan here, in those times by common consent of writers,
Protestants and others was, (Godwyn. Catalog. in S. David's. 1.2. and Landaffe
1. Bal. centur. 1. in Dubrit. and David. Capgrau. Catalog.) that glory of this
nation, S. David, to whom S. Dubritius resigned in his life, living as an
Eremite. Relicto Episcopatu eremiticam vitam el^gat ac tenuit. S. David by his
legatine power translated the Archbishops See from Caerlegion, where it was
instituted by Pope Eleutherius, to Meneuia, S. David's, of this name, where it
after remained. ( in S. Dubrit. and S. David. Giral. Cambr. itinerar. Cambr.
Capgrau. in S. David.) We read of this our holy and learned Metropolitan,
that having expelled the Pelagian heresy, and restoringe the true faith,
Saint David was constituted Archbishop of all Britanie, and his city dedicated
the Metropolitan See of all the contry, so that whosoever should govern it,
should he Archbishop: Therefore all heresy being expelled, all the churches
of Britanie, received the manner and Rule by the Roman Authority, monasteries
ar builded in all places, and S David was made the highest protector, chiefest
preacher, from whom all received the Rule, and form of well living. He
was an order, correction, and imitation to all: learning to the Readers, life
to the needy, norishment to Orphans, a susteyner of the naked, the head of the
contry, a Rule to monks, life to seculars. Expulsa haeresi, fides sanis
pectoribus roboratur, and sanctus David totius Britanniae Archiepiscopus
constituitur, necnon ciuitas eius totius patriae Metropo^is dedicatur, ita vt
quicumque eam regeret, Archiepiscopus foret. Expulsa itaque haeresi, omnes
Britanniae Ecclesiae modum and regulam Romana authoritate acceperunt.
Monasteria per loca construuntur, and sanctus David summus protector, summus
praedicator, a quo omnes normam atque formam recte viuendi acceperunt, effectus
est. Ipse cunctis ordo, correctio, imitatiu, legentibus doctrina, egentibus
vita, orphanis nutrimentum, nudis fulcimen, patriae caput, monachis regula,
secularibus vita fuit.

The Archbishop of London in this time, as our Protestants tell us. ( Matthew.
Parker. antiquitat. Brit. page 7. Godwyn. Catal. in London in Theonus. Stowe
histor. in Lucius. Holin^ histor. of Engl. Matthew. Westminster. an. 586. Galfrid.
Monument. hist. i. 11. c. 10.) was Theonus, or Theanus, who taking the
chardge of London upon him the year 553. the year 586. he with Thadiorus
Bishop of York, taking their clergy, and relics of Saints, with them, get
them into Walls and Cornwall to the rest of their contrymen, whom the Saxons
had drovven thither. So that except these Protestants deceive themselves and
others, this Archbishop of London and Thadiorus of York also must needs be
of the same mind with the others before for the Roman spiritual power in this
nation; for these Protestants, ( Godwyn Catal. in S. David's 1.2.) telling us,
that S. Dubritius lived until the year of Christ 522. and S. David which
succeeded him, sat long, to wit 65. years, they both must needs be made
Bishops under him, and their flyinge into Walls and ioyneninge with the
Britans there, does planely convince, that they were of that opinion: for if
S. David was now dead, which cannot appear, yet most manifest it is, that
both S. Kentegern and S. Asaph, those most worthy Bishops chiefest then in
those parts, and all Britanie also, if S. David was dead, were long time
living and ruling after this, and yett such patrons of the Roman spiritual
power, with their whole clergy, as before is evidently proved by these
Protestants, that noe Catholic may yield more to the Sea of Rome in these,
then they did in those days. And if S. David was dead; yett the next
successors of him in that Archiepiscopall See, which were Cenauc and S. Teliaus
or Eliud, must needs also succeed him in that opinion of him toward the Roman
See: for though little is written of Bishop Cenauc, but only that he was
Bishop of Pattern and after successor to S. David in the Sea Archiepiscopall of
S. David's, this sufficiently conuinceth it, for the Bishopric of Pattern
being then under the jurisdiction of S. David* we cannot think that the
Bishop thereof was otherwise affected in this matter, then his so holy and
learned Metropolitan, to whom he owed obedience.

And his very being Archbishop of Meneuia immediately after S. David does prove
the same by these Protestants before, (Godwyn. Catal. in S. David's. Girald.
Cambr. itiner. Cambr. antiquit. eccles. Meneuen. apud Godwyn. supr.) who have
told us, that by the power of the Roman See, Meneuia was made the Metropolis,
and this Bishop did not, nor could accept it in any other sense, or by other
Title, of S. Teliaus the matter is more manifest, more beeinge written of him
by Protestants and others, that he was Scholar to S. Dubritius the Popes
Legate, the undivided companion of S. David, in their holy pilgrimadge, not
only so far as Rome, but to Jerusalem it self where he was consecrated
Bishop, and after his return home, and the death of Cenauc, being Archbishop
of Meneuia, then had principality over all the churches of the west Britanie
unto the end of his life. Principatum super omnes ecclesias occidentalis
Britanniae vsque ad finem vitae suae tenuit. (Godwyn in Landaffe. Girald.
Cambr. Caius antiquit. Cantabrig. l. 1. page 146. Catal. Epis. Landaf. Ioh.
Capgr. in Catal. in S. Theliao. Engl. Martyrol. die 25. November.) And was
Archbishop there at, and after also by some, the death of S. Augustine. For it
is evident by the British history, as it is allowed by our Protestants, and
by their own chronology of the kings of Britanie, that S. David himself
lived within 16. years of S. Augustines coming hither. ( Galfrid. monum.
histor. Reg. Brit. l. 11. cap. 3.) Tunc obijt sanctissimus vrbis Legionum
Archiepiscopus David Meneuia ciuitate, intra Abbatiam suam, and iubente Malgone
Venedotorum Rege in eadem Ecclesia sepultus, pro eo ponitur in Metropolitan
sede Kincos Lampaternensis Ecclesiae Antistes, and ad altiorem dignitatem
promouetur. Then David the most holy Archbishop of the city of Legions, died
in the city of Meneuia within his own Abbey, and by command of Malgo king
of Northwalles, was buried in the same church. Kincus (he which by others
before is called Cenauc) Bishopp of the church of Pattern, is placed in the
Metropolitan See, and promoted to an higher dignity. For as these
Protestants, Matthew of Westminster, and others are witnesses. ( Protest.
Catalog. Rer. Britan. in Malgo. Matthew. West. an. 586 581.) this king began his
Reign in the year of Christ 581. or 580. so that by this calculation, there
cannot be from the death of S. David dyinge in this kings time, and the coming
of S. Augustine hither by all accounts in the year 596. above 15. or 16 years
at the most. So that we either must say, these two Successors of S. David
lived a very short time, after they were called to that dignity (the contrary
whereof is set down before) or that S. Telaus this patron of the Sea of
Rome, and a canonized Saint of that church, was living in the time of S.
Augustines preaching in this kingedome.

Which is the more confirmed by all those histories, which relate the
opposition of some British Bishops and religious men against S. Augustine. (
Bed. lib. 2. histor. cap. 2. Galfrid. mon. lib. 11. hist. Matthew. Westminster. an.
603. Capgrau. in S. Augustino.) and speaking of an Archbishop of the city of
Legions, and yett not any one of them makes the least mention, that any
Archbishop did either resist S. Augustine, or pretend the least dislike of the
spiritual supreamacie in the Sea of Rome, or gainesay any order or decree of
the blessed Pope S. Gregory which sent him hither, nor any Protestants though
diverse of them name the Bishops as they conjecture which resisted S. Augustine,
( Matthew. Parker ant. Britan. in August. Godwyn. Conuers. of Brit. Stowe histor.
in Ethelb. Bal. l. de Act. Pont. Romans in Gregor. 1.) do once name S. Telaus,
or any Archiepiscopal See, at S. David's, or any other place in Walls at that
time, to have consented to that opposition.

Hardinge in his Cronicle makes this matter plain, that the Britans which
gainsaid S. Augustine did not deny the supreme spiritual power of the Pope of
Rome in Britanie at that time, but rather defended and maintained it, and
thereby also, as they thought, did justly refuse S. Augustine, for when he
demanded obedience of them thus they answered by this Author: Ioh. Hardinge
Chronicle cap. 88. in Ethelbert king of Saxons fol. 83.84.

To which Brito^s answered that they not knew
That he had such estate in all Britanie,
For they had three Archbishops, to obeyu,
Of Caerlion, London and York city
By Bishops of Rome granted to us and ordinate
Full long before ye had such dignity
Wherefore we will obey noe new primate
And specially none English new prelate,
For Englishmen and Saxons have us noyed,
And have our Land and all our kyn destroyed.
Where we see the Britans were so far from disallowinge the Popes Authority
in such things, that by the same they both claymed, and maintained the power,
and prerogatives, of three Archbishops, among them, now four hundred years
since

But these Protestants themselves with others acknowledge, that the most
renowned Bishops that were in this kingedome at that time, both received the
Authority of the Pope of Rome, and submitted themselves to S. Augustine his
holy Legate. Of the holiness and learning of S. Assaph, I have spoken before,
yett a Protestant Bishop says of him, (Bal. centur. 1. in Assaph.) A Gregorij
Pontificis Romani discipulis Angliam aduentantibus, authoritatem accepit, he
received authority from the disciples of Gregory the Pope of Rome that came
into England. S. Asaph in the life of his Master S. Ke^tegern. Capgraue and
others after, affirm as much of S. Kentegern. ( S. Assaph and Ioh. Capgrau. in
vit. S. Kentegerni.) that he did acknowledge this high power in S. Gregory the
Pope, and received power, and confirmation from him. All our histories with
general consent affirm the same of S. Lethardus, the french Bishop that lived
with Queen Bertha in Kerit. I have proved the same of S. Iuo the Persian
Archbishop, that then preached in Huntington-shire. Of S. Telaus also the
Archbishop of Walls, sufficient is said all-ready. And yet these were only
the chief holy, and learned Bishops here in that time, not any one comparable
to the meanest of these mentioned in any writer I can find, to have resisted
either the Popes ordinance, or his Legates authority.

And to satisfy a vain objection of some Protestant writers; That S.
Columbanus the holy Irish, or Scottish Abbot, whose authority some Britans in
the time of S. Augustine pretended for defense of their error in observing the
feast of Easter, and not presently submitting themselves to the command of the
church of Rome, it is evident by auntie^t histories, that both this S.
Columban, and the chiefest of them, submitted themselves wholly unto it, and
received both instruction and jurisdiction from thence. For it is testified in
a very old Manuscript cited by Surius, that both S. Kelian, which was the most
renowned of them, and that S Columbanus and S. Gallus, submitted themselves
with their associats to the Pope of Rome in all things at that time. Thus it
testifies of S. Kelia^, made Bishop of Herbypolis Wirtzburg in Franconia by
the Pope. (Sur. in vit. S. Kel. M.S. peruetust. apud eund. supr.) Praedicationi
abstinuit, donec Romano se Pontifici praesentaret, quatenus apud Romana^ sedem
and integru^ christianae Religionis dogma, and licentia^ praedica^di acciperet.
Hibernia siquidem olim Pelagiana faedata fuerat haeresi, Apostolicaque censura
damnata. He abstayned from preaching, until he presented himself unto the
Pope of Rome, that he might receive from the Sea of Rome, both the sownd
doctrine of Christian Religion, and license to preach. For Irland (his contry)
was auntiently defiled with the pelagian heresy, and condemned by apostolic
censure: and there shows how he had companions both of his journey and
submission, among others Saint Columbanus, and S. Gallus, leaving the first in
Italy, and the other in Almayne. The like has John Capgraue, and a very old
manuscript which he follows, if not the same with that of Surius. (Ioh.
Capgrau. in S. Kilian. M.S. antiq. pr. gloriosissimus Rex Eduardus in S.
Kiliano.) In oppido orientalis Fraunciae quod Wirttzburch eorum lingua dicitur,
cum aliquo tempore sub silentio stetisset, Romam profectus est, and officio
praedicandi a Papa recepto, Episcopus ordinatus: socijs eius Columbano scilicet
in Italia, and Gallo in Almania remanentibus. Saint Kilian stayed in a Town of
east France, called in their languadge Wirtzburch, and when he had been there
some time in silence, he went to Rome, and receiving from the Pope power to
preach, and being ordained a Bishop, returned, leaving his Companions,
Columbanus in Italy, and Gallus in Almayne. Where it is evident not only these
Scottish Saints did not only submitt themselves to the Pope in all matters
both of doctrine and jurisdiction, but the Pope at that time extended and
exercised that his supreme spiritual power, both in Italy, France, Almayne,
Britain, and Ireland, both to censure a whole nation, and to disable any to
preach or exercise spiritual function without his license.

And although the kings of Britanie after King Arthur even to the desolation
of the Britans, were by all histories even of their own as Gildas, Nennius,
the British history, and others, most wicked men, and such that by all
testimony of Protestants, and others, their kingedome was overthrown by God
for the sins of them, and their people, yett not any one of them by any
history did deny this power of the Sea Apostolic, but even their last king
Cadwalladar, as their own historian writteth. ( Gildas de excid. Britan.
Galfrid. mon. l. 11. histor. cap. 3.4.5.6.7.8. monum. histor.) being
admonished from heaven: Nolebat Deus Britones in Insula Britanniae diutius
regnare: that God would not have the Britans reign any any longer in the Island
of Britanie, went as he was admonished on pilgrimage to Rome, submitted
himself to Pope Sergius, and died an holy Saint, in so much that our
Protestants thus note of him. ( Galfrid. mon. l. 12. cap. 17.18. Bed. l. 4.
histor. and in Epitom. an. 688. Matthew. Westminster. an 688.689. Protest. annot. in
Matthew. Westminster. an. 688.) Regnum relinquens propter Deum, Romam venit: leauinge
his kingdom for gods sake, he went to Rome. An other says. ( Stowe histor in
Cadwallader.) Cadwallader forsakinge his kingely authority, went to Rome, who
after became a monk, and was buried in S. Peter's church at Rome, he was the
last king of Britanie, says Geffrey. ( Galfrid. Mon. l. 11. cap. 12.) And
for the Archbishop of Walls to whom some British Bishops in the time of S.
Augustine said, they ought obedience, cum suum Archipraesulem haberent, there
is not the least color, or pretense of any title by these Protestants
themselves, how he or his See could be exempted from the Popes Authority:
for as these men have told us before, it was first instituted by Pope
Eleutherius, in the time of king Lucius, and by the succeedinge Popes and
their Legates here as is before declared, confirmed and ratified, they received
their Palle, the sign of an Archbishop from Rome, and after their union with
the Saxons and disciples of Pope Gregory, in the time of S. Theodore Archbishop
of Canterbury used it, and Archiepiscopall Authority in all degrees, and by
the Popes permission and allowance, five and twenty Archbishops successively
from S. David to Archbishop Sampson, and had seven Bishops subject unto them
until this Sampson, flyinge the contry in a time of sickness carried away the
Pall into little Britanie. Among many others a Protestant Bishop thus
relates this matter. Girald. Cambren. in Itinerar. Cambr. Antiquit. eccl. S.
David apud Godwin S. David. Matthew. Park. antiquit. Brit. Rog. Houeden. Godwin
Catalog. in S. David's in Sampsone.

In the time of Sampson the Sea of S. David had seven Bishops Suffragans
subject unto it, as the Antiquity of the church of S. David declares, to
wit, Exeter, Bathe, Hereford, Landaff, Bangor, S. Assaph, and Furnes in
Ireland. Roger Houeden, which I account more likely, reckons these,
Landaffe, Lanpatern in Cardigan shire, Bangor Saint Assaph, Chichester,
Hereford, and Worcester. While he was Bishop it happened the people of all that
contry were wonderfully vexed, with Ianudise, so as great numbers of them died
daily of that disease. By the importunity of his clergy and disciples, he
was induced to fly the contry, and sailed into Britanie, where the Bishopric
of Dola being void, he was straight way elected unto the same. He had
brought thither with him the Archiepiscopall Pall of S. David, and used it
duringe his life, as did also his successors there, for many years, until
they were compelled by the Pope, at the suite of the Archbishop of Turon, to
leave it, and make profession of obedience unto him, as in former times. By
this occa on it fell out that the Successors of Sampson in Saint David's, what
for want of their Pall, or for poverty, or negligence, or some other occasion,
lost their Title of bishop, and to this day never recovered the same. Howbeit
they used all authority belonginge to an Archbishop by consecratinge of other
Bishops; and neither did they ever make profession of subjection unto
Canterbury until the time of Henry 1. King of England. ( Godwin supr. in
Bernard. 46.) When Bernard Chaplain unto King Henry the first, and
chancellor to his Queen, was consecrate by the Archbishop of Canterbury,
Iulij 12. 1115. not chosen by the clergy of Walls as hitherto had been
accustomed, but forced upon them by the King of England. And there with others
declares, how this Bernard took upon him the title of Archbishop, but
Theobaldus Archbishop of Canterbury, prouinge before the Pope in the council
of Rhemes, by witnesses, cum suam fidem and obseruantiam cantuariensi
astrinxisse: that Bernard had promised obedience unto the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the cause was by the Pope adjudged against Bernard, and the Sea of
S. David. Match. West. an. 1115. Matthew. Par. an. 1115. Godwin. supr. Girald.
Lambr. in Itiner. Camb. and Topogr Harps. secul. 12. cap. 46.

So it is evident, that from the beginning thereof to the endinge of the same,
the Archiepiscopall See of Walls depended of the Pope of Rome, and it was not
he, but the Acts of their own Bishops, which overthrew the dignity and
privileges of it, which the Popes had granted and confirmed. Of the Popes
power here after the cominge of S. Augustine there is noe denial among
Protestants, all generally consentinge that from that time now above a thousand
years, the Popes supreamacy ever ruled here in spiritual things, he
changed the Metropolitone See of London to Canterbury, constituted that of
York, interdicted our universities, constituted Bishops in places as seemed
best to him, King Ethelbert changed his laws, and received the customs of
the Romans: cassatis paternis legibus, nouas Sapientum consilio iuxta Romanorum
consuetudines Anglorum sermon constituit. (Bal. centur. 1. in Ethelberto.) The
great flaterer of King Henry the eight, who first denied the Popes
supreamacy, and took it to himself, Polidor Vergil, speaks of that
parliament. ( Polidor Verg. l. 27. page 689) Habetur concilium Londini, in quo
ecclesia Anglicana formam potestatis nullis ante temporibus visam induit:
Henricus enim Rex caput ipsius ecclesiae constituitur. A parliament is held at
London, in which the church of England did put on a form of power, never seen
in any time before: for King Henry was made head of the church. The first
Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury speaking of the laws of that parliament
plainly confesses. ( Matthew. Parker. antiquit. Britan. in Tho. Cramner page
329.) His legibus potentia papalis quae nongentis amplius annis in Anglia
durauit facile concidit. By these laws the power of the Pope, which had
continued here in England above neyne hundred years, was easily overthrown.
The present Protestant Archbishop of Canterbury, director to Francis Mason, and
he with others in their book of pretended consecration of Bishops, speaking
of the same Matthew Parker. ( Fran: Mason Book of consecrat. 3. cap. 4. page
131. vit. Matthew. Parkeri.) say: Concerning Archbishop Parker being the 70.
Archbishop after Austin, yett of all that number, he was the only man, and
the first of all, which received consecration without the Popes Bulls. To this,
this man himself, together with their Protestant Bishop, Godwin, Goceline and
others, in the lives of the Archbishops of England do plainly testify; to
this all antiquities and antiquaries agree, none dissenteth. Matthew. Parker in
antiq. Britan. Godwin Catalog. in Canterbury and York, Goceline in epist.

THE XI. CHAPTER. How by these Protestants the Britans and Scots which opposed
against S. Gregory's disciples, did take upon then greater or as ample power in
Princes matters, as ever the Popes of Rome or their Legates did in this
kingedome.
BEcause our Protestant Antiquaries and writers of England do with a common
consent agree in this, that the Britans at the coming of S. Augustine hither,
from S. Gregory, did truly and inuiolably keep in all points that holy
Religion which was planted here in the Apostles time, especially they which at
the first opposed against the proceedings of that our holy Apostles. ( Matthew.
Park. antiq. Britan. page 1. Godwin Conuers. page 43.44. Bal. l. 2. de Act.
Pont. Romans in Gregor. 1. Theater of great Brit. l. 6. cap. 9. David Povvel. in
annot. in l. 2. Girald. Cambr. Itiner. Cambr. c. 1. Holinsh. histor. of Engl.
cap. 21. page 102. Fulk. Ansvv. to a count. cath. page 40.) therefore to walk
still by their directions, let us now learn of them, what was the opinion and
practice of those Scots, and Britrans in this question of Jurisdiction in
spiritual Rulers, claimed and derived from whom soever they will, or any of
them shall please, though it is evidently proved in all ages before, that never
any such was practiced here, but that which was derived and approved from, and
by the Apostolic Roman See. And we shall plainly see, that these their so
much by them commended gayne-saiers to S. Augustine, and the Pope also, as
many of these men contend, did further intermeddle with Princes and temporal
affairs, then the Popes of Rome, or any their Legates in this kingedome: our
Protestant Antiquaries with others, write of King Frequahard or Frechard the
first of Scotland son to Eugenius, in this manner. Hect. Boeth. lib 9. fol.
179. page 1. Georg. Buchan. Rer. Scotic. lib. 5. Reg. 52. page 160. Holinsh.
histor. of Scotand in Frequahard page 112.

Frequahard besides other his wicked behauiours, was also infected with the
erroneous opinion of the Pelagian heresy. Which suspicion was the more
increased, for that he used to have sundry British priests in his company:
the which nation had been ever noted with the spot of that damnable
infection. The nobility of the Realm moved herevvith sommoned him to come to
a council, which they had appointed to hold of all the states, that they
might there understand, if it were true or not, which was commonly reported
of him. But he refusinge to come, they assembled together, and beseiged him in
a castle, wherein he had enclosed himself, and vvinning the place, got him
into their hands, and immediately thereuppon committed him to safe keepinge.
This done they consult together for the administration of the Realm, whether
they should quite depose Frequahard, or restore him to his place. Then it
followerh how they deposed him, and sent to S. Fiacre his Brother then an
Eremite in France, to govern the kingedome, but he refused it. Then these
Protestants add. (Holinsh. and Buch. supr. and Hect. Boeth. supr.) The Lords of
the land assembled themselves together in Argile, about the choosinge of a new
king, where by common consent, Domoald the third son of Eugenius being
called thither with Bishop Conan, out of the I Will of Man, was invested king
with great joy, and triumph.

Where we see that S. Fiacre though next heir living in France, where the
Popes Authority was generally embraced, would not consent to the deposition of
king Frequahard, to gain a kingedome, when his Brother Domoald and all those
Scots which by these Protestants then opposed against the Popes Authority,
performed this with great Joy and triumph. Of king Frequahard the second they
write in this order. ( Holinsh. histor. of Scotl. page 114. Buchan. Rer.
Scoticar. l. 5. Reg. 54.) He was covetous, wicked toward God, a Tormentor of
the just and righteous people, insatiable in all unlawful affections, such of
the prelates, as he understood to be wealthy, he rested not till he had
picked one matter, or other unto them, whereby they were suer to forfeite all
their Treasure unto his coffers. Buchanan adds, which I am ashamed to
translate. (Buchan. supr.) Eandem in suos furorem vertit, Iugulata vxore, and
stupratis filiabus, ob haec scelera communione christianoru^ fuit exclusus. For
these wicked offenses he was excluded from the communion of Christians.
(Holinsh. supr.) The Bishops of the Realm, namely those two reverend Fathers,
Colman, and Finnan perceyuinge such wickedness in the prince, blamed him sharply
sundry times for the same: and at length because they savv he regarded not
their admonishments, he was by them excommunicated. Thus continuinge certain
years in his wickedness, at length the nobles began to conspire against him,
so that they would have devised a mean how to have ridd him out of the
way, if Bishop Colman, had not forbidd them that practice. Then follows how
being miserably punished for his sins, and beeinge at the last penitent, he
was absolved of his excommunication by the same Bishop Colman: who was that
great opposer against the disciples of Saint Gregory, and Saint Augustine, and
disputant for the Scots against S. Wilfride.

And the Bishops of Walls which were in the same opposition to the disciples
of S. Gregory the Pope, were in the same case by these Protestants: One a
Bishop and antiquary among them writes, from the ancient antiquities of that
nation. ( Godvvin Catalog. in Landaff. Annal. eccles. Landaffen: in Oudoceus.
3.) King Morcant having killed one Frioc his Uncle, beeinge therefore
excommunicate by the Bishop, upon his absolution, besides a grant of diverse
privileges unto the church of Landaff, gave Cynciri^l and certain land called
Cynfall, as also the churches of Ythat-Haffern. ( In Guruan. 10.) Bishop
Guruan excommunicated Tendur king of Brechinianc, for killing Engistill a king
of that contry trecherously, and for absolutio^ had from him the gift of
Lannihangel tref. ceria^c. Guoderec slew his own Brother Merchion. ( In
Greciclus.) for which deed, he was by Bishop Grecielus excommunicate, and
enjoined by way of penance before he might be absolved, to spend a year in
pilgrimadge to the church of Dola in little Brittanie. Garcan the son of
Guina^ ( In Berthygion 14.) kept his own stepmother, and being excommunicate
for that Incest, gave to the Bishop Marchywis. ( In Bish. Cerenhir 18.) Houel
King of Glewissig by perjury circu^uented Gallu^ the son of Cidrich, for
which he was held under excommunication, by the space of a year, at the time
of his absolution he gave Merthir-buceil, Merthirminor, and Tircollan. Like
was the case of Ili the son of Conblus who upon the like occasion gave
Gulipe. Aquod son of Ioua falling out with the Bishop, drove him and his men
into the church of Landaff, and threw stones at them into the very church, for
so doing he was excommunicate, and to be absolved, was glad to give
Pennoun, with the church of Lautilul, and certain other Lands. ( In Bish.
Joseph. 28.) Monric King of Glamorgan beeinge excommunicate for puttinge out
the eyes of Ergum, the son of Guriat of Gueinscot in the time of a truce, to
have his absolution gave Painiprisc.

Who desires more of such proceedings by the Britans, so recommended by
Protestants, may enquire the^ in the ancient Annals of Landaffe, and this
Protestant Bishop Francis Godwin, Protestant Bishop there, who in his treatise
of that See, is very plentiful in such Examples. And this shall suffice for
this short history of the Popes preeminence and proceedings here, from the
beginning of our first faith in Christ, by them and their happy instruments
therein. By whom and whose preeminence spiritual, this kingdom from that
time, has received many great and irrecomprehensible graces and benefits,
both spiritual and temporal, to bind us everlastingly to honor and reverence,
with all duty, that Apostolic See, and chiefest pastors thereof, successors to
our most glorious first Fathers and founders in the faith of Christ, and our
chief Sheephards on earth, except we will desperately run away and cast our
selves out of the blessed flock and fold of the militant church of God, out of
which there is noe salvation.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page 42. line 1. distributor, read, distribution. page 52 line 19. there
nowned, read, the renowned. page 153. line 19. this, read, these.

AN ADVETISEMENT.
Whereas in the first hundred year it is as suppose written in the story of S.
Mansuetus, that Ireland was never plainly called Scotia, I wish it thus to be
qualified. page 34.
For if we grant as some few write, that Ireland has been called Scotia, or
Scotia Mayor, Scotland, or the greater Scotland, yett that is very seldom
found in histories, but it is commonly called in them ancient and late,
Hibernia, Iuernia, Inuernia, and Ierne, Iris, and Ogigia little Brittanie, and
by the Irish themselves, Erin, when the part of great Britanie, after the name
of Albania ceased, is commonly in all historians named Scotia, Scotland.
Aristotil. l. de mundo Pompon. Mela l. 3. Solinus Poly. histor. c. 25. Strab.
l. 4. Iuuenal. Satyr. 2. Claudian. l. 7. Stangh. Hunfrid. Lhuid. Stow Holinsh.
hist. Hect. Boeth. Buchan. Capgr. in Catalog. Gryimst. in Ireland.


