A treatise of MELCHISEDEK, proving him to be SEM, The father of all the sons
of Heber, the first king, and all kings glory: by the general consent of his
own sons, by the continual judgment of ages, and by plentiful arguments
of scripture.

Heb. 7. 4. Now consider how great HE is. Imprinted at London for Gabriel
Simson and William White. 1591.

OMNE BONU^ SVPERNAE



To the right Honorable Sir WILLIAM CECILL, of the honorable order of the
Garter Knight, Lord Burghley, Lord Treasurer of England: grace and peace from
the just king of peace.
THe heavenly sayings of Moses (Right Honorable) concerning Melchisedek Genesis
14 and the commandment of considering how great the party is. Heb. 7. can
not well take place in our hearts, unless the person be known: that all
spoken of him may be taken in due sense. For either we shall clymbe three
steps too high with Melchisedekians, Hierax, or yet Origin, who make him more
then a mortal wight: or we shall fall too low, with the common Greeks, who
make him either a Chanaanite, or leave him to be an obscure man. But when we
find out certaynely who the person is, then we may safely examine all that is
spoken of him. And in my opinion, that which is written of him, reaches so
far both to the first Adam one way, and to the second Adam an other way,
still ouershynyng Aarons ceremonies: that an error in this matter will no
less frette the web of holy Story, then the work of a VVeauer is hurt, when
many thriddes in one place are pulde away, which reached through the whole
piece. In a matter of this weight, I judged my labors should be well spent,
that I might both shake off quite, from all minds which use my pains, that
which is to be rejected: and help to settle better the ancient truth. To that
end I handle the chief diversity that have been touching Melchisedek: and
speak for one opinion more at large: which Hebrews always held, and Latins
most commonly: that Sem the father of all the sons of Heber, must needs be
the man. Whereas many and great men thought otheryse: but neither the most
ancient, nor the most part, nor only of the best: I leave all to the Reader to
judge: who, if he be of Learning will either (as I trust) follow the oldest
opinion continued still, or without blame give others leave to follow it. In
chosing a particular Judge, I find your Lordshyp, meet to give a right
censure in difficulties: and I suppose you will delyght to hear what antiquity
speaks, and the matter it self in this cause. You shall find this matter
much like that, wherein once your L. bestowed long time in speech with me: and
many of the very same points (though to an other conclusion) will here offer
them selves. As the other, in my mind, were of profit to be known: so by
these I trust, the student in Divinity will think him self somewhat helped.
And that both may come together, if it be not a trouble to your leisure to
remember, it wylbe a benefit to Scholars for to mark how some Counselors
look into their studies, and teach by sudden demaundes what points
experience of whole kingdoms require to be plainly taught in the world:
which the common sort little think of: and for want of indgement rashly
despise. Five years ago your L. requested me to repair to the Court,
concerning the Greek translation of the Hebrew Prophets presented to you, and
concerning perusing of the Englysh: to have more integrity and playnnesse
according to the Hebrew and the Apostles Greek. Then you afforded most
wyllingly three hours spech for matters of chief and general use, and of
great hardness: in such sort that I was amazed how you should have either
such leisure, to be ready in them, from your political affairs and studies,
or so right and profounde a judgment for the bones in the body of Scripture,
as Divines skant think of, till great errors drive them to consider.
Beginning from the Greek, you demanded why the 70. should not be more
accounted then the Hebrew, seeing the Apostles follow it: Reason being rendered,
that they were to follow it, because Heathen commonly knew no other Bible. You
further examined how far they followed, and in each kind tried out the
matter. Their strangeness of imitation was, in that they refused not bare
faults of Grammar, as often appears: to teach us not to fight for words:
Secondly, they followed the 70. where they hid their mind, as in Kenan, Genesis
11. and Luke 3. and in Seventy and five souls, for Seventy* Gen 46. Act. 7.
or deal as Paraphrastes or abridgers: which often they do. Thirdly, in some
rare use of a word. One example of that offered it self. Heb. 10. which
mystaken by Translaters, puts all men to a plundge. For it is said: No
further offering remains for sin, if we after knowledge of the truth sin
(...) which ought not there to be translated willingly: rather of pretended
malice, from Exo, 21. 13. where (...) is in Hebrew Zadah, insidiatus, lying in
wait, or iazid. 14 wylfull, or malicious spiteful. And so the disputation was
plain against the Jews, wylfully faythles: and no further grief to distress
the conscience of any. This was examined as a third kind of the 70. followed.
You examined likewise, turning to your Bible the 70. Translations refused: when
a chief matter was weakened by the 70. therefore Paul said, for this cause
(...), I raised up, not (...) Thou have been suffered alive: Romans 9. 17.
because he would express the Hebrewe more plainly. Exodus 9. 16.
Moreover for heavenly eloquence, how the Apostles departed from the
Translation: namely Heb. 1. 3. that your L. diligently tried by Esaias. 4. and
other places. Neither was the Hebrew left untried with the 70. for a rare text:
or in some use an only: Why we say Psalm. 2. Kiss the Son: where the Latin
has after the Greek, Amplectimini eruditionem. The openyng of that drew more
matter. I answered, that by both Translations it might appear, that the Hebrew
word was Bar. Now the Hebrew word Barar (To teach) might by proportion of
language have Bar for doctrine: though so in use any where it comes not: but
for a son, it does in the Proverbs. 31. 2. Bar, and Dan. 3. Bar: and in the
new Testament Acts. 4. Bar-nabas was expounded, Son of consolation. This
text litigious, for the writing amongst the Romistes, for the meaning with
Jews following the 70. your L. moved to be expounded. For the Translaters I
gessed, that either they feared to translate for Heathen, ungrounded upon the
Trinity a distinct saying of one person, The Son, least Heathen should
turn it to a wrong meaning: or they marked it not. As in Daniel they knew not
how to translate Iccaret^ Messiah: Messiah shall be killed: because they
understood not the matter: or they feared to publyshe it in a plain phrase,
and in Greek. Upon mention of Daniel, your L. requested an opening of the
whole Book, and examined the particulers: what times or years it contained,
what Empires: and how the Image legs, which were to be made dust, before the
Stone was made a Mountain, might not be taken for the Romans. For so we
should conclude with Jews, that Christ is not yet come: as also by the fourth
Beast: if we made it the Romans. And for the golden text of Daniels Seauens,
your L. had read some that I then had not, of great account. It would be too
long to run now through all. I could not faster run then through any part
of mine own studies, then you pursued in demaundes for the chief matter. Your
shortness in propounding questions, readiness in conceyuing a full answer,
diligence in trying Scriptures, dexterity in replying upon color of doubt,
quickness in trying what confidence I had in mine assertions: and lastly,
singular gentleness of encouraging my studies, with entreatie to repair often
to you: these parts do assure me of a Judge fit for will and skyll.
Wherefore I willingly revive the memory of your Lordshyps spech: to live
through all memory: and to end as I began: to your Lordshyppes protection I
commit this Treatise, to find intertaynement: but so far as truth shall be
seen to require.

Your Lordshyps to command: HVGH BROVGHTON.

Scapes in printing* at which if the Reader stagger, let him read thus.
sickerly for sickerles, A ii. line 33. Sixtus for Pius at A 4. line 12. for
(...) for from from Vr from Vr. blunter beasts read breasts. For moves us to
faith, meets us by faith. F. b. i. the fourth side, line 13. for Ramban read
Rambam H i. b. in the margent. read Psalm. 48. for 180. D ii. a. line 14. F
iii. b. read that in a Political. Genesis 11. not. 12. F. iii. the third page,
line. 33.

A treatise touching the sundry opinions concerning Melchisedek, who he should
be: wherein is enterlaced a discourse of the old Greek translatours, hiding
their mind for Genesis 5. and 11.
Sundry opinions has Epiphanius of Melchisedek, Epiphanius, book 2. her. 55
what, or who that person should be. But time has vanquished part of them,
from defense of ye learned by writing, though in fantasies of men they be
quick. Part, have yet their defenders of sundry sorts until this day. Of
such as are vanquished, a short speech may suffice: of the others, more
shall be spoken: to settle one, true.

1 The Melchisedekians framing a deadly heresy, as Epiphanius does record,
The first Opinion*
held Melchisedek to be a certain wight dwelling in some place, which none
can tell of, being a wight greater then CHRIST. Forsooth they would stablishe
that opinion from ( Psalm. 110. 4.) Thou art a Sacrificer for ever, after the
order of Melchisedek: as though Christ must therefore be inferior, and
needing the order of the other. And of Melcisedek they hold it to be properly
spoken, that he is without father, without mother, without kindred: going about
to prove that, from the Epistle to the Hebrews. Now from the same words they
may be confuted. As David prophesying of the LORD, said, that he should be a
Sacrifi^er after the order of M^lchisedek: by the very same Scripture shows
the Apostle, That even Christ should be that Sacrificer, who is Lord in David.
Psalm 110. and above all to be praised for ever. Romans 9. Of Melchisedek speaks
the Apostle in the same place, that he likened to the Son of God, continues
a Sacrificer for ever. Now if he be but likened to the son of God, he is not
equal to the son of God: For how can the servant be equal to ye master? Now
Melchisedek was a man. That Epiphanius proves afterward. And that, Without
father, without mother: is not said, as though he had not father and mother:
but because they are not in most manifest sort ((...).) named in the Scripture.
How many others have not their kindred in ye most manifest sort, as Daniel,
Sidrac, Misac, and Elias?

This much for the Melchesedekians, out of the Greek Father Epiphanius:
wherein I could wyshe some to mark how gravely and truly, the learned father
expounds the words. without father, without mother. For whereas he In saying
(...)* that is: in the most manifest sort.
makes the relation to be only to Genesis 14. they do not well that stretch it
further: as though the holy Ghost had said, in all the Scripture, a father or
mother for him can not be found. So they might as well say, that by all the
Scripture it could not be proved, that he had beginning of days, and end of
life. Whereas the Apostle expressly teaches, That it is ordained, that all men
once shall die. Now of Melchisedek it is as well Heb. 7. Gene. 3.
affyrmed, that he lives: as that he is without father and mother. But by the
Scripture we may gather, that he dyed: therefore as well, that he had father
and mother. Wherefore it is not properly spoken.

Let none think, that the spirit of God is controlled, by seeking his name
and parentage. Job would tell us, that it is not good to defend Gods cause
with an error, Job. 13. 7.
( pretending a religion.) Neither is the Figure hereby destroyed. For it is
not spoken simply, but in relation. And every By S. Augustnes leave.
wise man will grant, that he had both father and mother. And why should the
Figure be more defaced, by a certain father taught us, by sundry arguments,
by Moses when he wrote, then by obscure fathers? The Apostle disputes of
Melchisedekes case, as in Abraham's time he was known, when he was alive, and
actually a figure of Christ, not medlyng with that certayntie, which is
evident since Moses wrote a Comment upon that case, showing what man was then
alive, at Salem greater then Abraham. And without the story of Sem, I think we
shall hardly perform this charge: Heb. 7.
Consider how great this man is: or understand this: Heb. 6.
Of him we have many things to be spoken, hard to be uttered: because ye are
dull of hearing. Follow then the Apostle, and mark his words: and know both
the reason of Moses silence, Genesis 14. and his undoubted proper meaning from
Genesis 9. Genesis 14. 18.
what man he must needs be, who then was king of Salem. It is a froward
modesty, which will not search when God bids: and the stopping of the
ears, is Serpentlike: when God blames for dulnes of hearing.

The Apostle (in deed) from the silence of Moses testifies, that he was a
figure of the Messiah. But how large may we expound his silence, to be over
his whole law, or in the phrase touching Melchisedek? Doubtless touching the
open and present story of Melchisedek. For to whom does he testify that? but
to the Hebrwees: which so hold it unto this day, as the Apostles speech does
handle it: who both consider the Figure representing one more then a man, and
also can plainly prove, in historical kind, by Moses from other places, who
held Salem then: and who then alive might be holden greater then Abraham:
whereby it might well be known, what particular person, both the Apostle
meant, and the Hebrews knew to be spoken of. And why then should men draw
the matter otherwise then ever the Hebrews would suffer it to be drawn?
Sickerles the Apostle would reason, as the Jews might understand* and never
would his argument, which must be plain, bring more entanglementes then all
religion had. But the Jews should have been more entangled by a doctrine
making any then alive greater then Abraham, but such as had the promise of
Christ before. Therefore the Apostle would never go about, to thrust an opinion
upon them: for one greater then Abraham, but would talk according to their
meaning. Let none thereon frame a godlyer modesty unto him self, then the
whole sway of Hebrews, touching an Hebrew point, will suffer: and the Apostle
writing to them: expounded by their continual judgment. Neither let any ever
think, that God would forbid searching of the Scripture for a matter of
story: as the kindred of a man is: but rather charge us to mark al points,
the first and the later: that in all, Gods plain constancy of blessing might
appear in a man: whom wicked Canaan knew to be glorious, but no more regarded
his state, or knew his kindred, birth, or death: then if he had them not at all:
Yet might have known, if their Fathers had delivered the memory of Noes
blessing from age to age until their time: and had taught them who dwelt at
Salem, borne before the world now, 2. Pet. 3, 7.
not of their kindred: nor like to end his life in their days, by reason of
lusty strength. An higher point Melchisedek resembled, Confer Genesis 9. and 11.
and 14.
to which the proper* story would bring by degrees: which to know we are
bound. The ignorance of that bred the Melchisedekians: The confuting of them,
I trust, shall not be needful in this age, but so far as men somewhat touch
them, in mistaking the spech: without father, without mother. etc.

2 There sprang another opinion that was somewhat holden of some old Latins,
The second opinion.
otherwise the best learned: But Epiphanius fathereth it upon Hierax, which
taught earnestly that Melchisedek was the holy Ghost, because he was termed to
be lykened to the Son of God: and applies these words, Abides a Sacrificer
continually, to that which the Apostle said: Rom.*
The spirit makes intercession with groninges unspeakable. But Hierax has
mist extremely. For the Holy spirit never took flesh: Wherefore he could
not be a king of Salem, and a sacrificer of one certain place: For, every
(high) Sacrificer is taken from men. Heb. 5. 1.
Some pardon must be given to them that held this error, more then to the
former: by reason that of two other opinions, which have had some stroke:
neither could greatly please the Greeks Until this day, as shall appear by
the discourse. Also amongst the Latins S. Augustine was a mighty wrestler for
ye defense of Hierax mind, styrred Up by ye fondnes of that one opinion, which
Greeks somewhat liked of, That Melchisedeck was a Cananite by kindred. Epiph. in
Here. 55. oecum. upon Heb. 7.
either not knowing, or not considering clearly the Chronicle and story
fortifiyng the other. These two opinions agree in one point, that Melchisedek
was a king of a small kingdom in Chanaan: Or as one translateth Tremelius, (a
little That he was no farther a Chananite then by place.
Chanaanite King:) for as the Jews language is called in Esaias. 19 The speech
of Chanaan: so any one dwelling there, might as well be of Tremelius called
Chananeus. Now by both sides, who hold this opinion, Melchisedek cannot be any
spirit: but one that has Adam and Noe to his father, and doubteles to his
mother Eve namely: and had both beginning of days, and end of life in
propriety: and lives not continually on the earth: nor can abide a Sacrificer
for ever, otherwise then by the description of Melchisedek. Genesis 14. Unto which
only the Apostle would have us to refer those speeches: seeing the rest of
Scriptnre, would teach otherwise of the very man, which we must mark, unless
we be dull of hearing: to know who by many degrees, should be greater then
Abraham. From this one stock of this king in Chanaan, grow two branches: one
bears up them, who make him to be of Chanaans seed: an other hold they, who
say that he is Sem the son of Noe. The first the Greeks brought in, who
held that Sem could not then be alive: The other held the Hebrews.

A discourse touching the Greek translation.
I Will separate these two from the former, A discourse touching the Septuagint.
by a discourse touching the Greek translation: and that the Greeks case and
judgment may better be known, I will here enterlace a long discourse, to show
how Genesis 5. and 11. the Greek translation differs from the true ground and
infallible the Hebrew text: whereof from Ezras age, every Rabbi Sadaias has
made a Treatise of that: which Elias has joined to his Hammasoreth
letter in the Hebrew was reckoned. I will lay down the usual translation
according to the Hebrew, and also that of the Greek, from the Septuaginta:
Whose translation, though we have not sincere, but for many sentences, patched
of sundry other translations, a sentence being repeated sundry ways, and
times, where the Hebrew has but one saying: yet for the body of the work, it
is the Septuagint, as may be gathered. For the new Testament writes many
hundredes of proper names, according to the common Translation which is called
the Septuagint: as Ar, not Har: Mageddon, not Megiddo: Sadduc in Sadducees, as
Sadoc is Sadduc. Ez. 7. and many such: But these examples I bring, to show
that the Greek Apocal. 17. Mat. 3. Mar. 12 Luke 20. Act. 5
copies are not (as some write) in those words corrupted. Such also are (...)
Hope, Ruth. 1. 12. Heb. 3. 14. (...) to oppress. Job. 35. Luke 3. 14. (...).
Pro. 3, 6. 2. Tim. 2. 15. to settle a right, (...). Psa. 53. Ephesians 6. 6. And as
(...) for vnreligious, or rob Altar Act. 17. cannot well be expounded, but by
Demostines from his oration, for Ctesiphon: as Vlpian expounds him: and
again as (...) Luke 22. 25. cannot be expounded so well as from the same
orator, making a difference thereby between the equal voices in Attens
government: and the sole principality of a kingdom, where all passes by one
voice and commander: so many places of several common words, used by the
Apostles, and also hundredes of phrases may and must be referred for
examination to the Greek translation whith we have now: though so much
mangled, and differing in sundry copies, that some times it would seem a
several work by diversity of copies. And this I dare affirm, that who so is
not acquainted with it, understands not fully the Greek of the new
Testament. That being so, as the common use held, we may hold that the common
Greek translation (though in some points compounded of others five Aquilas,
Symmachus, Theodotion: and two without the Authors names. These joined, made
Hexaplun: that is a sixfold work: the Hebrews both in Hebrew letters, and
also in Greek letters, but Hebrewe words made up Octaplun the eyghtfolde
work. The translation of Lucian the martyr: and that of Sophronius, though not
from the Hebrew, were of good account. Moses of late days is set forth, in a
Greek translation: but in Hebrew letters, by a wicked Jew: to deface the Greek
now used.
or six, which Athanasius and Epiphanius reckon, and wholly is an other for
the book of Daniel:) yet that for far the greater part, it is the old
Septuagint. That also appears by the Greeks citations. Doubtless the Romistes
think the Edition of Pius quintus, to come near to the Septuagint. According
to that will I translate the 5. and 11. of Genesis, and set it over against the
Hebrewe, joining some observations, not unprofitable for them that love the
truth. Herein you shall see years more then the Sun measured, hastenyng to
the North, and returnyng to the South. For several hundredes be added to all
these men, to Adam, to Seth, to Enosh. to Kenan, to Mahalaeel, to Enoch, to
Arphaxad, and to him a new Kenan (a man of Vtopia, that never was) with years
like the rest: after him to Selah, to Eber, to Peleg, to Regu, to Sarug, to
Nahor: to each one of these several hundrethes of years. These days God
sought not out: and light did never shine in them. The Stars that brighten
the day knew them not, nor the Horizon of the Ocean that bears up Whales.
But as the Egyptian Greeks followed the old Egyptians and Chaldeans, that
faygned years: whose days never came in number of months: So for their
weakness did the Greek learned Hebrews feign a thousand years, and many
hundredes, that never saw the eyelidde of the morning.

Great cause they thought offered so to dally, with profane folk that sought
for the Hebrews learning and books, only for bravery of a Library, nothing
for conscience to the Law of God: and would come with such minds to spy
likelihood of error, to catch at: as the men of Jericho came unto the house of
Rachab, to have caught the spies. Therefore as Rachab used a mockage with her
enemies: and said an irony or floute, that they taking her words in
propriety, let the Spies escape safe: So the Ebrewes coueted to do: being
requested to turn their Prophets into Greek, by a King whose father, before
that time, pretending favor to the Jews religion, and coming into their
town on the Sabbath quietly, straight way by force did surprise their City.
R. Abraham, Ben-Dauid in Kabala.
They were in fear least the son would follow his fathers steps, and pick
quarrelles at their wrytinges: which he would try by Heathen, no whit further
esteeming them, then with Heathen they had same likelihood of agreement. They
thus fearyng harm, seeing no hope of doing good with proper truth, would not
cast Pearls before Hogs, nor holy things before Dogs: to tread them under
their feet, and to be rented them selves: but altered such points, as most
would have stirred Egyptians to contention. The time and Chronicle was the
chiefest point, wherein the Heathen would fight against them. For some
inckling they had of the Homer, Plato in Timaeo.
Creation, of a Hesiod in Pandora.
woman full of gifts, that brought sorrow into the world, Nicander There.
of disdayning a perpetual youth, and envying that a fire Alexander polyhistor.
(which Clem. 1. Strom.
is light of knowledge) was hid from them: of old age, brought in by a
Serpents counsel: and yet Joseph out of Hesiod: and Diod. Sic Ovid. 1. Metam.
Herod 2. Eusebius 1. praep.
reaching to Manethus, Molus, Estiaeus, Ecataeus, Ellanicus, Acousilaus,
Ephorus, Sibylla.
a thousand years, whose infancy might endure an hundred years: of living by
food of Plants, Berossus Chaldeus, Hieronymus aegiptius* Ni colaus
Damascenus, Mnaseas.
of the deluge: of Eupolemus. Eusebius. 9. prap.
the Tower buylding, of the Sun twice altered in his course, of Moses, of
Chanaan subdued. These points, and many such did ye heathen somewhat know: but
for the times would they chiefly have bralled. Great is that matter, and
greatly to be considered. For that sentence which Tatianus in Eusebius used as
one sufficient to overthrow all the Philosophers learning: and of late for the
contemners in our time, M. Joseph Scaliger, that rare learned man, prefixed in
the entrance to his book de Emendatione temporu^: The same doubtless had the
ancient Hebrews in their mind. And this is that sentence, which wayeth so
much: Where the description of time is not well settled together, there can be
no truth of story. Wherein the Egyptians and the Chaldeans were extremely
deceived, as may appear by Greek records. Diog Laer. in his Proaem.
Mark for these how the Greeks reckon their times. Laertius writes of the
Egyptians, that Vulcane the son of Nilus was author of Philosophy: of whom
continued a succession of Priests and Prophets. In Egypt the learned were
called Hiereis, and Prophet ae thence the Septuagint borrowed these two terms
to translate Cohenim and Nebyir. The Apostles in Greek retain the Septuagint
terms, and for Cohenim put Hiereis* but never for o^e under the Gospel, that
is servant in the word and Sacraments. Wisdom would think their terms
the best: but custom will rule.
Now from this Vulcane to Alexander the Macedonian were years, eight and
forty thousand, eight hundred sixty and three, Iump forsooth. They would
seem not to miss one year of so great a time: whereas at Alexanders birth,
the whole world never had yet serne years three thousand five hundred and
eighty: by the Scripture account, conferred with the greatest constancy of
the Heathen. And to make their tales somewhat more notable: they join further
obscruations, to make all more sure, that in this space there were Eclipses of
the Sun three hundred seauentie and three: of the Moon, eight hundred
thirty and two.

The Chaldeans for profession are like the Egyptians, as thinks Diodorus
Siculus. In him they brag for Astrologicall experience of four hundred and
seauentie thousand years. Mar. Tullius much agrees with Diodorus Siculus,
who records in his book de Diuinat. 2. that they affirm four hundred
thousand years to have been spent of them in trial and experimentes of
observing chyldrens byrthes, with the stars situation, to cast their destiny.

With such mates had ye Greek learned Hebrews to deal. Their hatred toward
Abraham's sons and learning, Moses and Daniel shows. Baal Aruch (...)
lachnai or Iannes: who also cites the Talmud: and Numenius in Eusebius. Praep. 9.
Jews and Heathen kept the memory and name of Iannes and Iambres. For such
weak heads the Septuagint altered the text: not to be holden so in good
truth of the faithful, but done for present necessity of their case.

But now I will return to the Text: of the Hebrew the infallible: and the
Septuagint: setting one over against the other: and addyng some Observations,
where I think it needful.

The Hebrew original.
ADAM lived an hundredth and thirty years, and begat Seth. And the days of
Adam after he had begotten Seth, were eight hundredth years. So all the days
that Adam lived were nine hundredth and thirty years: and he died.

Seth lived an hundredth and five years* and begat Enosh: and Seth lived after
he had begat Enosh, eight hundredth and seven years. So all the days of Seth
were nine hundredth and twelve years: and he dyed.

Enosh lived nintie years, and begat Kenan. And Enosh lived after he begat
Kenan, eight hundredth and fifteen years. So all the days of Enosh were nine
hundredth and five years: and he died.

Kenan lived seventy years and begat Mahalaleel. And Kenan lived after he
begat Mahalale^l, eight hundredth and forty years. So all the days of Kenan
were nine hundredth and ten years: and he dyed.

Mahalaleel lived sixty and five years and begat Iered Also Mahalaletl lived
after he begat Iered, eight hundredth and thirty years. So all the days of
Mahalaleel were eight hundredth ninety and five years: and he died.

Iered lived an hundredth sixty and two years, and begat Henoch. Then Iered
lived after he begat Henoch, eight hundredth years. So all the days of Iered
were nine hundredth sixty and two years: and he died.

Henoch lived sixty and five years, and begat Metheuselah. And Henoch walked
with God, after he begat Methuselah three hundredth years. So all the days of
Henoch were three hundredth sixty and five years: and God took him away.

Methuselah lived an hundredth eighty and seven years, and begat Lamech. And
Methuselah lived after he begat Lamech, seven hundredth eighty and two years.
So all the days of Methuselah were nine hundredth sixty and nine years: and
he dyed.

Lamech lived an hundredth eighty and two years, and begat Noah. And Lamech
lived after he begat Noah, five hundredth nintie and five years. So all the
days of Lamech were seven hundredth seventy and seven years: and he dyed.

And Noah was five hundredth years old: and Noah begat Sem, Cham, and
Iapheth. And Noah was six hundredth years old when the flood of waters was
upon the earth. So Noah entered and his sons, and his wife, and his sons
wives, with him into the Arc, because of the waters of the flood.

The Greek Translation. Observations.

ADAM lived In the former times some note^, as it appears yet, very badly,
and blasphemosly, that Moses omitted an hundred years. So at the first they
would deface all his authority. What will they say for his later sum,
having more the^ the Greek has by ^n hundredth years: and yet the whole summ^
in most equal: in all saving Lamech.
two hundredth and thirty years, and begat Seth. And the days of Adam after
he had begotten Seth, were seven hundredth years. So all the days that Adam
lived, were nine hundredth and thirty years: and he died.

Seth lived two hundredth and five years, and begat Enosh. And Seth lived
after he had begat Enosh. seven hundredth and seven years. So all the days of
Seth were nine hunreth and twelve years: and he died.

Enosh lived an hundredth and nintie years, and begat Kenan. And Enosh lived
after he bgate Kenan seven hundredth and fifteen years. So all the days of
Enosh were nine hundredth and five years: and be dyed.

Kenan lived an hundredth and seventy years, and begat Mahalaleel. And Kenan
lived after he begat Mahalaleel, seven hundredth and forty years. So all the
days of Kenan were nine hundredth and ten years: and he dyed.

Mahalaleel lived an hundredth sixty and five yeerres, and begat Iered Also
Mahalaleel lived after he begat Iered seven hundredth and thirty year. So all
the days of Mahalaleel were eight hundredth ninety and five years: and he
dyed.

In him the Greek translation alters nothing: her in Noah.
Iered lived an hundredth sixty and two years, and begat Henoch Then Iered
l^ued after he begat Henoch, eight hundredth years. So all the days of Iered
were nine hundredth sixty and two years: and he dyed.

Henoch lived on hundredth sixty and five years, and begat Methuselah. And
Henoch walked with God, after he begat Methuselah, two hun^reth years. So all
the days of Henoch were three hundredth sixty and five years: and God took
him away.

Methuselah lived an hundredth So he should be a Father twenty years sooner then
he was in the Hebrew truth. And of 955. year old at the Flood: wherefore the
rest of his age he must be 14. years somwhere. Some would believe that he was
with Henoch till the Flood was past, rather then believe ye Hebrew text. Aug.
Ciuit. 15. Cha. 11. As though all the jews would, or could corrupt the Hebrew
text: cited so much in Commentaries, and found uniform yet. By this
impossibility, the Septuagint would have the world to know, that they for a
closer purpose would not communicate the truth of the Fathers ages with
profane Heathen. It is a pitiful thing to see how till this day men are bent
to imagine untruths against the Hebrewe truth, to disanul the holiness of the
word.
sixty and seven years, and begat Lamech. And Methuselah lived after he
begat Lamech, eight hundredth and two years. So all the days of Methuselah
were nine hundredth sixty and nine y. and he died.

Lamech lived an hundredth eighty and eight years and begat Noah. And Lamech
lived, after he begat Noah, five hundredth sixty and five year. So all the
days of Lamech were seven hundredth fifty and three years: and he died.

And Noah was five hundredth years old: and Noah begat Sem, Cham, and Iapheth.
And Noah was six hundredth years old, when the flood of waters was upon the
earth. So Noah entered and his sons, and his wife, and his sons wives with
him into the Arc, because of the waters of the flood.

As they dealt with the Fathers of the fyft chapter: So dealt they with them
that be in the eleventh: and some what more strangely, as touching additions of
one man, and of this sentence: And he died. To nine of them Moses for special
cause has omitted it. Mark that point likewise.

The Hebrew. GENESIS 11.
SEM was an hundredth yeeere old, and begat Arphaxad two years after the
Flood. And Sem lived after he begat Arphaxad, five hundredth years.

And Arphaxad lived five and thirty years, and begat Selah. And Arphaxad
lived after he begat Selah four hundredth and three years.

And Selah lived thirty years, and begat Eber. So Selab lived after he
begat Eber, four hundredth and thirty years.

Likewise Eber lived four and thirty years, and begat Peleg. So Eber lived
after he begat Peleg, four hundredth and thirty years.

And Peleg lived thirty years, and begat Regu. And Peleg lived after he
begat Regu. two hundredth and nine years.

Also Regu lived two and thirty years, and begat Serug. So Regu lived after
he begat Serug, two hundredth and seven years.

Moreover Serug lived thyrtie years, and begat Nahor. And Serug lived after
he begat Nahor, two hundredth years.

And Nahor lived nine and twenty years, and begat Terah. So Nahor lived
after he begat Terah, an hundredth and nineteen years.

So Terah lived seventy years, and begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran. So the
days of Terah were two hundredth and five years, and Terah died in Charan.

The Greek.
SEm was an hundredth year old, and begat Arphaxad two years after the
Flood. And Sem lived after he begat Arphaxad, five hundredth years: and he
died. Moses in the Hebrew omitteth mention of Sems death, to stay the reader in
expectation of some rare dignity of his person: and that men should not
think that he died before the blessing was fastened upon Abraham: as in truth
he lived after Terahs death, or the promise, seventy and five years, unto the
fiftieth year of Isaaks age: by the Ebrew infallible.


And Arphaxad lived an hundredth five and thirty years, and begat Cainan. And
Arphaxad lived after he begat Cainan, four hundredth and thirty years: and he
dyed.

And Cainan lived an hundredth and thirty years and begat Selah And Cainan
lived after he begat Selah, three hundredth and thirty years: and he dyed.

Here the Greeks enterlaced that feigned sentence: And Ca^nan lived. etc. (that
never was) and he died. And here a man mayse^ that they did but dally with the
Heathen, by this fained name, as in Chap. 10. they make a Ca^inan the sixth
son of Sem.
And Selah lived an hundredth and thirty year, and begat Eber. So Selah lived
after he begat Eber, three hundredth and thirty years: and he died.

Likewise Eber lived an By the Greek account Sem should die in the 105. year
of Ebers age.
hundredth thirty and four years, and begat Peleg. So Eber lived after he
begat Peleg, Because Eber doubled the ages of the men borne after Babels
buylding: the Septuagint to hide that, shorten his time much.
two hundredth and seventy years: and he died.

And Peleg lived an hundredth and thirty years, and begat Regu. And Peleg
lived after he begat Regu, two hundredth and ninty y. and he died.

Also Regu lived an hundredth thirty and two years, and begat Serug. So Regu
lived after he begat Serug two hundredth and seven years: and he died.

Moreover Serug lived an hundredth and thirty years, and begat Nahor. And
Serug lived after he begat Nahor, two hundredth years: and he died.

And Nahor The Septuagint for 29. give Nachor 179. to surmount Terahs 130.
according to his age compared with Abraham's. But Epiphanius copies will differ
in this, and many other points, as shall ^^one appear*
lived an hundredth seventy and nine years, and begat Terah. So Nahor lived
after he begat Terah, an hundredth twenty and five years: and he died.

So Terah lived seventy years, and begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran. So the
days of Terah were two hundredth and five years, and Terah died in Charan.

And thus much touching the alteration made by the Septuagint* to which I must
add one Narration touching Terahs age of 130. years, when he begat Abram:
which inequality with the former, might be a special cause why the
Septuagint, did add hundreds to many, least the strangenes of Terahs case
should make Heathen amazed. Thus Moses joins to Terahs death Abrams calling,
promise, and age, saying* And the Lord said unto Abram. Get thee out of thy
Land of dwelling, not of birth.
land, and from thy Nachor and his house.
kindred, and from thy Seeing he is dead.
Fathers house, unto the Where Melchisedek dwells, to pronounce the blessing
received from Noah, upon thee.
land that I will show thee. And I will bless them that Then faythles Nachor
went not with him after this spech.
bless thee, and curse them that curse thee, and in thee all the families of
the earth shall be blessed. And Abram If Abraham took Lot when he went upon
Gods commandment, and not Nachor, this must needs be an other speech, then
that which removed from from Vr, him self, Terah, and Nachor.
went as the Lord commanded him, and was seventy five years old, and Lot
went with him, as partaker of the same blessing. Zoar upon Genesis and that
appears in Ruthes commendation. Ruth. 2. 3. Where Booz says: Thou have
forsaken thy father and thy mother, and thy country, and thou art come to a
people which thou did not know before. The Lord will recompense thee: and
thy reward shall be perfect from the Lord. It is manifest by this Text, that
after his fathers death, God removed his dwelling from Charan, as S. Stephen
expounds it. And Philo the Greek writer in Abraham's Peregrination expressly
notes that to be the common judgment of the Jews of this time. This he
writes. It is like that none is ignorant that have read the Laws, how Abraham
first removing his dwelling from Chaldea dwelt in Charan. And after that his
father dyed there, he remooueth also from it. And in the same work also he
says, that Abraham left Charan, being seventy and five years old. I am
persuaded, that of old time the Greeks were of Philoes judgment. Yet of
later times two opinions have been much holden: which I cannot allow off. The
one, that Abraham should be borne when Terah was seventy years old, as he
is first in order: the other, that the Promise upon the former words was given
in Vr of Chaldea. The later Jews hold both. And also a Because saint Stephen
for Abraham's calling from Vr, used these words. Get thee from thy country,
and from thy kinsefolke: which words ate used also Genesis 12. (though after
mention of his fathers death, with many other, that could not agree with his
first calling) many thought that the words Genesis 12. were spoken in Chaldea
though he affirm the appearance of the God of glory, and words to that
effect, from other the like scriptures, and not from an express testimony.
speech of S. Stephens, caused many to hold the later. Bucholcherus
sufficiently answers that. Yet against S Stephen, the former, the Jews hold
for some rancor, because he says, that after Terahs death, God removed
Abraham's to Charan. Nothing but rancor could thrust them into that opinion,
against expressed words, and their own knowledge. They knew well enough that
the order of their names no more made Abraham eldest, then it could make Sem
eldest: whom the Septuagint, and most Rabbines hold to be younger then
Iapheth. Moreover, they hold Sarah, who was but ten years younger then
Abraham, to be Harans daughter. Genebardus lyketh well of this, that Haran at
eight years of age should beget her. But the Jews rather would think that
he understood not their dalliance: then hold that. An other reason against
the Jews is this: that they observe how Moses speaks of Terah only, in that
Chapter that he died: R. Bochai upon Genesis 11.
least men should think that Abraham would leave his Father alive behind
him. But he must be left sixty years behind him, if Abraham were borne when
Terah was seventy: therefore Moses by their grant would not have men to think
so. An other reason against them is this: of the present case. If Sem delivered
the blessing to Abraham, Abraham did out live him: for it could not be a
prophetical work to deliver the inheritance to one that should not survive:
and he should out live Abraham many years, if he were borne in Terahs
seuentith year. But they grant that Sem delivered the blessing to Abraham:
for they hold him to be Melchisedek: as witnesses Aruch in the word
Jerusalem, and whole troops, whom I elsewhere cited. Therefore Abraham out
living Sem, must be borne as Philo casts his age: whereupon doubtless the
Translatours were most moved to alter the Text for years. Now I will return
to my disputation for the other two opinions touching Melchisedek.

The Greeks held, that Melchisedek was a man of Canaans race: The third
opinion.
Epiphanius and Oecumerius are plain in that. Haer. 55.
Chrysostom upon Ebr. 7. speaks more circumspectly, that they knew not who
he should be, The Jews dallying, feign them who were reckened for Gods in
time of Heathen, to be Melchisedeks parents, carrying him above the age of
Abraham's time.
but deemeth not that he might be a Chanaanite. Epiphanius would seem to like
somewhat of this opinion, That Melchisedeks father was called Heraclas: a man
of that country, dwelling at Salem: and his mother Astaroth. These tales, some
belyke feigned, somewhat to stay the Melchisedekians folly: But they drove S.
Augustine to an other gross error, while they dispute against Samaritans
only, as though some Jews had thought otherwise. In deed Epiphanius dealing
is strange. He being a Christian from Palastina, and a Jew, as John bishop of
Nicea records, In an Homely not yet printed, but to be seen in Emmanuell
colldege in Cambridge: with Planudes, who condemns Purgatory plainly, yet
wrote about the year* 1100.
durst not openly deny the Septuagint: both for the Jews vow, that bound
their nation under pain of curse, not to alter it: and for heathen Christians,
who had conceived a better opinion of it, then of the Hebrew. Yet he disgraceth
the 70. much, as touching variety of Copies: and so disputes, as willing to
yield, that Sem must needs he Melchisedek: though he were loath to seem a
destroyer of the 70. authority, which Jews fables advanced, and Greeks
unskillfulness too much embraced. Thus he would seem to confute Sems defenders,
saying.

And these shall be found to be rediculous. For the Scripture making al sure,
has fortified the truth in all points, having ordered the times and years
not in vain. For when Abraham was eighty years old, or ninety, more or
less: then Melchisedek met him. Now Terah the father of Abraham begat Abraham
being That he speaks, but as the phrase at the first would seem to mean, we
may know by the like, in the Jews manner yet quick in Talmud. Saned. Cha. 9.
page 69. where Sarah should so be within eight years of her fathers age*
seventy years old: so years arise an hundredth and sixty, more or less.
And Nachor begat Terah at seventy and nine years old: so arise two hundredth
thirty and nine years. Sarug begat Nachor at an hundredth and thirty years of
age: so arise years three hundredth sixty and nine. Regu begat Sarug being an
hundredth thirty and two years old: so arise years five hundredth and one.
Peleg begat Regu at an hundredth and thirty years of age: so arise years
six hundredth thirty and one. Eber begat Peleg an hundredth thirty and four
years of his life: so arise seven hundredth sixty and five years. Selah
begat Eber being in the year an hundredth and thirty of his age: so arise
eight hundredth nintie and five years. Arphaxad being an hundredth thirty and
five years old begat Selah: Here he is so bold as to leave out Kenan, but in
three other places he does name him: and yet as a cipher, holding still Jacob
to be the two and twentieth from Adam.
so are years one thousand and thirty. Now the foresaid Sem. whom
Samaritanes fantasies would have to be Melchisedek, begat Arphaxad being an
hundredth years old: all makes years one thousand an hundredth and thirty,
unto the time of Abraham when he returned from the slaughter of the kings. But
Sem lived not so many years, according to these men's doting fantasy: but
being an hundredth year old, he begat Arphaxad two years after the Flood, and
lived after that, five hundredth years, and he died: Therefore he living six
hundredth years, and dying, how could he reach to one thousand an hundredth
and thirty years, that Sem the son of Noah, being ten ages before called of
them Melchisedek, should be thought alive after ten ages? He should seem to
be in earnest: but that in the words following, he comes as near the Hebrew
as he durst, well in that age.
O great wandringes of men. Now by the account of other Copies, from Sems age
since first he was Sem, unto the foresaid time of Abraham's meetyng Melchisedek
when he was eighty, or ninety years old, are years six hundredth twenty
and nine, more or less: so that in no case can Sem reach to the foresaid time
of Abraham, that he should be counted Melchisedek. Therefore on every side,
this tale of the Samaritanes falls to nothing. Anon I will try further his
meaning: Now thus I have laid down the force of his supposed opinion against:
That Sem should be Melchisedek. Tedious to me was this speech, standing upon
a false ground: which if it might be received, it would shake the certainty
of Scripture: yet needful at this day is the confuting of him. The Hebrew
falls. if (...)
For I have heard Learned men, more then one, object earnestly this aucttoritie
of Epiphanius, little considering how thereby the authority of the scripture
copies should perish wholly. He, and they, shall be answered both at once: if
they will start to no further skapes then Ep^phanius him self would like off:
that is, if they join not with Melchisedekians, and Hierax, in the exposition
of the words, without father, without mother. I will grant Epiphanius, that
the times make sure the cause: and agree with his dealyng, that he could bring
no other reason against it, that Sem should be Melchisedek: but from the
Greek account of time. Yet I must needs tell him: that he (as other native
Greeks) has hindered ye truth exceedingly, and wrought great annoyance to
Religion, in urging the Greek translation for propriety, where it dallieth:
for a ground against the ground: for truth where touching sad meaning, it
is further of then any Heathen Having a written story before them.
would or could lightly miss. The Hebrew text has Gods authority, and sad
propriety: it stands sure still, and of the wysest was always holden true.
Of it most sensible reasons may be rendered, amongst them whose senses by use
are made fit to judge: though it seem strange at the first. Variety has not
been found in the Hebrew text, nor Hebrew commentaries since Ezras time:
whereas nothing is more unconstant then the sundry copies of the Greeks, and
their citations in the Greek Doctors. Now in the Hebrew text it appears that
Sem, who lived six hundredth years, was but about five hundredth and thirty,
when Abraham met Melchisedek: and therefore Epiphanius has nothing for his
defense. And the more is he to be blamed, in that by some copies he found from
Sems birth to Abraham's wars but six hundredth twenty and nine years: which
variety might have hardened him to have sought for ye original, in true
plainnes. I think he might have found in some Greek translations, or
commentaries, the letter phi, which stands for five hundredth, in stead of
chi: that he cites, and would make six hundredth years, and so the Hebrew
aye was. But to conclude, all Europe, where Universities have had Hebrew: and
all our Bibles in these west parts, (that I have seen) Englysh, Latin,
Italian, Spanishe, French, Duch. etc. In work they condemn him, in that they
follow the Hebrew.
condemn Epiphanius for this point, as going about to shake the Hebrew text,
the strongest post of Divine buylding. In the same blame must they be wrapped,
that use for their defense the authority and testimony of his conclusion. And
thus much for turnyng against him, that which he chiefly leaned upon, in his
outward show.

Now that Melchisedek is not a Chanaanite, two points are handled therein by S.
Augustine. The one, that no Chanaanite could be greater then Abraham: An
other, that Abraham could not be the father of many nations, to revive faith
decayed, if a Chanaanite held it still: of these two, neither will suffer
other to fall: but either will be sure.

And for their objection that make the superiority to stand in the blessing,
August. in qq. ex vtroque mixtimque c. 109.
* that is always doubtless, that the rule of blessing is above them which are
blessed. But here the worthynes of the person is considered, whereby the blessing
from his mouth was regarded. Yea and Abraham him self was a sacrificer, and
therein could not be inferior to any Cananite for office. Moreover, what
warrant should Abraham have to acknowledge a Chananite, of a nation cursed, his
superior? They whose tongues were confounded, also lost religion, by the wrath
of God. But the Chananites had several Dialectes, therefore they all had lost
religion: neither was the name of the One true God, known to them. In deed
Eusebius records. 1. Praep, their religion, as somewhat sounding toward a
voice of good, but in truth bad to them selves. For, whereas God is called in
Sems house, ^l. Elion, the Chananites had several Gods, one called El: an
other called Elion: as often hearing somewhat of Melchisedek, who was
sacrificer to God, known by the terms El, and Elion. But they not holding the
truth, and being rather scattered from the face of the presence of God, went
on each one after their own gods: wherefore I can not see how against a
general rule, one of a cursed Nation and strange language in the life of Sem,
should excel Abraham and Sem. And thus much for the third opinion: wherein
also I was constrained, beside the natural method to answer the objections
against the fourth.

Now the fourth is that of the Hebrews, which hold it doubtless (the learned
of them, Cha. 49.
who cast Sem to be yet then alive) that Melchisedek can be no other but Sem.
For the better satisfiyng of all, I will name here some of the chief Authors,
with their testimonies. Syracides says, that Seth and Accordingly Talmud in
Such^, page 52. b brings the Sacrificer of Justice. Genesis 14 in catalogue with
Adam, Seth, Christ, Elias. etc. and there Massoreth Hashem, handles it, namely
of Sem, who was Carpender of the Arc with Noah: whereby we may gather that the
old opinion continued still.
Sem were most glorious amongst men. For Set^, it is manifest, in that all men
are. Number. 24. called the sons of Seth: But for Sem, I see not how he should
be manifest in such glory, but in the person of Melchisedek. And unless he
were a Prophet, I see not how he should excel: nor yet how he may be counted
a Prophet, but in the blessing of Abraham. So Seder Olam Rabba Cha. 21.
reckoning Sem in the catalog of old Prophets, used Melchisedeks story for a
proof. Such Hebrews as I have, that handle that case, record not only their
own judgment, but also the judgment of others agreeing thereunto, that Sem
was thought to be Melchisedek. R. Bochai is peremtorie in that. Fol. 23. col.
2. line. 42. and there in a kind of Rabbinical descantyng upon the phrase,
shows how Abraham was named by him So S. Paul calling Abraham heir of the
world. Romans 4. should take his speech from his country Doctors, as are
the other speches touching Melchisedek.
heir of the world, from the attributes spoken of God: in the words, Blessed
be Abraham to El. Elion, (the Mighty, the High) possessor of heaven and earth.
There also he handles Thamars case, that sentence was given by Judah upon her
to be brent: because she was (so they the Rabbines talk) Melchisedeks or Sems
daughter: and burning was the punishment of the sacrificers daughters, in such
faults. Marten Luther in sadness confuteth that: reckonyng how long before,
Melchisedek was dead, and showing that the time will not agree. As I think,
they noorished that tale, to teach their babes to weigh Melchisedekes case: and
no further thought that Sem should be her father in deed. For we should not
soon imagine them to be senseless, from whose Though all our Rabbines be
later then the Apostles: yet seeing they only of foren writers have some
hundrth of speches used in the new Testament, we may well conclude that the
old Hebrews before used them: whom the Apostles followed.
kind of study and learning, the new Testament brings many speches, in them
yet to be found commonly, and in no other writers: though touching their
fables, we have a warning. Salomoh Iarchi handles the cause of this blessing,
whose words be these, upon Melchisedek: Genesis 14. He in Midras Hagadah is Sem
the son of Noah: and he brought forth bread and wine, as unto men weary in
battle: and he showed the other, that his heart was not styrred against him,
for killing his Children: For Cedarlaomers people of Elam, must needs be of
Sem. This Iarchi and Epiphanius in Ancorato, are of one judgment: that many of
Sems posterity (such as had not their tongues altered) kept about Jerusalem:
though in time Chanaans families wearied them out. For that I will not strive,
as Ramban does against Iarchi: but both he (citing the Fathers) and I also,
will grant that Sem met Abraham.

I omit their short speeches in this point, that only cite other men's
judgments: as David Kinchi upon Psalm. 110. Rabbi Nathan in the record of the
Fathers. Aben Ezra upon Genesis 14. and Baal Hatturim, in his nootes of memory
from the letters of Melec Salem, whereby S. and M. in the words turned, make
Sem. Though such toying can be no proof in sound argument, yet it argues
that to have been always the common opinion: otherwise that dallying should
never have been admitted, whereas yet most As that Michael (who is Christ) is
the Angel that should go before Moses, in whom was the name (that is) the
nature of God. Exodus 23. 22. whom S. Iarchi calls Shaddai, God Almighty.
weighty things are found in that work, from the letters in appearaunce: but
in truth from the matter strong and clear of antiquity, and for memory
wittely contrived, to some note upon the letters, for better preservation also
of the Text. Ralbag confirms the Rabbines consent, by the great matters which
are in Melchisedek, and must also be in Sem. Midras, Psalm. 76. makes a lively
discourse upon the name Salem: which the very same is in Bereshith Rabba^; also
in Sepher Aruch: The name of that place was Jehovah Iireh. Abraham called it
Iireh: Sem called it Salem, as hence appears, Melchisedek king of Salem, the
holy blessed God said: If I call it Iireh, Sem a just man will be grieved: if I
call it (still but) Salem, Abraham a just man will be grieved: for his monument
forgotten. Behold, I call it as they both call it, Jerusalem: Iireh Salem:
That is, The sight or reverence, or religion of peace. I would Jerusalem had
as sadly looked to those things, which were her peace, as Midras does
pleasantly open the name. The same Midras has also a strong argument from the
place: For that was the place of Sems dwelling, whence in time Iapheths sons
should learn to dwell in the tabernacle of God. Esai. 2.
But from Sion came forth the Law, Mich. 4.
and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem: Acts. 1^
whereby God had his Tabernacle amongst us of Iapheths house: therefore Sion
and Salem was the place of Sems dwelling. Thus reasons Midras: that being so,
doubtless Salem and Sem were despised by the buylders of Babel, whereupon many
tongues sprang: and contrariwise, by cloven tongues understood at Salem, that
Jerusalem was founded, in which Iapheth and Sem might both dwell together.

The Jews at Worms, being By my self 1590.
demanded, When they thought Iapheth and Sem joined? said, at the overthrow
which they gave to Babel, and joined pains to build Jerusalem. And in deed,
it is somewhat that they say: but a small deal to the whole meaning. Then
Darius, of Madai and Iapheth: and Cyrus, of Elam and Sem, both pulde down
Babel, and set up Jerusalem. But the fulness of their dwelling is in that
Jerusalem, named Heb. 10 Apo. 3. and 21. Now that we cast no stumbling block
before those blind, we should furnyshe our selves to agree skilfully with
them for the writ, and take heed least we urge the Apostle as a new teacher of
an old story: in which kind Apostles would not be convicted, disputing with
their enemies, to teach that which Moses and the Prophets taught not. I will
pass over Tanchumah and Elias follow R. Sal. Iarchies words.
Tanchuma, Elias, Abrabaneel, Iuchasim, page 5. and page 134. b. where the
Rabbines say, that he buylt Jerusalem.
Zakuto, to hasten to those Hebrews, which by type mystery or calling of the
matter to an high understanding, deal in Melchisedek as does the Apostle,
considering how CHRIST in him is represented: that thereby the Apostles words
may less amaze us, when we see that ye Jews of them selves bring Melchisedek,
to represent the eternal name of God: and distinctly the Messiah: against
their present religion, at this day.

Let us mark R. Symeon ben Iochai a Rabbin, of which a man may speak, as
Odyss. Delta. verse. 230.
Homer speaks of Egypt: that therein been receites many good and many evil.
I am to regard him as a recorder, and not a judge: as citing other men's
words, and of small authority for his own. He is thought of Genebrard, to
be a very old writer: as of Galatinus: and I find R. Symeon Ben Iochi, cited
in Talmud Sanadrin. page 70. b. But doubtless many rare things for a Rabbin he
has yielded to many Christians, very agreeable to the Apostles doctrine. Thus
he says: Melchisedek king of Salem, Salem properly: When is he king of Salem?
In the day of reconciliation, when all faces are made lyghtened. What can be
better spoken, or more fitly for the party resembled by Melchisedek? For when
our Lord Jesus ware the crown of Thorns, then the daughters of Jerusalem were
to behold the true Solomon, and king of Salem: even in that day, when the most
Holy was killed, not for him self, but to make expiation, or reconciliation
for sin: Therefore the Angel does use Daniel 9. the verb capper, for to
answer Moses word cippur: expiation, and reconciliation. The same Rabbin
Col. 83. speaks, that the spirit of God. Genesis 1, 2. is the spirit of the
Messiah, who is also Shiloh: Zoar upon Shiloh. Genesis 49
in which name is The adversaries confession, for the matter in controversy.
Iah, the Eternal. And there he speaks of the Serpent desirous to shed
blood: so that Christ should be kilde, and many of Israel with him. This may
well be admitted in the Cabalist, who yet properly held Melchisedek to be Sem,
as S. Iarchi and the Nedarim. cha. 3. page 32. b.
Talmud does. This old Cabalist should be the more esteemed, for that out of
him many cite from these words, Jehovah, our God, Jehovah: In Zoar I can not
find that sentence: Sebast. Lepusculus cites not Zoar, but Vezoar for it.
the persons of Father, Son, and holy Ghost: Yet I may for his skill speak
as of one, that of late wrote a Book imperfect and vnpermitted, and forbid to
be printed: of the Lives of the Fathers: A discourse framed by a rude Serving
man, who had scraped notes from sundry men: and stained all, either with
arguments unapt, or with blasphemous errors: He citing Zoar, (a book whereof
he can not read one word) caused his book to be fathered upon such as would
loath it: and by such means many were dispersed, and the simple much
entangled. The same is the case of these Rabbines: who have much from old
writers, agreeable to the Apostles doctrine: but stained with dogged
blasphemies: notwithstanding their readiness in the text, and records in pieces
of ancient truth must be regarded. And who so deals with them, and is found
erroneous in story, as they who would make the rare type of Melchisedek to be
of a nation cursed: he shall give them great occasion to disdain the truth:
as was given to Hierax and S. Augustine, to run to a speculation unprofitable.

I may well join R. Menachem to the author of Zoar: for his words Menachem
most commonly follows. Thus he writes upon Sedek, part of the name, and
signifies Justice: The meaning is, that the term Sedek has a close
betokening of S^cinah: that is, the Divine nature. More plain is Rabbi Isaac
ben Arama upon Genesis: whose words Sebastianus Munster, and Augustinus
Nebiensis use upon Psalm. 110. where Melchisedek is a figure of Christ. Thus he
writes: We have not found any man, not any Prophet, whose nativity was
prophesied before nativity of father or mother, but only that of Messiah, our
justice: to that, this is spoken: And before the womb, before the morning
had thou the dew of thy birth, before the womb of thy mother was created,
thy birth was prophesied: And a close signification to the same matter is this:
(Before the morning, his name was Son.) The meaning is, That before the Sun
was created, subsisting and firm was the name of our Christ, and he sat on
the right hand of God. And according to this, spoken is that: Sit on my right
hand: and again: The throne shall be established with mercy, and he shall sit
upon it in truth. This much does this Rabbin confess. Mark R. Moses Hadarsan
upon Genesis 14. And Melchisedek king of Salem* He was Sem the son of Noah. An
other exposition. Melchisedek. etc. as it is written, The Lord swear, and will
not repent: Thou art a Sacrificer for ever, after the order of Melchisedek king
of Salem: And who is he? This is the just king: and the savior Christ the
King: as it is said: Behold thy King, a savior also, that shall come to the
just. This notes Galatinus from Hebrews: Rabbi Phinees the son of Iair
said: Melchisedek, that is, Christ the king. Now he is termed Melchi, that is
king: because he is king of the whole world: and Sedek, that is justice,
because he shall send his justice and his grace upon the whole world: as it
is said. Psalm. 83. Truth shall budde from the earth, and justice shall be
seen from heaven. King of Salem: that is of the high Jerusalem. Consider now,
whether the Apostle does not speak to the same effect, styring them up which
are dull of hearing, to weigh many things from Melchisedek unto Christ: many
and hard to be made plain: things fit for men which have their senses
confirmed by use. This Malchisedek king of Salem, the Sacrificer of the mighty
most high, who met Abraham as he returned from the slaughter of the kings, and
blessed him, to whom also Abraham gave tithe of all things: who first is by
interpretation, king of righteousness: after that he is also king of Salem, that
is, king of peace: without father, without mother, without kindred: having
neither beginning of days nor end of life, but lykoned to the son of God,
continues a Sacrificer for ever. Consider how great he is unto whom, even the
Patriarch Abrabam gave the tyth of the spoils: without all gainesaying, The
lesser is blessed of the greater. Who can not see this spoken fit for the
opinion of the Hebrews, which has continued unto this day: as may appear by
their words, whom I brought forth to speak.

A little more from them, touching the heavenly Jerusalem, or Salem: much as the
Apostles do speak of it. Thus writes Aben Ezra, upon Cant. 1. in Praes. Know
that in this spech, O Daughters of Jerusalem, many have staggered (seeing the
Sinagoge of Israel speaks it) what that, O Daughter of Jerusalem should
mean. Some say there be two: one in Heaven, an other on the Earth beneath it,
answereable unto it. And Midras Psalm. 180. he says, that it shall have one
hundredth forty and four Gates, for the twelve Tribes: vsyng a phrase like
that in Apo. 7. where one hundredth forty and four thousand, are sealed: And
Apo. 14 One hundredth forty and four thousand, are on Mount Sion. Aben Ez.
affirms, that Salomons name in the end of the Song signifies Christ. And
Iarchi upon the same Book, says: that the families of the Gentiles, are
called the Daughters of Jerusalem. Then by the best of their words the
families of the Gentiles under Christ, make that heavenly Jerusalem. Midras
upon Psalm. 122. where Jerusalem is excedingly praised, expressedly names The
high Jerusalem, and the low. But most plentifully in that is Zoar, of the
former R. Symeon Ben Iochaj, who living with In S. Paul's time. So by Zachuto
in Sepher ^uchasim I find his times to be: that antiquiti^ is elder then the
great Talmud.
R. Akiba esquire to Bar Chosha the pseudo Christ, though he mist to hold the
true Christ: yet he is plentiful of good phrases, such as the Apostles have,
and speaks better then he knew in the Apostles kind.

Consider an other point what y^ Apostle means, when he says of Melchisedek
strangely: he is by testimony faid to live still. Although Learned men expound
it so, that the not mentioning of his death, is the testimony of his living
still, I dare not therein follow them, to call silence a testimony: neither can I
think that the Apostle writing to men, professing deep skill in learning, and
skant his favorers, would use any word that might not abide trial of the
adversaries. Now I hold that the Hebrewe words, VE HV COHEN, that is, And he
the same still was sacrificer, are urged even after Ben Iochais manner, who was
alive when that the Apostles wrote, and amongst that nation. So in Zoar he the
Rabbine expounds: AND HE shall bruise the Serpents head, to import the
nature euerlyuing. So properly Psalm 102. The word HV, imports GOD, who still
is the same: though the Heavens change. Whose years fail not, though the
heavens wax old as does a garment. In that sort had I rather expound the
Apostle, by the Hebrew manner, then draw him to be a coyner of new phrases.
Whereas the new Testament in 4640. words, and some more, has not skant any
word or phrase but usual in that age: specially it regarded the Jews manner
of speeches, and in every book flows with such: which when we neglect, we
wander. Now for the Sacrificer in Heaven, whom Aaron on the earth resembled.
The godly in that age made the spech so usual, that the wicked grant Michael
(who is Christ the eternal Angel of the covenant) to be Sacrificer in the
Heavens. So R. Symeon etteth from Exodus, Thou shall make all Page. 19. col.
75. And again upon Number. 6. Hebr. 8.
things according to the form showed on the Mountain, to teach men of a
Sacrificer in Heaven: who is Michael. Which very same text the Apostle cites,
disputing of ye Sacrificer entered into the Heavens. Moreover in words they
confess that Christ should be kilde: and Kinchi and S. Iarchi upon Zach. 12.
10.
Christ (supposed) the son of Joseph, though presently they start aside and
wrangle, the later of them, that there should be two Christ's: one of Joseph
Rachels son, who should be killed: But their words may be cited as reason
and art shows, they were to understand their first aucthours. Them selves
confess Christ, that was killed, to speak as Jehovah. Zach. 12. And they have
no whit of glaunce, to their other way in Scripture: For it is expressedly
told by Gabriel, of the most holy Christ, the governor or King, that he
should be killed, and cease Sacrifices: who is Michael, Dan 10. 13. 21. and
12, 1. Apo. 12, 7 and Iud. 9. who does the work of Jehovah, that buried Moses.
Deuteronomy. 34. and speaks the words of Jehovah: The Lord rebuke thee Satan. Now
as S. Jude and S. John do follow their kind of phrase and manner, here and in
other places: So I assure my self, that the Apostle does, in the description
of Melchisedek.

The testimony of Josephus touching Christ, a just and holy man, or rather
more then a man, who taught the people truly, is cited by Eusebius. So to good
purpose in Mid. Psalm. 10. one R. Iochanan, who might well be of the Apostles
age: for one of that name was scholar to Hillel, of Gamaliels time, he
speaks thus: Three years and a half was the Majesty standing upon mount
Oliuet, and preaching: Seek the Lord, while he may be found: but they
regarded not. And that Christ was holden the son of God (by the old
Rabbines) it is manifest in Cayphas, speaking of God, Math. 26. 63.
in their term Baruc HV, The blessed: saying, I adjure thee by God, tell me
whether thou be Christ the son of the blessed (GOD).

And of later times, Aben Ezra says upon Psalm. 2. Kiss the Son: that Christ
is that son. Now if the man is cursed, that makes flesh his arm: and yet
happy is he that trusts in that Son: that son must needs be not a bare
man, but also God, after the spirit of sanctification: seeing they are not
cursed, but happy, that trust in him. Wherefore seeing the Jews speak the
same things that the Apostles do, reason would that the Apostles spech like
theirs, and to them, and differing from all others, should be expounded
according to their dialect and peculiaritie of spech. Esaias reports this of
them, that their eyes be opened, but they will not mark for to see. And our
Lord told them, that if they were blind, they had no (such great) sin: but
now their sin abides, seeing after so great knowledge of the truth, they
fall quite away, again crucifiyng Christ, and profaning the holy blood of the
Covenant. But as touching their sayings, Heb. 7. and. 10.
fighting for us against them selves. I think them profitable, For want of
skyll in the Rabbines, they are followed by our selves beside truth in sundry
points.
when they are cited with skill, what they do mean, or ought to mean:
otherwise they will trouble much, men little acquainted with them. And thus much
for the judgment of the Hebrews touching Melchisedek. Next them, let us
behold the Latins what they taught: and after that, we will examine
Epiphanius better, and conclude by examinyng the text of Moses by it self.

And first S. Ierom must come forth from his Epistle to Euagrius: who knowing
how he was sure to be blamed of captious people (as he tells) what soever he
said. yet proceeds courageously. He might mean S. Augustine.
And first taunteth a writer, that affyrmed Melchisedek to be the holy Ghost.
Next Origin. and Didymus, coming much in the same kind: who by the same
reasons make him an Angel. This opinion I passed over: for that with the other
it should also fall, and needed not new arguments.
Thence he touches Hippolytus, Eusebius Caesariensis, and Eusebius Emisenus,
Apollinarius, and Eustathius: which thought him to be a Canaanite. Lastly, he
brings the Hebrews, saying, thus to Euagrius: Because you gently demand,
and all that I have learned, should be commended to faithful ears: I will
lay down also the Hebrews opinion: and that no curiosity be wanting, the
very Hebrew words will I hereto join: Vmalchizedec melec^ Salem hozi Lehem
vaiain vehu Cohen leel elion vai^barchehu Vaiomar baruch Abraham lee^ Elion
kone samaim vaarez Vbaruch El Elion escher migen Zarecho beiadecho naijten lo
maaser michol. And Melchisedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine: and
he was Sacrificer to the high God: and he blessed him, and said: Blessed be
Abraham, to the high God, which has made heaven and earth: and blessed be the
high God, which has delivered thine enemies into thine hands: and he gave him
tenth of all. Also they teach, that he is Sem the son of Noah, and was aged
when Abraham was borne 390. years: which thus are reckoned. Sem, the second
year after the Flood, when he was an hundredth years old, begat Arphaxad:
after whose birth he lived five hundredth years, that is altogether six
hundredth years. Arphaxad being thirty five begat Salem, who him self at
thirty procreated Heber: who, as we read, at thirty four years begat
Phaleg. Again Phaleg when thirty years were come begat Rehu, who at thirty
and two since his birth is father to Serug: of whom when he came to thyrtie
years Nachor is borne: who being twenty and nine begat Tbare, of whom we
read that he being seventy, begat Abraham, and Nachor, and Haran: Now
Abraham dyed being an hundredth seventy and five years old. The sum being
cast, Sem is found to outlyue Abraham his nephew in the tenth degree thirty
and five years. And soon after. Also they teach, that it is no marvel that
Melchisedek went to meet Abraham, and brought forth for his repast bread and
wine, and blessed him: seeing he owed this a duty to his grande Child. (And
again.) This have I learned of the best learned, of this opinion: who are so
far from thinking Melchisedek to be an Angel, or the holy Ghost, that they
asscribe the most certain name of a man. And in good sooth it is foolysh,
that, upon a speech in type, one should concerning Christ's sacrificehood, not
having end, how he being king and Sacrificer, gives us both, to become a
kindred Regal and Leuiticall: and being as the Corner stone, joins both
walls: and of two flocks, being a good Shepherd, makes one flock: this
should so be referred to (...) or fit answereablenes as to take away the
truth of the story: and say, that he was no king, but an Angel showed in a
man's Image: whereas the Hebrews so vehemently endeavor, to show openly that
Melchisedek was Sem the son of Noah. Thus the fadde Father, loath to strive
with the Greek, shows what he best lyked under the Jews authority: which
Epiphanius in Greeks to Greeks durst not so well do. In the times of
blindness, When Satan was loosed. Apo. 20.
yet in this tory men were not blind. For Gulielmus Tyrius when Satan was
loosed, made Bishop of Jerusalem, wrote, that Sem, called Melchisedek, there
dwelt. Also many others of Romistes are content to follow lerom, as Petrus
Somestor in Scholastica historia, Aquinas, Lyra, Johannes benedictus upon Genesis
14. Cassaneus, Nauclerus, and whole troops of others. And even to this day
Romistes hold that most commonly. Genebrardus having therein the help of
Hebricians, and considering many circumstances, by truth herein, somewhat
beautifieth his Chronicle, otherwise pestered with lies: and often returns to
the same assertion, as mynding to disgraee some that there in seem to stagger
or strive: yet good Melanthon before him, was no less sensibly and certaynely
persuaded herein. Also John Lucidus was plentiful in this matter in his
Chronicle: In John Luridus.
Isidorus likewise, who makes Salem buylt by Melchisedek, treads in the same
steps with the Hebrews.

But Romistes, I need not to name many: for the simple of that sect,
Genebrardus him self is of two great credit with them. Men of better
religion, and more of Ieromes divinity, are fitter for the cataloge of his
folowers. The three fold thread of Carrion Melanthon, and Peucerus, will not
sone be broken. Melanthons words bring a great light to Moses. narration.
Isuppose (Noah) came from Armenia, into the old Country: that is, the places
near Damascus, where he had Iyued before, and where he knew that the first
Fathers were made. For it is certain, that Sem the son of Noah, lived again
in that Region, seeing that he was king of Salem, which was afterward called
Jerusalem. For Sem is the very same man that was called Melchisedek. Therefore
the Church of God was in that place, where was Noah, Sem, and Sems sons, so
long as they kept the true doctrine. Doubtless Sem kept the light of doctrine:
But whereas his posterite were in Babylon, there by a little and little true
doctrine was extinguished, and wicked religion received and established.
Therefore God brought Abraham from Babylon to Sem, the father of his ancestors,
to join again a notable company of the Church, soon after the death of Noah.
Now when Abraham with his Cosen came to Sem, what a goodly College had Sem?
who had seen the Flood, and such descent of posterity. Let us consider the
sweet company of Sem, Abrabam, and their Arphaxad, Selah, Heber, Lot, and
Isaak.
kinsmen: when Sem saw the eight of his Nephews in descent, called to the
society of the Church, and the promise of the Messiah renewed: for whom, death
being destroyed, eternal life should be restored. These good meditations,
good Melanthon yields.

Victorinus Strigellius in his notes upon Genesis. 14. and upon Melanthons
Chronicle, is no less plentiful to the same effect. And Chytreus a long
student in story, yet alive, but very aged, Nc a reuerencer of Melanthon,
deserves that reverence, to have his words set down: and first for the name
what it means. SEM, a name, in whose posterite the name of God should always
remain, until that name which is above every name, should come down from
heaven: and in Sems posterity take flesh. And Melchisedek it is a nowne
appellatiue, the epithet of Sem the son of Noab which dwelt in the city
Salem, which was called afterward Jerusalem, and was distaunt five miles from
Hebron, where Abrabam dwelt. Therefore those firstlyghtes of the Church might,
often meet, and confer of great matters, and teach and strengthen their
hearers.

Seln^^^rus, an other Witenberge man shall conclude my Latin testimonies: who
for his reverence to Melanthone opinion touching the Sacrament, shall not for
the oversight of his own judgment therein, be neglected for his great pains
and large comment upon Genesis.. Take his words. Melchisedek signifies a king
of Justice. And it is the usual iudgemt of the godly Doctors of the Church,
that this Melchisedek was Sem the son of Noah, The common judgment.
who was the greatest Patriarch of that time: for he lived before the Flood
nintie eight years, and outlyued Abraham The error of 60. years. In that
error many be, which mistake Genesis. 11, 27. which place of late, Codoman^
Witenb. man, and many more, have rightly expounded by verse. 32. and chap. 12, 5.
thirty and six years, and was a keeper of true doctrine, and saw great
calamities, change of Tongues, a new Empire, Idols of Babylon, horrible lust,
the destruction of Sodom. The name Melchisedek he had by his office, which he
bore: because he alone (though poor in respect of other kings, specially his
neighbors) was a just king, looking to his Churches and calling, and
governing them well. And also, because he bare the type of the Eternal king, I
mean Christ.

Now that the simple may know that our Nation Ver. 1. aeneid.
bears no blunter beasts then others, nor the Sun dryueth his Chariot so
far from England: I will lay down their testimonies of our country, who
never thought that the Apostles would forbid to search a Story: nor think
that a greater then Abraham could be out of the right line of the Fathers.
Thus says an old Chronicle. Sem the son of Noah other why le is called
Melchisedek, the which first after the Flood made the city of Salem: and now
it is called Jerusalem. An other old Englysh Chronicle specially deserves
account: his letters speak thus. Me redeth, that Abraham yaf first tithinges:
but Abel yaf rather the first that God sent him of all manner kind. The
Hebrews tell, that this Melchisedek was Sem. Noah's son, and tells, that he
lived unto So Terah at 130. years begets Abraham, if Sem saw not lacob.
Ysac. Those Hebrews agree with S. Stephen and Philo: And they who differ from
them about Abraham's birth time, to make Sem see Jacob, greatly entangle the
narration. Wherefore this old Chr^nicle of our country, should not be
disdayned, for some lies: but embraced in some woorthynes. Master Bale
deserves well, for his true detecting of the Popes antichristianity. If we
follow him therein, we should not think him worse advised, where y^ very
Romistes with their greatest aduersarixs, Nl our best learned, agree with him.
In his Preface of the English Votaries: Melchisedek a just and a peaceable
king, is Noah's son: As many read his works, and that to very good use: so
they should take all before them, and hold that, not the weakest where he
has most consent with him. Join to him Lanquets Chronicle: wherein also the
judgment of the reverent father Thomas Cooper B. of Winchester, is to be So it
may be gessed by that to Lanquet he p'utteth additions.
weighed. This is Lanquets voice. Page 5. b. Sem the Prince of Asia, called
also Melchisedeck, a just and peaceable king, and Priest of Almighty God, from
whom Christ lynially descended, possessed all Asia with his children. And
again, Page 11. a. opens the Apostles meaning, saying. Abraham received with
blessing of Melchisedek king of Salem, and high Priest of Almighty God (called
also Sem the son of Noah) Bread and Wine: to whom Abraham gave the tenth of
his pray. The Apostle says, that this Melchisedek was without Genealogy, That
in this Parenthesis is put for exposition of Lanquets meaning*
because his progeny (under the name Melchisedek) is not rehearsed in the
Scripture. Some I pass over for brcuitte sake: but here I will not omit the
speech of a learned man, a friend of mine, M. D. Penny, a D. of Physic, a man
of great judgment, and gifts in Divinity: who now is with the Lord, and
re^eth from his labors. Of him I take occasion to speak, partly to leave some
token behind of our Christian friendshyp, and agreement in Scripture: partly
to show his experience how the teaching of this matter obscurely, caused some
to blame the most part. He told of a Gentewoman that said thus to him: Why do
the Preachers now teach, that Melchisedek had neither father nor mother? Of
old time they taught otherwise: for I have seen an Englysh book, found in
Dover Castle. 400. years old, that affyrmeth Melchisedek to be Sem the son
of Noah. He marked offense given to the Matron in the chiefest story of our
Lords Grandfathers after the flesh: in that the phrases for a type and
figure, taken from the description of Melchisedek are not clearly
distinguished, from that which in story from other Scriptures must be gathered.
To her he gave a right erposition, in what sense the Preachers, of his
judgment so spoke: and how by the type, they did not overthrow the truth of
the story: but in proper spech held him to be Sem. With the learned Doctor, I
will join their commendation, who in Tables joined to the Bible, or explaning
the names used in Scripture in the word Melchisedek, show the simplest, that
he is commonly thought to be Sem: that they should not mistake the Apostles
words. Thus for the weakness of our simple souls, I cite our Countrymen:
against Jews* I bring Rabbines: to Antiquaries in Latin fathers, I bring
Jerome: by Romistes, I persuade Remistes: by Melanthon and Luther, with others
of their opinion, I deal for the best religious. For the Greeks, I must take
some more pains, who to this day mistaking their Translations meaning, make
less account of the constant Hebrew truth, holden certain of all other
sides: but that a few leave all Learning to follow them. For them now will I
return to the Grecians, that such as followed Epiphanius, may be known to have
missed of his meaning.

First I will prove, that Epiphanius did but dally, being content to shake off
Melchisedekians, Epiphanius hidyng his judgment.
and Hierax. etc. Secondly, I will show great reasons that moved Epiphanius to
dispute against his meaning: but so, that one skillful in the cause, might
understand what he would have to stade. For the first, thus I reason: If
Epiphanius leans in appearance upon that which custom held, and he knew to
be most untrue, he followed custom, and would not simply be thought of that
judgment: but he is evident in sundry places to follow for custom, that which
was not true: therefore he might also here be expounded to mean no otherwise,
then as a bearer with custom, against propri etie of truth. One place proving
this kind of dealyng, and dallying, he has. Page. 8. where from Adam to the
Floodde, he counts years. 2226. following the Greek translation: whereas he
knew the Hebrew to have less, even. 1656. and knew also that the Hebrew was
most true, and never blamed. For being so cunning in Hebrew affairs, as his
works show, he could not be ignorant of the Massorites miraculous diligence,
for preservation of every letter in the Prophets, how many they were in all:
which was the middle letter of all Moses: which words were written with other
Characters then their fellows: What words had pricks over their heads, and
such other things, which being handled in Zoar, and some by S. Zoar and S.
lerom upon Genesis 19, 33. touching a prick over Van in the Hebrew.
Ierom, were doubtless well known in his age, and could not be hid from him.
Wherefore, I may well conclude, that for the Greeks weakness, he bare with the
Greek translation, and in truth thought as Jerome did: that not it, but the
Hebrew had the truth: even as well for them betwixt Sem and Abraham, as for
the former ages. Now if you maruayle not at 1. Antiquit. 4. years. 2656.
Josephus, hiding his mind for the same ages, following the Greeks: and in
Reckoning from Adam, Floodde, Promise, Lamb, to the buylding of the Temple:
wherein for the Judges times repeating twice (after y^ phrase) 111. years, he
makes the Temple to be founded, in the year of the world 3102. It was 3000.
seven years after, when it was finished.
Salomons age, coming to the Hebrew account, striving with him self, marueyle
neither at Epiphanius.

Moreover in bringing a Kenan between Arphaxad and Selah (who^ some times he
leaves out) it is manifest that he regarded custom. S. Luke was his warrant
in this point: who amongst our Lord his fathers, brings in the same Kenan,
least the Grecians that understood not y^ mind of the 70. Translatoures,
should take offense, if he had left it out. Also, in that Epiphanius makes
Jacob the two and twentieth from Adam, where he names the foresaid Kenan, he
reckons him not for one of that number: if he had, Jacob should have been the
three and twentieth. Moreover, he so handling the ages of Noah's sons, as to
make Sem the* eldest, Page. 5. 15.
Cham the next, and Iapheth the youngest, as the phrase at the first would
seem to teach: therein declares that he had a mind to follow custom for
quictnes, against the truth, amongst such as would not soon understand the
depth of the matter. Notwithstanding he knew that Iapheth was the eldest: and
in the Greek, Genesis 10. 21. compared with Sem, is called ( the elder:) and Genesis
9. 24. Cham in comparison with both, is said to be ( the younger.) Moreover,
seeing Noah at. 500. years was a father, and Sem was not. 100. years old at
the Flood, when Noah was. 600. years, but two years after: Epiphanius could not
be ignorant that Sem must be younger by two years, then some of his brethren.
Yet he followed common custom: though Iapheth was holden eldest by the custom
of exact truth, amongst the Rabbines: as D. Kimchi records in the Root
Gadal: and many Hebrews that comment upon Genesis, Two, Aben ^zra, and
Rabbaneel: none ^ls, that I have read, and remember.
thought some take the spech as it lies, at the first sight. Of both Abraham
and Sem the Rabbines of Epiphanius age (from whom came the Talmud) in Mass.
Sanad in, page 69. b. write many things, wherein the Jews sharped their
Scholars: which should fall to great obsurdities, if they took not good heed
to the Scripture phrases, by the matter to examine them. Mark the Hebrews
well and you shall better understand this matter. Terah begat^ Abraham,
Nachor, and Haran: So Abrabam is elder then nachor an year, and Nachor elder
then Haran an year, Abraham is found two years elder then Haran. Also it is
written: Abraham and Nachor took the wives. etc. R. Isaak said, Ischa, she is
Sarah. Now how much was Abraham elder then Sarah? ten years, and elder then
her father two years. So it is found that Haran begat Sarah at eight years.
In deed Abraham is younger then the brother. But by a mystery of A Rabbine
speaks of other Rabbines.
their art, thus they reckoned. Know that this their reckonyng, they call a
mystery of their art, by this: And Noah was five hundredth years when he begat
Sem, Cham, and Iapheth: Sem being elder then Cham by one year, and Cham elder
then Iapheth by one year: Sem should be found elder then Iapheth two years.
But now again: Noah was six hundredth years old when the deluge of waters
was upon the earth. And again: Sem was a hundredth years old, two years
after the deluge, and begat Arphaxad. So he is at once an hundredth years, an
hundredth and one, and an hundredth and two. Nay it is a mystery of art, as they
reckon here. What is that mystery of art that so it is reckoned here? Rab
Cehuneb spoke of a tradition before Rab Zebed of Nahardea, he says; Ye are
taught from that place. Genesis 5. we are taught from an other Genesis 10. Sem also
had issue, he was father to all the sons of Heber, and brother to Iapheth the
eldest, the eldest of the brethren. Thus far the Talmud in this kind
speaeth: the ignora^nce whereof bred a false translation in Latin, to make Sem
eldest: whereas Moses words should stir the Jews to an other consideration,
how they were chosen of the younger house, through favor. Also that they
should not despise the Greeks, and Iapheths sons, who coming of a good
father, the eldest brother, in time (when the Jews should kill and deny
Christ) they should obtain their dignity in the High Jerusalem, and doctrine
of the kingdom: beginning from their Jerusalem, and tents of Sem.

By not marking the Rabbines, here we norysh untruths in two special
stories: Sems first, and Abraham's likewise: by not discirnyng in what kind of
spech Hebrews make Sem and Abraham eldest: where they held it in truth, for
both to be otherwise Likewise. Epiphanius not being marked drove some to
expositions, which him self had blamed in Melchisedekians. But boubtles he
must needs be holden to hide his mind, bringing but one reason, and that from
a false ground. And for reasons against that in him he is strongly resolved,
that Sem held the place, after given to Abraham's seed. This dissemblyng in
writers should not seem strange, seeing that even Poets in kings persons set
it forth, and Rhetoritians thence gather precepts for that kind. ^liad Beta.
Homers Agamemnon, preparyng a set field, makes an oration of going home, to
try his Soldiers minds and courage: but his reasons are strong against
returnyng. He urges a going home, because the wars were long, and it was
shame to leave all imperfect: and their ship timber was rotten, and their
sails were ragged: which poy^^Tres, all were contrary to returnyng:
notwithstanding the multitude took hold on his spech quickly, and so preparde
homewarde, that skantly could all the wisdom of Nestor persuade them, that
the King meant otherwise: or the wit of Ulysses stay them from returnyng.
Hermog. Page 425.
Hermogenes held this dealyng to be so common, that he thought good to teach
from Homer, how to do it artistcially. But most common was hiding of the mind
amongst the Jews nation, touching the Septuagint. Eusebius Praep. 8. page 208.
records out of Aristeas, that they bound their nation by pain of a curse,
that none of them should alter the Greeks Translation. Aquilas, Symmac^us, and
Theodotion, were hated, not only for their heresies, but also for Their
TraINslations, though they were not of their nation. Wherefore Epiphanius had
two things to bridle him: the one, that he might not draw in the same yoke
with Heretics: the other, that he might not run into the curse, for altering
the Greek. I think that the Apostle writing to the Hebrews was also to regard
that, and wyshed not to offend the nation, where no need required. And we see
that S. Paul was loath to differ from the common manner in reckonyng of the
Judges time, after a sort 450. years, as Josephus in effect does: which time
was nothing near that in propriety, and yet in a dobble reckoning by
Oppressors and Reuengers, most exactly so much. Also S. Luke reckonyng Iacobes
family to be seventy and five souls, according to the Sep^uagint, was loath
to break the agreement or custom of their nation. So I think that Epiphanius
to Greeks durst not disclose the secrets of the Elders.

And thus much for testimonies of Hebrews, Greeks, and Latins, touching
Melchisedek: where for Latins I broughe many of Witenberge: becaluse that to
an abridgement of Codomans Chronicle there set forth, an opinion unlike theirs
is fastened by one, which would not have it searched who the person should
be: and in a second edition is against him self, drawing men not to mislyke,
that he should be a little Cananite king. That the simple might know this
opinion not to come from Witenberge, I (...) authors thence otherwise minded.
Under the testimonies, and upon some discourses, many reasons were brought:
which by the matter without man's countenance, seem to stand, each one. But
least by them selves, and several, they show not all their strength: or being
scatttred, cannot be so well vewed, nor make so good a show: To conclude this
cause, I think it good to bring them together, and to strengthen them, if
need be. And first to take away that, which most seems to hinder, the
mistaking of the Apostles words, of being without Father, without Mother, that
I confidently affirm to be spoken only by relation to Genesis 14. without any
condemning of such, as from other places affirm who in truth Melchisedek was.
Now that Moses meant that Sem should be known to be that King, and the
Apostle likewise: the matter it self cries out aloude. For Moses speaking of
Sem blessed front Noah, by these words: Blessed be the God of SEM: and of
Chanaan cursed, upon Chams badnes, and to be his servant: also of Iapheth to
fetch religion from SEMS house: First shows how the curse came, Moses
narratio^ observed from where Sem rece^eth the blessing, how it is continued
until the just king delivers it in the tenth generation, when Sem is yet
alive, that narration shows who he must needs be that has right to deliver
the blessing to Abraham.
in that Babel was buylt: rebellious Nemrod of Chams race, and the youngest
brother, erecting a tyranny, and setting forward a work, for men to make them
selves a Shem, that is, a Name. He reckons the Languages that came upon that
work, wherewith they that were punished, were scattered from the presence of
God: of which we should not feign any to hold Religion, nor by their own
ability to recover Grace, nor without hearing of the word, to be made
faithful, nor to affirm of special preaching to them, without warrant from
Scripture. Now as for blessed Sem, Moses returns to his strory, tells of
his line to Abraham, reckons how long they all lived, omitteth mention of
death, Genesis 11. far otherwise then he dealt Genesis 5. casts Sem to be alive
very long after Abraham's calling, and likewise for a good while Arphaxad and
Selah, men borne before the confusion of Tongues. Heber also, that forwarned it
longest of all: but none borne after Babel, as Peleg, Regu, Sarug, Nachor,
Terah: and expressly mentions Terahs death, that fell to Idolatry, that we
should consider him dead, before the Promise, as the wrath upon the
Towre-buylding: yea and upon the Fathers borne after, until Abraham, that none
of them lived to see the Blessing continued. Then shows how Abraham called,
to l^aue his Country, going to Chanaan, going to Egypt, returnyng to Chanaan,
recoueryng his Lot partaker of the blessing, killing of the king of Elam, was
after this blessed of Melchisedek representyng CHRIST: and saying, Blessed be
Abraham to El Elion, and blessed be the God of Abraham. Does not the golden
chain of the story thus settled, and of the phrase alyke continued, draw Sem
hither? who as he received the Blessing from Noah, delivers it unto Abraham.
Should we think that in so great a matter, Sem should have a blessing, and
live obscurely all his life: and some vpstart of Families cursed, should
pronounce it upon Abraham? While Libanus bears Snow, and Iordans waters
flow, that will not stand, I trow. Such a stately matter falls not out
without a prophecy. If Adams fall being so speedy, A prophe^y should be
searched for, touching the authority of hy^^ which could bless the Patriarch
as superior.
yet had with a warnyng a kind of foretellyng: If the Floodde at Noah's birth
was closely foretold: and also the Languages confounded upon Cham chursed
through his families: I would also think that the blessing of Abraham should
not be a late told thing: but depend upon ancient speches. As the Lords
works are known to him of eternity: Act. 15.
so it is usual in his word, that he shows things before they arise: Esa.
42.
and does nothing but that he tells his servants the Prophets. In this
kind I assure my self, that Moses purposedly continues the blessing of Sem
to Abraham. The matter will better appear by considering other attributes of
the man that blesses Abraham. He is a King, Melchi, a king^ Sedek, Justice*
Heb. 7.
and just in such high degree of commendation, that those terms turn in him
to be as a proper name. And does not this honor drive us to search for some
man specially blessed, to be this King? Also in that Noah called his son by a
general term, in our language (Name:) this falls out fit for him, who is
in story set forth by a general name, without a proper. Moreover, the office
of a King is fit to have a beginning from such a man as Sem was: for a
Kingdom is a Divine policy. Religion does require exact properties of a King:
and Heathen by natural light, speak to the same purpose: both by divinity
and humanity, All the notes of a king De^. 17 are ^ounde in Sem.
the office is of an heavenly force. These properties God requires to be in a
King. A king commendable to the faithful Deuteronomy. 17, 15. should be of their
brethren, not seeking the favor of Chams land, not a lover of many horfes, nor
many wives, nor much gold, nor proud hearted among his breathren: but a keeper
of the ^^w, to prolong his days. Of this, Sem before the Law was a pattern:
being not of Leuy Heb. 7. but ancestor to Leuy, as to all the sons of Heber,
Genesis 10. and the stock of Isreal's branches: and for kindred in Abraham, against
his kiured in blam, he would be glad of a victory. He knew that Cham was
cursed: and being a Prophet, might foresee through Gods spirit Pharaohs
dealyng, and would hate cursed Cham, with his race. As touching many Horses,
that age yet was not much in that kind: neither is there the name of an Horse
spoken of before Joseph's time. Genesis 46, 17. But for the same in force, I mean
for the quietness of the mind resting in God, who then should be so settled as
Sem, whom so great experience of deliverances had taught? How for the other
point, of Wives, he had but one, Genesis 6. and knowing best how the best byued
from the beginning, would so continue. Now for Gold, if he had loved it, he
might have chosen the land of Chauilah: Genesis 1.
but that he did not chose, as the name shows: termed not from him, but from
the son of Chush and Chams house. That he was a keeper of the Law there is no
doubt. For this is the work of God, to believe in him whom the Father would
send: who was promised to come of him. Genesis 9. And God was not ashamed to be
called his God: for he had prepared him a son after the flesh, who after the
spirit of holiness, is the son of God: and God to be blessed for ever. Romans
9. and the faith in this son, was the very end of the Law: wherein doubtless
Sem was a notable ringleader. As touching long life, none ever was comparable
to him for sight of posterity: he only same an eleventh descent in the
faithful line: whereas of all others in the faithful line, n^^e saw ten:
though Arphaxad saw faythles Ismael, in the tenth. Thus for the holy
description of a King before the Law, his state might be some form to a Law.
The Heathen, that had no more written Law then Sem had, by the Law written in
their ha^tes agree in the worthynes of a Kings office. Xenophon says well,
that a good Ruler differs nothing from a good Father. Now Sem, Semis fatherly
government best deserved the name of a King: and might be some great restraint
to his near posterity a great time, from working in Babylon.
who was not to be ruled, but to rule amongst his offspring, he acquainted with
the fatherly government that was before the Flood, would best practice that.
And we see. Genesis 10. where the Families be counted that bad tongues skattered,
by the rebellious pride for buyldyng the Tower: that his families in that
curse were not half so many, before the sixth age in Ioktanes Ioktanes house
despising Hebers forewarnyng was punished with more tongues then any family,
and disceauered farthest from Salem^by despising Sems blessing.
thirteen sons: as Chams sons were in the th^rde posterity punished with
parted and diverse languages. He that will may there mark, and count the houses
of spe^che altered, and he shall find it so. Whereb we may gather, that sundry
families of Arphaxad, Selah, and Peleg continued in Adams or Hebers tongue. And
doubtless hereto the fatherly government of Sem was a great help. And as
Ioktanes sons dwellinges are farthest now from Jerusalem, as by Heathen
writers we may see, by such as give testimony to Moses, whom they knew not:
But Arams children near Jerusalem had better success: So this in mine
opinion, may very well be attributed unto the happy neighborhood of the good
and fatherly Emperor Sem. And as Grandfathers are most tender, so he the
greatest Grandfather must needs excel in fatherly aflection and ancientie, to
carry away the general name of a King, as proper to him self: more worthyly
then Greeks As to Greeks the Poet is Homer, and the Orator Demosthenes: so
to Divines, the just King should be Sem.
by the common name of Poet, mean Homer particulerly: or mean Demosthenes, by
the term of Orator. Moreover if a king be well defined, Plato in definit.
to be One ruling according to Laws uncontrollable: and again distinguished
from a Tyrant, Plato in Politico.
by rulyng men willingly subject, where a Tyrant rules men against their will:
Sem must needs be supreme in these properties. We see by his obedience in
Noah's house, procuring an eternal blessing, that he would be fittest to rule
when time should come. For as none can well rule, but he that can well obey: so
he that best can obey, can best rule. But Sems obedience in willing care for
his Father was the best, amongst his breathren: wherefore likewise Sem should
be the fittest ruler, to care as a father for his subjects. Also most
willingly would men suffer such an one (if any) to be uncontrolled, that same
so many years. Pla^. 1. Pol. Tull. de senect.
As men learn the way of one that has gone it before: so they that will
learn, most willingly learn of the aged, how quietly to tread the way of
their life, to come to old age: and soonest suffer experience to be far from
check. It was not so in Nemrod: For he starting up from the youngest house, to
be so great a Tyrant, as God from heaven should openly look to, did not long
thrive nor live. For in Sems life Cedarlaomer being the king of Elam, had
Amraphel the king of Synear as his Vassal: yea while Sem was yet alive, and
deubtles of continuance in kingdom. Wherefore by the general name of a King,
whom then but Sem could he mean? One ornament of Kings may not here be
omitted, which Sems story does show, that is, A kingdom ancienter then Tyranny.
The antiquity of a Kingdom: that before tyranny sprang, it was. Now by
expressed words of By Sems story
Scripture, (that a political cause must chiefly be Policy should for open
decrees seek rather warrantes from express terms, then far fetched
collections. Romans 13.
looked unto) unless we make Sem to be Melchisedek, we can not plainly prove,
that a King reigned before Nemrod. Wherefore the honor of Kings for the
antiquity of them, should with great delyght embrace him to be the first
King, who had justice as a propriety, and represented the first and last, the
son of God. As the persuading to obedience is goodly before God, and
profitable for men, so Sems kingdom is the fittest for that: being showed how
ancient it is, contrary to Nemrods confusion: of which most properly the
Gyantes words for their common weal may be spoken: Silenus in Eurip. Cyel.
Sems story a study for kings. This lyfe^s called a way of Gods iudgement^s, Es.
26.
Not any in any thing hears any. Verily it is a seemly thing for the Kings
of the earth to know the antiquity of their own state: as an healthy thing to
kiss the Son, least he be angry: to seek in government a virtuous and
quiet judgment in this life or way of Gods judgment, Nemrods dealyng was so
hateful in procuryng the buyldyng of Babel, that not only Moses scholars,
but also H^athen, could speak of the Gyantes wars, fighting against Heaven.
It was to be wyshed that the like care had been to know the truth, for the
record of the first king. Doubtless Homer divinely touched the mark, and clam
high to the gift of a Kingdom from God. For Il. Beta, thus speaks Ulysses
appeasing the tumultes of the Greek state: A ruling by many is not good: let
there be but One ruler,
One king, to whom the Son of So I favorably translate Homer.
eternity manifold in wisdom
Gave Scepter and Laws to rule by them.
This Homers saying is a divine saying: the profaneness of one term in his
language being taken to a better sense: as S. Paul cites Aratus, turnyng his
Jupiter from a profane religion, to the author of those works in truth,
which Aratus spoke of: who warranteth me to do the like, with this Poets
words. Now the Heathen Poet not being able to ascend above Iapheths times,
nor the Flood: and yet making a King the most ancient state, makes Kings
ancienter then Tyrants, and to receive the government from God. Which opinion
would soonest agree with Sems case: pronounced such an one, as from whose
tents Iapheth should fetch his comfort of religion. If Homer by plain wit
might see so much, and if Fables condemn Gyantes vnloyalty: Christians helped
by story, should not plead uncertainty, specially having so many Divines of
all sorts to warrant them, Plat^ in his soph^ster, called Sophesters fight So
^ome amongst us, otherwise learned and profitable men, have in Pulpit condemned
such as follow herein the ancient opinion, and most common.
gigantomachian Gyanteswarre. Pitiful it is, that by mistaking the Apostles
words, such fightes have been by Melchisedekians, Hierax, and such: yea and by
men otherwise of rare commendation, by obscuring the story of a man, made such
a stay in the first discord after the Flood: to whom still there might be an
open recourse, for such as would repent of falling away from Christ. And thus
much touching the term King in royalty, appropriated unto Sem.

For the next attribute of JUSTICE, it is a nail fastened in a sure place, and
a certain witness. That in Justice every virtue is contained, even by the
Heathen language, Theoginis the Poet cited of Aristotle teaches us. Doubtless
by Justice the holy word, conteyneth all parts and parcels of virtue: For,
that which gives life, has perfection of virtue. And it is written in great
letters, that one runnyng by may it read, That JUST SHALL LIVE. Ab. 2. Romans 1.
Notwithstanding we must with all the Law, Prophets, and Apostles, understand
that this justice is not found by works, but moves us to faith from God: and
faith aryseth by hearing the word. Also the same Justice bears fruit before
men: So that in Melchisedek we must consider faith gotten by hearing: and a
life commendable, even to the tongues of Chanaan. Now if we affirm no more
then the open spech has in any Scripture for that time, none but Sem can be
found then alive, of whom the Scripture pronounces particulerly that he is
blessed of his God: and Psalm 32. Romans 4.
therefore has his sin forgeuen, his iniquity covered, and his mouth made
without guyle. Doubtless there were many good men: but as the Apostle speaks
to the bare description for his beginning of days, or end of life, that he
had none: so we in like sort may say, that he only in record was just: and
just not only in humane judgment, but just in faith before God, resembling in
office the Son of God: who after the flesh, should come of him. Of those
which had their tongues confounded, the words of the divine king may doubtless
in most exact propriety be spoken: As Silver purified in an earthen vessel,
and purged seven times. Confer with Moses Genesis 12, 1. These words: Nabal
(the ^oole) says in his heart, there is no God: they work corruption and
lothsomnes: there is not one that does good. The Lord looked down from heaven
upon the sons of Adam: every one turned away. Romans 3.
This is spoken to them that were under the Law: but as there be degrees in
sins, so most fi^ly in manifest story it falls upon the buylders of
confusion in Sinear: whom the earth shoke into sundry quarters. And in all the
Scripture we read not of any since Babel bredde bablyng languages, called to
the faith, but men acquainted with Abraham's house, with him self, or Isaaks
line, or the Children of the East, the sons of Keturah. And whereas S. Paul
Act. 17. says, S. Paul would not hold one of a faythles family to become
Melchisedek.
that God passed over the times of ignorance: and in his time bids every man
every where repent: He closes in ignorance all Families once fallen away, but
such as were blessed in the blessing of Abraham. So the learned Hebrews
understand Moses: and I doubt not but so S. Paul meant. To Moses he looked. If
we hold any Family uncalled in the Scripture, to recover faith, S. Paul will
not commend us: Romans 11.
in whom faith comes by hearing: Romans 11. and we may not mind any thing, 1.
Cor. 4.
above a warrant written: 1. Cor. 4. And as he bade men judge what he said, 1.
Cor. 10.
and would not be a lord over their faith: so all that he teaches, 2. Cor. 1.
may be proved by the Old testament: Act. 26.
neither may we draw him into any other meaning. The Apostles bring not new
revelations for old stories, but divinely expound the stories agreed upon.
Chanaanites are far from Melchisedeks justice.
As for the justice of Chananites, and their behavior, the laws in Moses are
faithful witnesses. For where decrees are made against most loathsome
fylthinesse, this conclusion does shut up all: Ye shall not do any of these
abominations: For all these abominations do the men of the land which is
before you: and it is defiled, and it vomiteth out the nation which is before
you Leui. 18* 27. Though their sins were not in all so ripe in Abraham's time,
yet they were so rife, that their Land was given to Abraham from them: and in
some so rife and ripe were they, that they served Elam for twelve years
chastisement: and unpenitent, at the last were by fire from heaven, made an
ensample of fire in hell. And this story in Chanaan, fell not out without a
prophecy. Prophecies and stories should be tried together.
For by Noah's mouth Cham was cursed unto Chanaan. Now if Chanaans history of
curse fell not out without a prophecy, why should we against a prophecy of
Chanaan cursed, believe that a King came of him goodlyer then Abraham, or any
King in all the Scripture, with a story without blemyshe? Genesis 23, 10.
Abraham was a Prince of God, yet Hagarenes to this day are his stayne. Moses
was a Moses a king
King, and faithful with God: yet so sinned, as to come short of the Land. Genesis
36. 30.
Number 20. The Kings properly termed kings, Deuteronomy. 33. 5.
soon either altered houses, or needed new annoyntyng, upon troubles in their
state. What kings in Judah were anointed.
Saul of Bemamin anointed, within two years lost Gods favor. David anointed
of Judah, in his life time, and by his life, saw his sons strive: and Solomon
was feign to be anointed, because of Adoniahs contention. Likewise Ioas for
Athaliah, and Ioachas for Ioakim: so was the house shaken: and Josias who
excelled al, and is called the anointed of Jehovah, (though visibly he was not
anointed:) yet mist once to loss of life, Lam. 4. in Resh.
and his sons overthrew all. 2. Chr. 35. 22.
To be short, David told that his house would not be vpryght with God: 2.
Sam. 23. 5.
And if Dauides house could not be, which had Moses to direct them, and
Prophets to warn them: should we think that Chanaan could yield such a
King? let Esaias judge. Thus he speaks upon Abraham's victory: Chanaanite kings
by the terror upon Abraham's victory, fell further to Idolatry. Esa. 41. There
again S. Ierom makes Sem Melchisedek, by Hebrews.
Whom God raised from the east, calling him in justice after his foot, he
gave nations before him, and made him overcome kings: He made them like dust
by his sword, like tossed stubble by his bow. He pursued them: he passed in
peace, by a way which with his feet he never had gone. Now the countries saw
and were afraid: Carpenders, Smythes, Founders, wrought for them gods to
help them. So far were those countries from having any King of true
religion. And should we deem any of their brood greater then Abraham, the
friend of God: the high father, the heir of the world? If Chanaan had had a
just King of their race, his subjects would some of them have followed him.
But no such goodness may be affyrmed of them: therefore neither of a King in
their line. Sickerly they had been the happiest in the world then, if they had
such a King: but they were openly cursed: that far from their fathers or
mothers, must that Kings lineage be holden. Long after the death of
Melchisedek, his fame of Justice was great with men that had denied the power
of it. For the King of Jerusalem was called Adom-Sedek: but we may be sure that
he was not of Melchisedeks posterity. For some memory and monument would
have continued of his faith, in him or in his neighbors somewhere: Neither
Adonisedek, nor his neighbors any whit, but in part of his name remembered
Melchisedek: as strangers to his line* Ios. 10.
As in Hoham king of Hebron, or in Piream king of Iarmuth, or in Iaphia king of
Lachis, or in Debir king of Eglon: who joined with him to fight against Gibeon
for making peace with Iosue. But as Hoham king of Hebron was no kin to
Abraham, no more was Adoni-Sedek to Melchisedek: and as they were utterly
estranged from the policy of the faithful, and godles in the world, so their
punishment is more from God then from men. For the Lord did cast upon them
great stones from heaven: and more dyed by the Hayle stones, then Israel slew
with the sword. If they had come of a famous King that understood the
blessing of Abraham, some sparkles must needs have remained of the ancient
story, and true religion. But as Moses in Melchisedeks story shows of no
familiarity betwixt him and Chanaanites, but in his office does most
certaynely distinguysh him from all of their cursed religion: so the Apostle
does sharpen us to understand. Moses aright. For in that he terms
Melchisedek to be without kindred, he does warn us to gather by Moses, that he
is not a Chanaanite. Else as Adonisedek is to be holden a Chanaanite, by the
place, and all the other kings of Chanaan: so should Melchisedek be counted,
if sure arguments did not exempt him from their nation. But by the attribute
infallible the term of JUSTICE mentioned in the Name, whereof here much might
be well spoken, the Apostle boldly affirms to Hebrews, and as he knew that
they held, that he was not of Chanaans nation, no more then of their religion.
Now Job was not further from the mind of Eliphaz, Sophar, and Bildad, in any
point, then I am from theirs, who would not have us to search who the man is.
Therein (I trow) the Apostle would summon us for sleepers, when he expressly
bids us to consider how great he is: which his greatness cannot be fully
known by the bare action of blessing Abraham. And if the Apostle had been
thought so to mean, and by such a type for blessing only, or yet for
sacrificehood, to require Jews to leave off circumsicion, and all ceremonies
peculiar to Abraham's seed, and to yield to the greatness of Christ by a figure
of a known Chanaanite: which Chanaanites case should represent a worthyer
case then that of Abraham ye Patriarch: they would sone have stopped their
ears at such a collectio^, seeing they did at S. Stephen, having Gabriels
countenance in his face, and Gabriels words in his spech. For if expressed
words would not move them to alter Moses, much less would a bare collection.
The Scripture foreseeyng their weakness, would avoid all arguments weak
amongst them. We should take ye like heed. The families that are in the book
of Job, Melchisedeks kindred was also Abraham's, and they only kept in diverse
places true religion, or some memory of it.
and in the land of Arabia, as Eliphas of Esau, Bildad of Suach of Ketura,
wife to Abraham, Job their brother, doubtless of Abraham, (though the old
Greeks bring him rather of Esau, then as more certain it is of Ketura, and
the sons of the east:) these with Elihu the son of Baracheel the Buzite of
Nachor, all kept religion in high degree of knowledge: and name God El, and
Elohim: once Job does name Jehovah not in disputation: Job. Chapter 1. 21. thrice.
as does he that wrote the book, in the preface and in the conclusion. As all
these kept Religion until Moses time, so would some have done in Melchisedeks
house in Chanaan, if he had not been ancestor to Abraham and to these men, but
some fresh Chanaanite excelling all kings that ever were in glory of religion
and justice in government. Now whereas Elihu is called a Buzite but of Aram:
of whether family he be, or be of both, Buz comes of Nachor. Also one Aram
Genesis 22, 21. Elihu may take part of the first Aram the son of Sem. Genesis 10.
Seth named amongst Madianites.
it makes nothing against me, but rather with me, that Arams house should
keep monumentes of Religion. Balaam a false Prophet, yet a Prophet, confirms
that. His example is very fit for this my purpose, to show how religion once
kindled in the myddest of blindness, will leave some light, who speaking to
Madianites names old Seth as famous with them. So if such a just king had
been of Chanaans seed, some remnant would have continued of the house. But
when old Melchisedek or Sem unknown, was dead, then the good men of his
household dissoluing family, went away to some family, as of Aram, Buz, Vz,
etc. when Chanaanites had mightily increased and prevailed in the land: who in
Abraham's time so went on that with the Chanaanite, also Kenite, Kenezite,
Kadmonite, Perizite, and Rephaim, grew on so, that Abraham and Lot could not
have in one place land enough for both their Flocks. By seventy years more,
and Melchisedeks death, they would more multiply: and more using the soil for
them selves, less would they suffer Melchisedeks house-holde to live amongst
them. And thus much for the term Justice, contained in Sedek, part of the Name
Melchi-Sedek, whereunto also I drew Religion as a chief spice under Justice.
Now for the place SALEM: that helps not a little to know who the person is.

The word SALEM betokens Peace, Of the place Salem.
and so the holy Ghost notes the power of the word. Heb. 7. Now it was not a
short continuance of peace that could make a famous name of peace: wherefore
long before Abraham's time it should seem to have had quietness. But it will
not soon agree with likelihood, that cursed Chanaans brood should excel all
in that blessing. Phil. 4, 7.
For the knowledge and love of Christ only gardeth men in a continual peace:
which the buylders of Babel having once despised, could never find in their
families, until Christ came: Only some few Proselytes yielded unto Abraham's
religion. As for the wicked, Esa. 57, 20.
Esaias makes them as a Sea tossed, which casts up mire and clay. Dan. 7.
And most lively does Daniel describe the enemies of the Jews (while they were
the high Saints) being as four beasts coming out of a Sea tossed with
four wyndes. Also, against the Heathen Christians, Apo. 13. Rome damned
from out of the Sea arises Romes power: as both Greeks and old Romistes
confidently expound it. So for a long time, more then the third part of time
since time More then 2000. years of 5520.
was, we have a determination for profane kingdoms, how far they are from
such a state as God would call peace. In all ages we see the state of peace
and war to be alyke. The old Serpent from Adam Genesis 3. to John Apo. 12.
executes the same hatred: that Salem properly can be no place but where God
gives a special blessing. Expounders at Sichem buylt a Salem: and make it
John Lucidus.
Melchisedeks city: where Jacob becomes salem (that is safe) not to Salem or
Peace-Towne. Gen 33, 18. The wars made in Abraham's time, and the leagues of
men there, teach us to examine this story. When the kings of Elam, Synear,
Ellasar, and Goym, fought with the kings of Sodom, Gomorra, Adama, Seboim, and
Bela, the king of Salem had nothing to do with the wars, nor with the twelve
years subjection, nor with their rebellion. As Abraham was in league with
Mamre, Eshcol, and Aner: so much rather than Melchisedek would have been, if
he had been of kindred. When the four kings stroke Rephaim, Zuzim, Emim,
Chorim, and En-Mispat, to the plain of Pharan, and the Emori in
Chazazon-Thamar: Would they have suffered Salem so near to be in peace, but
for some greater cause, then would soon befall a Chanaanite to be in?
Wherefore the short Hebrew Commentary, called An exposition of every hard
word: in that place calls Melchisedek Sem, induced not only by
aucthorities, but also by the matter. Whereas Chanaan by the curse should
serve Sem, Chanaan was to serve Sem: for which service the open story must be
looked unto.
and doubtless Sem would not omit the open vantage of superiority: it may well
be that for some encrochment upon the possessions of Sems families the first
contention did arise. Whereupon the king of Elam, as the eldest house of Sem,
should revenge his younger cosens quarrel. That Sem should settle in Salem,
it is by many reasons most lykely, for As for Selahs and Hebers families.
Epiph. in ancyroto page 516.
some his posterity: and for his breathren. Epiphanius so far disputes of
Sems sons, in such sort to have been there, but weeried thence by Chanaanites
encrochment, that there was a civil right, and not only the sole lordshyp of
God in giving Chanaan to Abraham. And R. In Neuath Salom, page 39. cityng their
fathers. Upon Dionys. Alex. page 130.
Abra, Ben Isaak thinks, that Jacob the dweller in Tents, learned religion
from the tents of Sem and Heber. Now for Sems breathren: the Greeks bear
memory of Iapheth. Anchiale a daughter of Iapheth, is by Eustathius recorded to
have buylt the town of that name. As for Cham, the land of Egypt is
expressly named of him. Now for the middle brother, the middle space betwixt
both, is the fittest: The middle Seas most fitly serving such use of their
life. And if the first dwellinges by any partition from Noah were appointed:
they guess well, which guess at this partition, for the first dwelling to be
from Noah's appointment. Abraham Ben Perizol a Jew, in his Cosmographie follows
Christians, The Jew follows and names Supplementu^ Chronichorum.
not only for placyng of Sem at Salem: or for Cham (of whose place none doubt:)
But also for Iapheth to be settled where we place Iapheths sons. 1. Geor.
We have good reason: because Virgil, Ovid, and Horace, 1. Metam.
from Hesiodus and other ancient Greeks, 1. Od.
such as Eustathius afterward follows upon Homer, 1. Erg.
making Iapheth one of the Gyantes, in whose time they warred against heaven:
Also In Cor, etc.
Lucian before him, making Iapheth the eldest of all folk: because these carry
the memory of Iapheth, we have good reason to place him in those countries
whence we came. Horeouer Egyptians made a God of Ammon: so Ch-am in Greek may
be written, where Cheth is in many names (as in Eve for Cheue) vnpronounced,
and the Greek termination observed. That religion does credit ye narratio^.
As that of our ancestors: who were much better taught by Iapheth to avoid
Idolatry, and to term him one that had been in the Gyantes age: and never to
make a God of him: Fables glaunce at a truth. Plut. De Deo Soc.
or as that of the Fable which tells that Prometheus the son of Iapheth
made men of the slyme of the earth: which thing came from his spech, wherein he
taught how God made Adam, and Eve a pandora full of al goodly virtues: that
Heathen Charites, Pallas and Venus could not be so well imagined of, as Eve
was Goodly in deed. It is usual in all kind of writers, to attribute the
work unto the narration. So Christ was crucified before the Galathians, not by
the Soldiers of Cittim or Italy, that with nails and spear wrought the
forespoken tyranny: but by the tongue of the Disciples. So Prometheus tongue
made men. And if we from fables are called somewhat to a truth for our
ancetour: shall not a more certain record for the place of Sem, fit for the
situation, fit for religon, held so continually of his posterity, move us to
follow ancient plainnes? Or could there be any reason why Melchisedeks story
should be hid until the Apostles time: to have an other meaning afterward,
then ever it had before: that the Apostles should not be able to teach the
old says, but by a new meaning in the story, which Jews never did, never
will like of. The Apostles would have no such reverence given to their words,
as to bring them to a meaning unheard of by the Apostles nation. Furthermore,
if Mount Sion be so fair in situation, and the glory of all the earth: where
Isaak was offered, where Salomons care buylt the first Temple, where Cyrus
decree buylt the second Temple, where Christ the true Temple powered out the
waters of life: should we think that Sem being a Prophet, Esaias. 2.
would not enquire from what place the Law and the word of Jehovah should
come. Mich. 5.
Nay it is expressly manifested and observed by the very Jews, that the place
whence the Greeks should learn Religion was Sems tents of old time, as I
have touched before, their own words from a threefolde authority. And this
their observation is good to help them. For as the blessing was performed
before Salem was abolished, and the word of the Lord did not fail: so they
and we were to look unto the curse. Moses tells, that upon denying the
Lord, the Land should have an eternal desolation. Gabriel tells their
particular denyance, in killing of Christ, not esteeming of the covenant blood,
wherewith we are sanctified. Our Lord told, that by the abomination of
desolation, The Romans are termed abominable, Dan. 9, 25. Mat. 24. conferde
with John. 11. and as bad for their last times. Apo. 17. the last verse.
( Math. 24.) an host besieging ( Luke 22.) Jerusalem should be destroyed, and
continually abide desolate: while the Gentiles calling continued. Great error
has been herein committed, by not marking the force of Noah's words: pursued
by Moses, Gabriel, the Lord, and full event: and the glorious erecting of the
Church, termed The heavenly Jerusalem, in stead of it. The Apostata Julian to
falsify our Lord his words, stirred faythles Jews to repair Jerusalem,
being him self at great charges: but Christ showed his truth. For the Moulde
which thousands carried on the day time, was on the night Theodorite book. 3,
20. Greg. Naz, against Iul. 2. page 301.
removed: likewise their Mortar and their Plaster, wyndes, tempests, and
storms dispersed. Their further madness an Earthquake terrified. Upon many
their buyldinges falling, quelled them: and plain tokens of Christ, were
against them. The Apostata would never have been so mad, if he had known how
long Noah's grant for Sems place, to hear a prerogative did continue. Apo. 8.
The Popes when they had fallen as Stars from heaven, Apo. 9.
and brought from the pit a smoke to darken the Stars: even when that
Helbrande was manifested to have the throne of Satan, and all his Apo. 13.
power: then they would falsify our Lord his words, and would recover
Jerusalem, to set up there a superstition. They styre wars for to recover the
low Jerusalem: to weaken Princes, that their Clergy might afterward have
Emperors and Kings at their commandment. So the force of the West, was sent
to the East: and there the four quarters of the earth made greater wars for
the City which had been once beloved, then the Seleucide and Ptolemei of old
time made: brynging thither the force of Gog and Magog: who also wrought and
suffered greater slaughter, then ever the world saw before or after, for the
holding of one place. And reason would, that men going about to disanull the
words of our Lord, should know the price of their folly: Seeing they would
help the City that killed Christ, to repair Jerusalem where he was killed,
to prove the words of truth untrue: to build there, whereupon Christ had
pronounced in Daniel, and in the Gospel, a perpetual desolation. Our Lord in
wrath against that place, remembered mercy toward the sons of Abraham. For
whereas this was and is amongst the Jews a ground of all their error, that
Moses Laws and Ceremonies continue for Ramban in Halachoth lesode Thora. Cha.
9. and in their daily Creed: called any Maamin: that is, I believe.
ever unchanged: and yet them selves confess, that while they be out of their
Land, their Law can not have his practice: and that they are bound to
affyrmatiue commandments, only in things about their body, as Phylacteries,
In N. Salom page 3. out of Ramban: there Mezuzothdoth mean writing upon posts
this: Jehovah our God Ieho^ah is one.
and post-writinges: The Lord in Moses, Deuteronomy. 28. and in the Gospel, Math. 23.
leauyng an unchangeable decree for a perpetual desolation, does plainly tell
them: that Sems tents having received Iapheth into the same dwelling, must be
enlarged on the right and on the left hand: that they may dwell in desolate
Cities over all the world, and build a larger Jerusalem then that where Sem
dwelt. Wherefore it is a great ^mperfection in us, that in so weighty a cause
Christians should be found unskillful: unable to express the open
prophecies, for the open place, and continuance of Sems City: and also for the
perpetual Desolation, and the use of that Prophecy. If for the first point we
be found ignorant, where Sems tents were: we shall never eleerely conclude
against them, when Sems tents lose their glory. Through our foolysh devotion
toward Jerusalem, in that Pilgrimages be continued thither: and we do not
openly profe^^e that place a burden of impiety, ouerslowen with an eternal
Desolation: Ramban a Jew, writing upon Leu. 26. shows him self stricken with
blindnsse and astonyshment of heart. For he says, that God will not suffer
Chanaan to be replenished with Heathen: because God does (forsooth) reserve it
for Isra^l to return thither. Because these poor souls are not mad enough of
them selves, Popyshe superstition wyshe pricking them forward: which as it is
bad, not limityng the end and term of Sems house: so let us not be found
uncertain for the first places of it. Concerning Mount Sion, how ancient the
dwelling of the holy Fathers have been there, the same is spoken of Hebrew
doctors, that the old Latins have delivered unto us. Rabbi Moses Ben Maimon
says Book. 6. Halachoth Beth-habbechira. cha. 2.
: It is a tradition holden of all hands, that the place where David and
Solomon buylt the Temple in the floor of Arauna, the same is the place where
Abraham buylt the Alter, and bound Isaak upon it: and the same is the place
where Noah buylt, when he came out of the Arc: and there was the Alter where
Kain and Abel offered: where also the first Adam offered, soon after that he
was created. Then if this be holden true, the second ADAM fi^lished his
course, where the first Adam began his. By this we may understand, that the
Apostle would not hope to persuade the Jews of any to dwell at Salem but Sem
in those days: seeing this was their universal opinion, and so fit for help
of memory for the story. And this much for the place Salem.

Most certain of all notes poynting at Sem, Sem is the Sacrificer.
is the Sacrificehood: which though I have touched already times, one, two,
three, yea and the fourth (as Plato phrazeth in Timoeo.) I must somewhat yet
handle it a new: and jointly with it the continuance, without beginning of
days, or end of life. As the Son of God took not of him self the function
of Sacrificer, but was called by him who said, Thou art a Sacrificer for ever,
after the order of Melchisedek: So neither would Moses have us to think that
Melchisedek had not a caller, or had an obscure calling: But this open calling
and warranted in story, and the highest that words could express, was
fastened by Noah upon Sem: wherefore it must needs be, that he would hold
it, and not yield his honor unto any other. The Lord was not ashamed to be
called the God of Sem in his life time, yea and in his young years, in respect
of his whole age: Iapheth his elder brother being a Prophet, as the Jews
rightly think, and persuaded by God to prefer Sems tents. Now if Iapheth
were his inferior, would Moses have us to think any other man his superior,
to represent a Sacrificehood of life undissolved? Neither Moses nor the Apostle
would ever wysh any such thought to climme into our heads. And seeing the
Mighty, the most High, would be described by an adiunct of his servant, and
after his name the God of Sem: it cannot stand with reason that than Sem being
alive, an other and not Sem should have the highest place in worship of the
most High, the God of Sem. The word Shem, or Sem with additions, is Gods name
in Heb^.
A learned Hebrew would not despise this reason also, that God in Moses is
called in Hebrew the Shem (that is Name) the great and the terrible. Leu. 24,
11.
And so the Jews to this day call God the Name. Deuteronomy. 28, 28.
Wherefore the man also called Name, or Shem, was fittest for this name and
honor, to be known by a general name: Noah foreseeing, and in his name
foretelling, how in time he should not be named but by a general name
IVST-King, sacrificer to the great and tirrible Name. Sem the Father of our
Lord, Sem of whom yet living God would be named the God of Sem, Sem the
Prophet, Sem who doubtless was a religious sacrificer, Sem the first King, Sem
and Sem only was then greater then Abraham the Patriarch, of whom being dead,
God is named, the God of Abraham: greater then Abraham the Prophet, the buylder
of Alters, the sacrificer of Isaak, and the Prince of God: Sem in every degree
is before him: But now we view Sacrificehood. Abraham was the son of an
Idolatrer once: but none of Sems fathers worshypped strange Gods. Also his
life being without record of blemishe, he was fittest to use the highest
office. The other is a most high honor, that he had fathers in order in such
honor: yet his two breathren matched him in that. But with godlynes to win
the prerogative from his elder brother, to have the faithful descent, until
his God came in the flesh: this was an unspeakable glory: as that all the
world should look unto his Tents. But as The Word coming in the flesh,
John. 1.
came unto his own, but his own received him not: So Sem, whom Chanaan
should serve, was to Chanaan unknown, who was his father, or his mother: when
was the beginning of his days, or the end of his life. The men of the world
then without knowledge of God of the creation, of the beginning of the
continuing of man, could not in their fables come near the antiquity of Sems
birth. A little weigh their ways. Sem elder then Heathen gods. Plat. in
Epitaphio. D^onys. Alex. and Eust.
They who replenished Attens plead, that there the earth did first yield up
Men. Wise Socrates in his time was no wyser then so to think. The Rivers Ladon
and Iaon in Moraea may well be thought memorialles in name of Laud or Lud, and
Iauan. Eustathius from Greeks, records that there they said men first
sprang. In Euterpe.
Herodotus tells a chyldysh tale of Children that heard no voice of men: who
were kept so, that they might be marked what language they would speak: Bek
they first spoke: (in Egypt it was done) and the king learned that Bek in the
Phrygian language was Bread: And thereupon a conclusion was gathered, that the
Phrygians were the most ancient people. Seeing Englyshmen bake Bread, they
might as well make us eldest. Trogus Pompeius wrote of a contention betwixt
Egyptians and Sythians for ancienty full of babyshnesse. The Ethiopians of
Cush, in Diodorus Siculus, thought that all the earth being covered once with
water, the Sun did first dry up their Country, and men out of the Mudde
first bred there. And in Arabia, Alilat is their God, as Herodotus records:
he seems to be Chauila or Euila the son of Cush. For that cause I think
the Septuagint translated the name Euilat is in LL. VV. the common copies,
noted in Sixtus quintus edition. 1. Chr. 1 though in his text, and some others
it be altered: belike by some that marueyled at the strangenes of the matter.
But as Ioinan is for Iauen, to sh^we that the Jones came of them, so I doubt
not but Euilat was for Euila for the like consideration.
Euilat, putting a, t. to the word: that Grammar neither required, nor
permitted. But they would teach the Heathen of their forged Gods. Phayt or
Phut John Lucidus.
was holden to be Phaeton, begotten by the Sun: and as the hot Lybea was an
intemperate Zone, so they feign that he drove the Charot of the Suns lamp
out of course, Anubis in Egypt of Anum or Anub, Chams nephew, was their God.
And commonly it was holden, that the earth bare Iapheth, Cham, and the buylders
against Heaven. Such was their blyndnes. Moses knowing very well how the Gods
of the Heathen, and their most ancient monumentes of Rivers, Mountains,
Towers, Countries, Gods, and Fables, (saving some few of Adam) skant matched
Sems first years: describes Sem (keeping his name close) in such sort as
Chanaan understood his case. For in him Melchisedek has, as the Apostle does
teach us to mark, no beginning of days, nor end of life. How simply it is no
wonder for a man to be in Scripture, for the open phrase without father,
without mother, without beginning of days, without end of life. So are Pilate
and Tiberius, Annas and Cayphas, whose Pro. 10, 7.
name does rot, and they Esa. 50, 11.
lie in sorrow: And it is rather a baseness then an honor simply to be so
recorded. But when a man well known, as a private man is suddenly in the style
of the story, set down as a stranger, full of royal majesty, by a new name,
unknown to them that lived about him, and to such as read his story: unless
it be some Angel, one of a thousand, as Elihu terms godly Preachers, the
case of such a man is to be considered, and is like to conteyne long speech,
and hard. Such is the case of Sem. What Infidel would If Moses writing had not
first made it common amongst the faithful.
believe that Sem borne before the Deluge, weakened a quarter of man's former
age, by it: yet by worshypping EL ELION, kept a Language original, kept,
almost only, true religion, saw men's age again halfed, saw not three ages, as
Nestor in Homer, but ten ages in the Male line: what infidel would think that
in the tenth age Sem should seal the blessing to Abraham? Moses full of the
most wise spirit, could both mock the mockers, and make the same words
seen to the Godly whyter then the Snow, of any Ulysses eloquence. He does not
only show how much, Homer Il. 3. verse. 222.
or rather how nothing the wicked understood that then were alive, or the
wicked would that should read his book afterward: but also most lively
teaches the Godly the sum of the Gospel, in that the blessing of the
blessed God of Sem, is in Sems life geued to Abraham: in whose Seed (not
seeds, but seed, as of one, who is CHRIST) all Families of the earth should
be blessed. So the doctrine of life everlasting is opened, that Christ that
seed of Abraham after the flesh, is the God of Sem after the spirit of
sanctification. This was the counsel of the Apostle writing to the Hebrews,
to show how the Son was made heir of all: by whom God made the world. Who
in Esa. 4. being Zemach Jehovah to glory, a bright spring, and Jehovah that
washes away the uncleanness of the daughters of Sion: Heb. 1, 3. Zach. 3, 8. in
the. 70. and Luke 1, 78.
Being in Exodus the Angel that has within him the name of God: Being in
Genesis, Elohim, that by speaking made and vpholdeth all: Being Psalm. 110. the
Lord of David, sitting on the right hand of God: and an eternal sacrificer
after the order of Melcisedek: is honored by the Apostle, with most goodly
speches: as fayrer then the sons or Adam. For he from those places terms
him the brightness of glory, the Character or graven form of Gods person:
carrying all by the word of his power: by him self a clenser of our sins,
and a sitter on the right hand of God on high. How the Jews could hardly be
called to an higher manifesting of the Redeemer, then the bare speches to
Abraham at the first sight contained: and were dull in hearing, that God was in
Christ, reconcilyng the world unto him self. Wherefore the Apostle by
Melchisedek, would draw them to the God of Sem, and to the great mystery of
Religion, that God was manifested in the flesh. Many others through all ages
in their stories bear a shadow of those things, which in Christ should be
more notable. As Adam, in deriuing his case upon the many: that is, all: Romans
5, 14.
Abel in innocent martyrdom: Heb. 12, 24.
Enoch in ascending: Genesis 5, 23.
Noah in saving the world by waters: 1. Pet. 3, 21.
Abraham in large fatherhood: Heb. 11.
Isaak in yeeldyng him self to a sacrifice, Genesis 17, 5.
Jacob in vigilant shepardy, Romans 4, 17.
Joseph in saving his breathren, Esa. 9, 6.
in price of sickles by Judas, Genesis 31, 40.
and his restraynt between two, Romans 8, 32.
one saved, Number. 12, 7.
the other perishing: Heb. 3, 2.
Moses in faythfulnesse over the house: Leu^t. 4.
Aron in sacrificehood, Number. 13, 17.
called the Christ: Judge. 16, 30.
the son of Nun in saving into that Rest: altered therefore in name from
Oseah to be called Jesus: Esaias. 45, 1.
Samson in destroying many enemies by his own death: Ezr. 1, 1. and. 6, 3.
David in a stout kingdom: Solomon in a peaceable: and I see not why Cyrus
may not also be joined for his office, though his faith be less certain: yet
because he set Israel free, and would have buylt the Temple on his charges,
therein he bare the form of a deliverer: As all these had foreshadowes of a
body to come, performyng a better thing answerable: so well might a man look
that Sem the rarest, or only for glorious phrase of Blessing, should not be
left in meaner degree. Therefore the matter in his story does ring and roar,
how in obscurity he is glorious: who in style, being known Sem, blessed
openly from his blessed God: recorded for all the time of his life, first in
that kind vnrecorded, as touching dying, appointed to that dwelling place
whence Nations should learn Religion, derived unto his tenth descent, finding
a man ordained to the succession of blessing: Suddenly comes on a stranger in
a famous name of a just King, to make him unknown to the blind world: such
an one as none might hold for beginning of days, for end of life, or yet for
father, mother, or kindred, to be a Chanaanite: and to special purpose a
Sacrificer without record of end: to represent by sequel of matter offering
it self, even the son of God, that king of Justice and Peace, without Father
in his manhood, without Mother in his Divinity, John. 1. 10. and 11.
without kindred for acceptance, and yet for ever continuyng a Sacrificer. So
an history one and the same becomes a black cloud to Chanaanites, and
clear to such as take both will and leisure to view the cloud that might
conduct to follow God.

Upon mention of Ageednes, I may join Without Sem, succession of doctrine has
no record.
Succession. Sem only of all living with Abraham, is recorded to have seen the
old world. Beyond record, we may affirm no exceeding old age. Noah was
dead before Abraham was borne. Sem might tell from two men, Lamech and
Methuselah, who both lived in Adams days, the stories from the beginning
until his time by hearing: and the later by his own sight, of prophannesse,
of religion, of the wrath, of mercy. Such treasure hid in Sems breast, holdyng
the glory of God, would seem more precious then any wall of Jasper or
Crystal, to behold the defense of God clear in the midst of the enemies.
Job would not so much esteem of any Heb. Ra^^oth, by the high color holden
to be Coral, as I guess from Orpheus, in couralio. 57.
Coral or Heb. Gabish, in Orpheus I read Chabazios, by notation it should be
like an hayle stone. In Greek also called Chalazias. Plin. book. 3^ Cha. 11.
Chabaz, as Abraham would of Sems authority to drive away Serpents, such as
Nachor his brother, and Ismael his soune were, despising the words of the
Blessing. By Sem, Abraham and Lot might instruct Isaak, who by them might be
brought to see Sem: that four workmen, four just men, of whom Heathen come
and not Israel only, meetyng at Salem, might begin the buyldyng of the high
Jerusalem, where in time all their Families should have a glorious dwelling.
They though then few would tell how their children should be taught by
Jehovah, when of them he took flesh, how they should have plenty of peace
(or Salom) in the high Salem, being settled in Justice: and their teaching then
amongst Heathen, was aprecious buylding, where stones were laid with
ornaments: the foundation of Saphir, the windows of Emeraud, and their gates
with flaming stones. I more willingly use these terms, by imitation of Esaias.
54. wherein he tells of the Heathens calling: For that the state of us now is
very like theirs: the partition wall, of circumcision and Moses ceremonies,
being so broken down as if it never had been buylt. Moreover the doctrine of
Moses delivered in twelve Precious stones, wherein were graven the names of the
twelve sons of Israel, not only to be in remembrance before God, but also
to teach their children to hold the precious gift of faith, as their Fathers
did: moves us to consider that the like were worn not upon, but within Sems
breast before: who had lived in the days of so many several fathers, and was a
high Sacrificer, bearyng Vrim and Thummim, the form of wholesome words, Faith
and Love, within his breast. When Isaak should hear him teach of Gods love
toward the world, how he would give his only Son for man: he should be
prepared before he knew his own case, to give him self to God, at the
commandment of his own Father. And well might Sem be faygned to have two
Onyx stones on his shoulders: the one having this engrauement: The seed of the
woman: the other having this, Jehovah Elohe Sem. These points be more precious
then any Stone. For afterward by these the white stone, with a name which
none knows but the receyuer, shall be given to such as fight for these two
Powsyes. When Sem should teach Abraham how Christ should come to his own,
but his own would not receive him: John. 1.
he might see a stamp of that in Sem, who being amongst his own, was not
glorious but to such as God drew unto him, despised and rejected for speaking
of Religion.

Now two things yet remain to be handled: The one a common saying of the
Jews: from the Babylonian Talmud, which often before I have mentioned. Theother
in what special meaning the nation of the Jews bears blame for dulnes of
hearing. Both which clear the cause. They say, from Elias house. Massecheth
Sanadrin, Cha. Chelek. pa. 97. line, the last.
6000. years the world stands. 2000. To^u (or before the Law) 2000. in the
Law. 2000. in the days of Messiah: which is by interpretation Christ. By ^ohu
they mean a vacuity of ornament, in the rate of commandments, Abraham had
the Promise in 2083. Jerusalem was destroyed at. 4000. How near. 6000. the
world shall end, God only knows certaynely: men can but guess, by like
reuolutions.
borrowing the term from Genesis the first Chapter, where the Earth is said to
be Tohu, that is, void. Now by the Law they mean not that which commonly men
would think, Moses law. For long after that was given: but they mean the
commandment of Circumcision, or any thing that God commanded Abraham. The
law of Faith stands rather in a narration, then in a form of imperative
speech: which being told but in Adams and Sems time, for common and open
record, they who knew not Christ, could never know whom Melchisedek could
represent: and they who knew the preferment of Sem, would soon know why he
should be lykened to the son of God. Sacrifices doubtless were commanded:
but no express word is written so, that men might be for^ed more to the law
of Faith: which they that knew not, thought all a Tohu, or emptiness, until
Abraham, that even Sem in all his royalty and office, could not show them an
eternal Redeemer. So for the other point, of Dulnes in hearing. The Lord
would never blame the Jews Nation for ignorance in the Prophets language,
open sayings, Tau. Resh. Iod ad Gimel in Arithmetique make. 613. which number
of letters they find. Exo. 20. for the spech of the Lord in the Law, and in
memory of that have gathered the Commandments. 613. full blindly enough:
omitting the article for Christ, holden in their belief: and appoynting no
law for belief in him, which was the end of the Law.
as Therig (that they call the. 613. commandments) nor for the times,
wherein for all knottes they yet have the truth, nor for the place whyther
Christ was to come, nor for the families recorded: who doubtless at that day
agreed with S. Matthew and S. Luke: though they would neither commend them,
nor keep a record of their own: they never durst resist them. For these
points whereupon the Scripture to us seems sealed with seven seals, for
want of daily readyng, wherein we should be occupied: The Nation most cunnyng
in these points, touching the open phrase, should not be blamed: but for the
close life skattered through all these sayings, the Scripture blames for
dullness of hearing touching Christ, for his person and his office. For the
whole world by loss of Millions, daily find this a great secret: how God
was manifested in the flesh, was justified in the spirit, was seen of
Angels, was preached in the world, was believed of nations, was taken up in
glory. The Turks, Jews, and all other Infidelles, they hear this: but they
hear these points dully. Though in the two thousand years of Tohu, no
expressed sayings for Religion, That the words of God, for faith in Christ,
should be better marked, little else for 2000. years is written.
to continue are written, but for these points, of the Seed that should
overcome the Serpent: and of the blessed God of Sem. By neglect of the first,
came impiety in all kinds, and thereupon the Flood. The floutyng of Sems
blessing buylt Babel, to make a Shem or Name: and that bredde the shame of
Languages. Before Abraham and Moses, this was a deep point. And after in
expressed words, it is the end of the Law. For Moses Leu. 26. describing
perfect recompense of Justice, speaks of plenty in Corn, Wine, Peace, and
such: and of the placyng of Gods Tabernacle amongst us: (which points, Amoz.
9. S. Luke 1. and Apo. 21* turn to Christ) and never enclyneth toward any
story in men, for perfourming any such thing: but contrary, in the punishments
for breaking. Moses foretells their story, until they are in Babylon. 70.
years, and how they will confess their sins, and the sins of their
Fathers: and tells how God will remember his Covenant with Jacob, Isaak, and
Abraham: and that he brought them out of the land of Egypt. This does Moses
tell. Daniel shows the perfourmance. He when the Captivity was ended,
confesses his sin, and the sin of his Fathers, and that every curse
written by Moses had taken effect from the just God: and notwithstanding that
God would remember how he brought his people from Egypt. Hereupon God does
work for us wonderful things. He sends an Angel to Daniel to teach him
understanding: who did so, as he him self records for more certayntie, that
we should take his words in that meaning as he him self took them, and not
be wyser then Daniel. He calls the Prophet that gave God holy praise of
justice and trueh, Delight it self, Chamudoth in Hebrew, and tells that the
word came forth at the beginning of his prayer: (Now he prayed for return to
build Jerusalem) and from the outgoing of that word, unto Messiah the king
most holy, brynging in Justice eternal, to end Sacrifice, to seal vision and
Prophet. 490. years exactly were pared out: and thereupon Jerusalem should be
destroyed. This he told: but who did look so far to the end of the Law?

As Moses face did shine to such as could look upon it: so does his doctrine
shine to such as pursue the tenor of it. Yet none can come to the end of it,
nor remove the coueryng from their heart: but such as the Father does turn and
draw unto the Son. After the Lord had long taught, little could men look
into the person of Christ. They thaught him to be John Baptist, Elias, Jeremy,
or one of the Prophets, but could not know the King Holy of Holy: therein they
were still dull of hearing. Neither could any of the Scribes and Pharisees
assembled, tell how Christ was both Lord and Son of David. Let us come to the
Apostles them selves, how skantly they knew Christ: Peter does confess, that
he was Christ the Son of the living God: but the thunder of his power against
Satan by his death, that he did not understand. For when the Lord said: that
he should be killed, and rise again the third day, he was not now Symeon Bar
Iona: a right hearer of Jonas case: what should be answereable to Jonas, lying
in the Whales belly there days and three nyghtes: but said, Chos ve shalom: in
our phrase, God forbid: being a Satan, a stumbling block, not conceyuing the
things of God. Let us consider how dull we our selves are, for the word
Rock. That word in the Prophets divinity, and in the Apostles phrase, and
course of the demand of Christ, imports God. So the Septugint translate the
term ZVR, that is Rock, by term Deu. 32, 4. 15. 18. 30. 31. and 2. Sam. 22.
1. Cor. 10. and Psalm. 8. 19. 28. 31. 62. 71. 73. 78. 89. 92. 94. 95. 144.
Theos, God. And this sentence twice tells us that plainly: there is no Zur,
Rock, but Jehovah. And S. Paul called Christ the Rock: and our Lord seals
up the Disciples answer, how he him self is the most Holy, the Rock: who
will perform vision and Prophet, by whom always came forgeuenes of sins. In
this poy^t the sharpest edge will soon turn aside. The Romises do not only
there turn to Peter the name never bestowed but upon God, but do the like in
Genesis 3. saying, She (not HE) shall bruise the head. Though the masculine gender
be past all doubt in the Hebrew. These deep sayings they mocked, before the
Flood, and at Babels work. And when Christ granted, that he was the Son of
God: they made that the occasion of his death. Moreover when S. Stephen said,
That Jesus of Nazareth would destroy that place, and alter the laws that
Moses gave: what had he then spoken more then Gabriel spoke, That Christ would
destroy City and Sanctuary: and finishe Sacrifice and Offering? And where it
is in Moses said, that his laws should continue Le Olam, continually: It
falls out most fitly in this cause. For Olam signifies a Iubilee. Now
Jubilees continued not beyond our Lord his death: but the last fell out in the
same year, that Holy year, the acceptable time, when he brought us into our
Rest. For particular declaration of that, an other time must be taken, and for
Moses further meaning, to be opened. For ye present matter touching dullness of
hearing, it was spoken doubtless of not understanding Melchisedek representing
the Some of God: which representation, how would that Nation ever have looked
for in a Chanaanite, whereas in Sem granted by them to figuer Christ, and in
most manifest Scriptures, they would rather stop their cares, then hear that
point? Thus all that is spoken of Melchisedek, shines in Sems cause: and it
can not be, that any other then alive, should be thought equal in the kind.
Sem is the honor of Kings, for antiquity, and justice: ended his dwelling at
Salem, whence Religion sprang to our Fathers: was the worthiest Sacrificer to
his God, was unborn in the world now, vndead in the memory of most that saw
him bless Abraham, undying in description of his age: besides the manner of
spech before used, to the astonyshment of men. Sem only could tell Abraham
and Isaak, the stories of Adam, from the mouth of Lamech and his father
Methuselah: only by the jews grant against the Jews can be brought, a
keeper of the world from Tobu, by his own ears testimony, as knowing the law
of Faith before Abraham. Sem only had before a promise, wherein the learned
Jews would be dull of hearing, and was meet to be lykened to the Son of
God in his case then. And never was any King more strengthened to a Kingdom by
Warriers, then Sem is by arguments, to be Melchisedek. This I had to speak of
Melchisedek, styred up first to defense by spech of a Learned brother, who
taught the same, and of some was blamed. Afterward I wrote in few lines the
effect of all this, sufficient (as I supposed) to stay the unstayed: and so I
found, that in many it took place. One Learned man otherwise minded, wrote
what he thought good to an other conclusion. His, and mine, I willingly
commend to the judgment of the Godly: that the truth may take place to
common agreement, in buyldyng the kingdom of Justice in Peace.

FINIS.
Hebrew Rabbines, or Rabbine works, cited in this book for Sem or
Melchisedek: whose whole works, from Venice, or Francfurt, Students may have.
1. Aben Ezra. 2. Abrabbaneel. 3. Abraham Ben Isaak in Nauath Salom. 4. Abraham
Zakuto author Sepher Iuchasim. 5. Abraham Perizol. 6. Baal Aruch. 7. Baal
Hatturim. 8. David Kimchi. 9. Elias Mizrachi. 10. Isaak Ben Arama. 11. Leui Ben
Gerson. 12. Menachem upon Moses. 13. Midras Bereshith. 14. Midras Tillin. 15.
Moses ben Maymon, or Rambam. 16. Moses ben Nachaman, or Ramban. 17. Perush col
millah Kasha: that is, an exposition upon every hard word. 18. Salomob
Iarchi. 19. Seder Olam Rabbah. 20. Symeon ben Iochai: he is cited in the
Babylonian Talmud: but is far elder in Zakuto, in Sepher Iuchasin: as of S.
Paul's age. 21. Talmud Babylonia^, printed at Basil: and from Sucha, Nedarin,
Sanedrin. 22. Tanchuma^.

