THE COPY OF THE Sermon preached before the University at S. Mary's in
OXFORD, on Tuesday the XXIV. of December. 1633.

By THO. BROWN, One of the Students of Christ-church.



Imprinted at Oxford by John Lichfield. Anno 1634.

THE COPY OF THE SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE UNIVERSITY at St Mary's in
Oxford, on Tuesday, the XXIV. of December, ANNO DOM. 1633,
PSALM. CXXX. Verse. IV. Quia apud te est Propitiatio; vt timearis.

For there is Mercy (or, Forgiveness) with thee; therefore shall thou be
feared.


THERE are some Psalms in this Book, that are called Paenitentiall Psalms;
that contain matter of Humiliation and Dejection for sin; that do refrain
the soul, Psalm. 131. 3.
and keep it Low. And, they are seven. There are other, that are called
Graduall Psalms; that contain matter of Elevation and Exaltation; that, by
Degrees, do, as we say before Communion, Lift Up our hearts unto the Lord.
And, they are fifteen. (As ever, the Troubles of Gods people are ouerdone in
there Redresses. When God humbles for sin, it is, but, in Pauxillo reliqui:
Some small leaving of us, for a moment: but, when he visits, again, ^say. 26.
20.
and redeemes his people; then, He rayses a mighty Salvation for us, as we say,
in our Benedictus.) Now, of all the Psalms in the whole book, this, that I
have read, and not one, beside this, has had the honor to be in, at both
Capacities. It is one of the Graduall Psalms: It carries the soul Up And, it
is one of the Paenitentiall Psalms: It brings her Down to the dust of death,
too. We may say of it, as Psalm. 22. 25.
sometimes S. Paul of our Savior; Et qui Ascendit, Idem est qui Descendi^ (in
the 4. Ephesians.) The Psalm that Ascends, is the Ephesians. 4. 10.
same that Descends, also.

THe Title to the Psalm, is, Canticum Graduum. A Song of Degrees. So, the Text
is piece of a Song; and we, so, to consider it. Now, to consider any Song
aright, The Division.
we must look into the parts of it. They will easily be known. They divide
themselves into the number blessed above all Numbers, the Number of the Blessed
Trinity.

And, now I speak of the Trinity, some of the Ancient Writers, (Pope
Innocent I mean for one;) do deduce the Doctrine of the Trinity from this
very verse. Apud te, they find the Father. Propitiatio, the Son: according to
that of St John. ipse est Propitiatio, (in the 1. John 2. 2.) he is the
Propitiation for all our 1. John 2. 2.
sins; speaking of Christ. Timearis, the Holy Ghost; according to that of the
Prophet, A Timore tuo Domine concepimus Spiritum; (in the 26. Esaias 18.)

The Doctrine of the Trinity, said I? nay, and (if you will) the Doctrine of
the Sacraments, too. Ethicsunt Ecclesiae gemina Sacramenta; as sometime S.
Augustine. Here are the two Twin-Sacraments of Christ's Church. In, Propitiatio,
there is the Sacrament of the Altar, Blood: for, Propitiation is, per fidem in
Sanguine, in the. 3. Romans 25. Through Faith in his Blood. There, you have One
Sacrament. And, in, Timearis, the Sacrament of Baptism, Water: for, Timor
Domini fons est vitae. 14. Prove. 16. The fear of the Lord is the Fountain,
(or, Font) of life. There, you have the Other.

But, because we considered this our Text, as piece of a Song; it will be most
proper for us, to found the Three Parts of it, upon the common Scale of Music.
And then, here is. I. Mercy. And, Mercy, does Super exaltare iudicium: Exalt
herself against Judgment, in the 2. James. 13. Above all his works, ^he^ as it
is in the Psalm. 145. 9,
Psalm. By the tender Mercies of our God, says old Zachary, we are visited
from on High. In Alto, She. There, you have One Luke 1. 78.
Part; The upper part, Hypite. II. Here is Fear. And, the Fear of the Lord,
is the Lowest Grace of the Holy Ghost, in the 11. Esaias. 2. A Sapientia
Descendit ad Timorem. (it is S. Augustine.) There is a Descent made to Fear.
And, the Apostle, as the Ground or Base, to Noli Altum Sapere, Sets, Rom, 11.
20.
Time. Be not high minded, but (Low minded, that is, but) Fear. There, you
have Another part, the part Below, Ne^^* III* Here is, Thee and Thou, Christ
our Savior, that was both God and Man: and so, Medius vestrum, in the. 1.
John. 26. There you have the Third part, the Mean, or Middle. part, Mese. Of
the one part, Mercy, he pertaked as God; and is styled so, in Nehemiah, Deus
Nehem. 9, 17
Misericordiarum, the God of Mercy Of the other part, Fear; he pertaked as
Man. For, in the days of his flesh, that is, when he was made Man; He was
heard in that he Feared. says the Apostle. 5. Heb. 7.

NOw. Of these, in this order. Fear. Object, Thou. Cause, and that a strange
one, to see too, Mercy. Prophet speaks of, that, is renewed every morning:
but, one of his Tender Lam. 3. 23.
Mercies; even, the Forgiving of our Sins. And yet. Cause: and that, for these
Quia's. Quia apud te. It is yet a Mercy with him. It is not Misericordia super
nos; A Mercy Lightened upon us, (as we pray in the Te Deum.) And, because of
that, Fear. There is Cause, in That. Quia Propitiatio. When it does lighten,
It is but One Single Act of Mercy. It may Lighten, and Lighten beside us. And,
because of that, Fear. There is more Cause in That. And, Quia Est. This
Mercy, though Lightened upon us, only, Is, now: it is not -- Dixit, Erit. We
do not know how long this Mercy will endure. She may in time, too, as Psalm.
136.
the Psalmist speaks of Righteousness, be turned into Judgment: (in the Psalm.
Psalm: 94, 15.
XCIV.) And because of That, Fear. In that, there is most Cause of all.

We told you, even now, that, in, Timearis, in, Fear, there was water. Then,
(as the Eunuch to Philip) See: here is Water: what does hinder you to be
baptized? I Acts. 8. 35.
am ready with my, Timearis, with my water; not with water which is Afraid,
(as it is in the LXXVII. Psalm.) But, with Psalm. 77. 16.
water which, it self, is, Fear: the first particular to be considered in our
Order. Quia apud t^. Whereof, that we may so speak. etc.

THE PRAYER.
GOd be merciful unto us and bless us; show us the light of his countenance,
and be merciful unto us. Look down from heaven; behold, visit, and releive
us; whilst we power out our Souls before him, in Prayer, and in Thanksgiving.

In THANKSGIVING, for the wonderful Grace and Virtue declared in all his
Saints, from the beginning of the World. And chiefly, in the Glorious, and most
Blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of God, who, as about this time, brought forth her
first borne Son, Jesus Christ our Lord. In; the holy Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs: whose example, and steadfastness in the Faith, grant He us
Grace to follow. FOR all his Benefits, both Temporal, and Spiritual, in great
Mercy and Abundance conferred upon us. Not only, for our Election, Creation,
Redemption, Vocation, Justification, Sanctification, in some weak measure in
this life, and Hope of Glory in the life to come. But, FOR our mediocrity of
Health, competency of Wealth, Preservation from many imminent and apparent
Dangers; though, not of that miraculous Mercy, as our deliverance from the
Spanish Invasion, the Gunpowder-Treason, and the late Plague among us. FOR all
his benefits National or Local. As well, for the Plenty and Peace which he
has bestowed upon us; when, he has not dealt so, with many other Nations. As,
for that liberal Education which He has conferred upon us, of this Place; by,
King Henry the Seventh, and Elizabeth his Wife: Humphrey Duke of Gloucester,
Lady Margaret Countess of Richmond; John Kempe, Archbishop of Canterbury;
Thomas Kempe Bishop of London; Richard Lichfield Archdeacon of Middlesex;
Thomas Woolsey Archbishop of York; King Henry the Eight, Founder of
Christ-Church: King Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, King James,
of blessed memory* And, our present Gracious Sovereign, the King. Sr Thomas
Bodley, Sr Henry Sauill, and Sr William Sidley, Knights, Mr William Camden, and
Dr Thomas White; Men, and Women, in Their generations Famous, and, in Ours,
never to be Forgotten.

And, in PRAYER, not for our selves alone, but for the whole estate of his
Catholic Church, militant here on Earth. FOR, those particular Churches, in
which we live, under the government, of a religious King, CHARLES, the first of
that Name, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, defender of the
Faith; In all Causes, and over all Persons, Ecclesiastical, or Civil, within
these his Dominions, Supreme Head, and Governor; That it may please him, so
to Bless unto him, his virtuous Lady the Queen, the Prince, the Lady Mary,
the young Duke, his royal Progeny, with the Princess Palatine, his only
Sister, and her Issue: that, after this life ended, they may all attain
everlasting Joy and Felicity, through Jesus Christ our Lord. FOR, the Lords
Spiritual, and Temporal, and the rest, of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council. FOR, the Nobility, Magistracy, Gentry, and Commonaltie of
the Land; That it may please him, to give them Grace, to Fear Him, Honor
their King, hate Coveteousnesse; and to let Brotherly Love continue. FOR, the
Right Reverend Fathers of the Church; both the Archbishops, all the Bishops,
with the whole Body of the Clergy For the Eyes of that Body the two
Universities of the Land, Oxford and Cambridge; In that, FOR the right
Honorable and right reverend Father in God, William, by the Providence of God,
his Grace of Canterbury, Primate, and Metropolitan of all England, One of his
Majesty's Councelours of State, Our Honorable Lord and Chancellor; FOR the
right worshipful his Vicechancelour, FOR all the Doctors* both the Proctors;
all Heads of Colleges and Halls, particularly, for the worthy Deane of
Christ-Church; the Prebendaries, Students, and every member of that, or any
other Society; That it may please him, so, to make Religion and Discipline to
flourish among us, that all they, which speak evil of us, may be ashamed,
when they hear of our Conversations, and receive a greater foil from them,
then, from our Controversies. FOR, all Jewish and seduced Romish Proselytes;
whether, as yet, without the pales of his Church, or, Members of an unsound
One. That it may please him, so, to let them see, and understand the mysteries
of their Salvation, that we, being all reduced to one Faith, under one
Shepherd of our Souls, may with joyfullnesse expect the coming of the Son
of Man, in the clouds, to Judgment. FOR, all those his Servants, which are
departed hence from us, with the Sign of Faith, and, do now rest in the
Sleep of Peace. That it may please him, to grant unto them his Mercy; and
that, at the day of the general Resurrection, we, and all they, which be of
the mystical body of his Son, may be set on his right hand, all together,
and hear that his most joyful voice, Come unto me O ye that be blessed of my
Father, and possess the Kingdom which is prepared for you, from the beginning
of the World. And, FOR our Selves, lastly, that are assembled here together, to
be made pertakers of his holy Word: That it may please him, to bless Me, in
Speaking, You, in Hearing; and, both, in Practicing of both, in our Lives, and
Conversations. That it may please him, to give us these, and all other his
blessings, which, he, in his infinite Wisdom, knows to be most necessary for
us; and, which we, know neither, how to deserve, nor desire, but, in that
Form, which he himself has taught us, saying. Our Father which art etc.

Vt timearis.
(feared.) And, Fear, is a good Beginning. Principium Of Fear.
Sapientiae the wiseman calls it: so, that, to begin wisely, no such Beginning
as with Shall be Feared.
It. There is an Epistle in Bernard (the 108. is that I mean.) that in steed
of Salutem in Domino, the Ordinatie term of greeting, begins with Timorem
Domini, for the complement of Salutation. It is as full of spiritual wisdom
(that Epistle) as most in the whole volume. Principium sapientiae, did I call
it? So, indeed, we Prove. 1. 7.
read. But, that is not All. It is not always, (as in the verse) Optima Prima
-- the Best goes not always First. We know where it was kept even till Now;
(in the 2. John.) The word for Principium, in the John. 2. 10.
Original, is the same that is used in the Law for Primitiae; So, that, Fear
is both the Beginning of wisdom, (that is) First: and, it is the First-Fruites
of wisdom, (that is) Best. First, and Best, both.

They have a Prouerbiall saying in the Pirke Auoth, this, Metus antecedit
Sapientiam; that, it is better to Fear to Do Evil; then to Know, how to Do
Good. And therefore some of their Doctors, in Galatinus; upon the place,
Homines and Jumenta tu saluabis Deus: (Psalm 36.) The Lord shall save both man
and beast; do observe, that God will not save those, that are Homines only;
those, only, that have the understanding of Men, in the knowledge of what is
Good; except they be Jumenta, too; except, in the Doing of Evil, they be
Fearful, Foolish, and Ignorant; even as it were a Beast, before him, (as the
Psalmist speaks, in the Psalm. 73. at the 21 verse.)

As Church Discipline is Retinaculum Fidej, (it is Cyprian so calls it,) the
Bridle of our Faith. So, Fear is Retinaculum Naturae, (as the Philosopher
calls it,) the Bridle of Nature; which, being once cast upon her, does, either
guide and govern her in the right way: or, else, does quickly check, and
turn her about, when she is in the wrong. It keeps her right: therefore, the
Prophet (in the 111. Psalm. 10.
111. Psalm.) speaking of the Fear of the Lord; adds, at the 10. Verse.
Intellectus bonus possidentibus eum. A good understanding have They that do
thereafter. And where a good understanding is, there error is excluded, and the
right way kept. Or, else, it checks and turns us about; quickly, when we are in
the wrong; therefore, when somewhat ayled Io^da^ (in the Psalm.) that is, when
the water was afraid, (there, the Bridle of Fear is cast upon her:) the very
next news is; o^ repulsus est retrorsum: the tide is straight way turned: no
more going that way. Jordan is driven Backward, (in the 114. Psalm. at the 5.
Verse.)

And, take this along with you, too. Amongst all the Affections, Fear, was (as
it is in the verse,) Primus in Orb -- the very first Passion in the world,
that we read of, that ever showed it self, after the Fall of Man. Now, by the
Law of first-bornes, It should be, therefore, Holy Exodus 13. 2.
unto the Lord. And, so, indeed, it is. It is, as the Salt unto the Sacrifice;
even Faith her self, unless brin'd and seasoned in often Fears, does soon
grow rank and perish. If that Faith be a Fabrique or Building; (and, be ye
builded up in your holy Faith; is the phrase of the Apostle S. Jude. v. 20.)
Fear, is Fundamentum salutis, (as Tertullian calls it.) the Foundation, that
must be first laid, or the work of our Salvation will scarce go forward. If
Faith be a kind of Physic to the Soul; (and, thy Faith has made thee
whole; was a speech, often in the mouth of our Savior.) Fear, is, electae
mentis praeparata Purgatio, (as Basil, and Gregory calls it.) the Purge, that
being, before, taken down into our hearts; does make, fidem quae operatur, (as
the Apostle would have it, 2. James 22.) Faith, work more kindly and better,
after. If Faith be a doctrine to be learned; (And, one of the principles of the
doctrine of Christ; the Apostle calls Faith, (in the. 6. Heb.) Fear, Heb. 6. 1.
is magister salutis, (as Gregory Nazianzen calls it) the Reader, or Lecturer
that must expound it. And, there must be an Instructor before a man can learn.
How can J understand except that some man guide Act. 8. 31.
me, could the Eunuch say to Philip. So, that, every way, Fear is before
Faith; and directs her going in the way. To believe, Psalm. 85. 13.
first, (there is Faith, spiritual Faith;) and; then to tremble, (there is
Fear, Natural Fear:) is the order of the Devils Creed; They believe and
tremble. With the James. 2. 19.
Christian, as with the Apostle, that is not 1. Cor. 15. 46.
first which is Spiritual, (Faith) but that which is Natural, (Fear.) As in
the last, so it must be in the first resurrection, too. So, that, first of
all, (I say) Fear.

Now As there was in the Prophet David's time, generatio querentium, A
Generation Psalm. 23. 6.
of seekers (in the Psalm) men, that were still to seek, and never found. So
there is in this our Age, (a world it is to see it) generatio Timentium; A
generation of Fearers. A generation of men that have, ^repidauerunt timore,
running in the blood; but, it is, vbi non erat Timor. They are afraid, still
where no fear was. (14. Psalm. 9.) Set there timearis upon the right Tu, and
that is, Tu autem Domine; let it be God, either as in himself, and his
observance; or, as he is incarnate in the Prince, and his ordinance; let him be
to be Feared; and, as far as a man may judge, there is no Fear of God before
their Eyes. Set there timearis but upon Psalm. 14. 7.
a wrong Tu, as, Tu qui destruis Templum, in the Gospel, or the like; Let the
great Temple be Destroyed, (that indeed Mat. 27. 40.
they would be glad of, but,) be Destroyed, to be Raised within few days;
where they should serve God in holiness, and righteousness, Absque, Timore,
(as, in the Song of zachary) and, without Fears, and, there you shall have it,
totus tremo horreoque; Every mothers child among them Fears, Religion, pure
and undefiled Religion, will be utterly ruined, when the place to exercise it,
in, is but repaired. Set up, in our windows, the Image of the Holy Lamb (And,
in that form of a Lamb they represented our Savior for many hundred years
together. They gave him not the Shape of a Man, so ordinarily, till after the
Sixth General Council.) And, through the inverted Perspectiue of this their
fear, that, which is but a Lamb, no more, but a Lamb, in the Window: will
seem, Leo in Via (in the Prove. 26. 13.
26. Prove.) A Lion in the way; and, seal the doors as fast, as a Persecution.
Paint the story of the Resurrection, and you may leave out the Keepers: you
shall have enough afraid, in the congregation. Do but white the Doors of a
Church, and you shall have them (as they were in the 20. of John. 19.) Fores
clausae; Doors, that may be shut up for any of our Disciples, that will
assemble there together. And, I do not think, but, propter metum Iudaeorum,
may come in, here, as it does, in that verse; for questionless, they fear,
too, that, Iudaisme will be professed among us, if the Gates of our Temples be
but once called Beautiful. (3. Acts. 2.)

To order, therefore, this our Fear aright: Psalm. 50. 23,
(for, according to that of Bernard, Nil sunt virtutes nisi ordinatae
affectiones:) we must have an especial eye, to match our timearis, with a
right Tu. This timearis, here, is like the Cockle-shell; none but his own
half; none, but one (Tu) will fit him. So, that, it is not, Tu vir, he, that
would kill our bodies, the Man of war; abroad: it is not that Tu, that does it.
It Is not, Tu frater; he, that does vex our righteous souls, the Brother, at
home; It Is, not that Tu, that does it, neither. It is, only Tu Dominus, the
third, Tu, in the verse; It is only God the Lord; and I say unto you, Fear
Him. (12. Luke 5.) He is the right Thou, for the, be Feared; the Object Luk*
12. 5.
(we spoke of) and our next particular, Thou. Vt timearis. etc. therefore
shall Thou.

fear God, shall, what? shall want nothing. (So, says the Psalm) I, and,
shall fear nothing, too. (So, The Object.
Lactantius.) A man shall cast out all other fears, in the name of this fear.
Efficit timor Thou shall be Feared.
Dei, (they are the words of the Father) vt caetera non possint timeri. And,
S. Jerome notes the same, upon the remoues of the children of Israel. When
they removed from Thaar (and Thaar, is that, quod, pauorem melius
interpretabimur, in the very words of Jerome: by, Thaar, is most properly
signified, fear: (there is, efficit timor Dei; there is, shall thou be
feared.) They came, to their next mansion, at Their; (and, Their, is as much as
depulsor, or abactor, says the father; Their signifies properly a driuer
away;) there is, vt caetera non possint timeri; or, (in the words of the
Psalmist,) no fear, what man can Psalm. 56. 4
do unto me.

Thou shall be feared? I; but how? S. Ambrose, here, (that our fear may be,
according Romans 10. 2.
to knowledge, too) gives a Scio to it. we must know, (says he) that, aliud est
timere, quia peccaueris; aliud, timere, ne pecces. One thing it is, (says
Ambrose) to fear God, only, because we sin; another, not to sin against
God, because we fear. The first is from the earth, earthly; when we fear,
only, because we sin: when we have that low earthly respect, only, to our
selves. The second is, from 1. Cor. 15. 47.
heaven, heavenly, (as we say in the order for Burial,) when, we will not
sin, because we fear; when we consider him, that is in the heavens, only,
and his glory. Psalm. 8. 3.
Time, ne pecces; there is fear, volley, fear, above line; fear, that never
touches the ground; time quia peccaueris, that is, fear, only, at the
rebound: never, without some fault before it. Time ne pecces; there is fear,
like the first Myrrh in the canticles, that flows of its own inclination,
freely; time, quia peccaueris; that is fear, only, like the second Myrrh,
that flows, indeed, (says the Naturalist,) but, not before incision; it must
smart, first. Time ne pecces; there is, stand in awe and sin not, (in Psalm.
4. 4.
the Psalm,) the Prophet David's fear; fear, that is the preservatiue against
sin; time quia peccaueris; that is only, if thou do evil, then fear, (in
the Apostle:) S. Paul's Romans 13. 4.
fear; fear, that is the plaster, after it.

Now: frail and feeble though our nature be; let us bid for, time ne pecces,
as much as we can. Let us endeavor that; let us not take away the first; if we
can help it. But howsoever; let us establish the second, (Heb. 10.) let us not
Heb. 10. 9.
pass by, time quia peccaveris; be sure of that. Fac, fac, (cries S.
Augustine,) do it, man, do it, any way: which way thou will, so one. Time ne
pecces, if it be possible; this indeed, you ought to have done; venture for
this a little; but howsoever, time quia peccaueris, by all manner means; and,
not leave this, undone, (23. Mat.) Mat. 23. ^3.
do not pass by, this.

There are, that delight themselves in observing a composition in the soul,
like to that, in the body; they compare our Hope in God, (hope, which is yet
only, happiness in the egg, as S. Augustine calls it,) they compare the
Christian man's hope, I say, to the liver, the shop and storehouse of blood: so
Clemens Alexandrinus calls a Christians hope, (Sanguinem fidei) the blood of
his faith; because, as that hope wastes, so, his very faith, the vital part
of his religion, does decay. Now: as Hope, is the liver of the Soul: So, say
they, is Fear, the lunges of the Soul; which cooles and fanns it, ever, and
anon; and keeps Faith in a good temper; which else would be subject to strange
heats, and passions; were it not, for this cooler, fear.

I do bring you to your Puerilis; I do teach you, like little children, thus,
the Psalm. 34. 11.
fear of the Lord: because, (I know not how, but, so it is;) this duty of
fear, is much, of late, minished from among the Psalm. 12. 1.
children of men. Men are grown, me thinks, as if they were afraid, to fear.
All their fear is struck inward, and gone to the heart; and, it is to be
feared, there is not so much charity residing there, as will, for as mittere
timorem, (1. John. 4. 18.) as will, drive out this fear again, either, into
the leg, or knee; or any other part of the body; where it may be discerned.
The, timearis, of the text, is not meant of any such invisible service. Will
you see it is not? Look upon the Chalde Paraphrast; the word, there, for,
timearis; is videaris; and so, a visible fear it should be, or it is not
right. To audivimus, (in the Psalm) Psalm. 47. 9.
the Prophet joins vidimus; So do we. Like as we have Heard, (for, hear it
we may from every man. It is every man's Song, that, who will not fear thee O
God? Apoc. 15. 4.
as well, as Moses, and the Lambs: so that, Hear it, without doubt, we may;
but, I wish, I might add) So have we Seen, also: for the world will but,
partly 1. Cor. 11. 18.
believe it, so long as in our ordinary service, and worship of almighty God,
there is so little, or no sign at all of it, to be seen. It is abscondita Deo
nostro, right. (Deuter. 29. 29.) Hidden things belong unto God. Our fear, I am
sure, our manner of worship is so; hidden, both; as if God required that, too,
only, in the inward parts. Psalm. 51. 5.
As, for outward worship, it is, better spared then spent. At the best, it is,
hitt, or miss, with us; fast, or loose, choose you whether; and, even in this
sense, too, is his service perfect freedom.

The Guest, in the Gospel, was cast into Hell fire, but, for his very garment.
'Twas not his inward demureness, could save him from outward darkness. Now.
Let me ask a little? Does God consider the raiment so precisely, without, so
much, as looking after the body that wears it? Does God so exactly censure the
form, and the fashion of the one; and, will he not, the deportment, and
behavior of the other? Is not the body more then raiment, Mat. 5. 26.
O ye, of so great faith?

I will conclude. With my body, I thee worship, is not, only, the office and
duty of the man unto the woman, when, by that magnum sacramentum, which the
Apostle speaks of, they two are made one flesh, Genesis 2. 24.
in Matrimony; Ego autem dico de Christo and ecclesia, with St Paul (Ephesians.
5.) I speak of Christ and the Church. I say, They both Ephesians. 5. 32.
require it; and, therefore, as we look to have our bodies, to be raised in
glory, when they shall enter into Joy: let us* sow them, first, in this
dishonor; let us fall down with 1. Cor. 15. 43.
them, and worship, when we come before him, in true reverence, and fear*

Scientes igitur timorem hunc Domini, (as the Apostle, in the 2. Cor. 5. 11.)
Knowing, The Cause.
therefore, this fear of the Lord; that is, knowing, now, that thou art to be
feared. It behooves us in the next place, cogn^scere causas, to enquire after
the cause, to look into the, (...) the quia, of this timearis, what that
should be. Assure our selves, we may, that, one there is. It is not, numquid
gratis? (as the Devil said of Job,) what? do you think, that we fear God,
for naught? truly, no. No Job. 1. 9.
causeless fear, this. Some Cause, or other, there is, out of all question;
and we (lo) now, to enquire after it.

And, to have found it, now, at length, And that a strange one.
quia Iustitia, had bin no great news. Gods Judgments usually, do cause
fear; let it, once, come to, in eadem condemnatione, 1. not Judgment.
let some common Judgment be upon us, once, and then, an non tu times Deum?
will be a question quickly stated with us; do not thou fear God, that art
under the same condemnation? (Luke Luke 23. 40.
23.) there is none, sure, but does. And, to speak but the sober truth, the
world is come generally to this pass, that, it is not, (as in the Psalm,)
thereafter, as Psalm. 90. 11.
a man fears, so is thy displeasure; but, vice versa, quite and clean;
thereafter, as thy displeasure is, so a man fears; just so, and, no
otherwise. Our fear goes altogether, by his Judgments; waxes and waineth;
comes in, and goes out, with them; keeps time, just, as they do. When Gods
Judgments are upon us, then, who, so devout, who, so godly, as we? who does
fear, and we do not fear? bring 2. Cor. 11. 29.
us once under some affliction, some of Gods Judgments; and then, straightway,
a godly fear comes upon us, too, as pain does upon a woman in travail; (and,
for the same reason, too) because, we know, that our hour, (the hour of
John. 16. 21.
affliction) is come. But, let that, once, pass from us; and, (lo) we are
even, as quickly past all fear, too.

We are, in this very thing, worse then the Heathens themselves. They are
noted, so far to have bin more obsequious in the service of those Gods, that
were most beneficial, and most merciful, unto them; that, the more gracious
and gentle they were; the more, they esteemed them, Gods. Hence, came the name
(...) (in Plutarck) to be ascribed to the King of the Gods; and hence, (as is
imagined by some) is Moses in the scripture, termed Deus Pharaonis, (not, Deus
Aaronis, as Theodoret does corruptly read the place, against the very letter
of the text; but, Deus Pharaonis) the God of Pharaoh; not, because he was more
powerful, then the very Sorcerers Exodus 7. 1.
were; they did hurt, as well as he could; but, because he was more pitiful;
he did heal, again; and, that, they could not do.

But, Iustitia, is not the quia of the text. 2 but Mercy.
Judgment, is not the cause we look for, and indeed; as for that fear, that
is caused from that, it will, like fruit from a forced ground, never last long;
fear, that is caused only, when Judgment is upon us, is, commonly, fear, that
may endure for a Psalm. 30. 5.
night, but joy comes again in the morning; it is fear, of no long
continuance; it will not stick by us. But, when, Mercy, is on them that fear
him: when the timearis has propitiatio, for the quia: that fear endures (as
it follows in the Magnificat) throughout all generations. And this mercy of
God, is the very quia, the cause we look for; (although, yet, we do not, I
believe, think our selves very happy in finding out, such a Cause, as this: we
had rather have found it, any thing, then mercy; especially, such a mercy, as
we are like to find of it.)

mercy is it? why! of what sort? There are in God a multitude of And that no
Common mercy.
mercies. All the ways of God (says the 25. Psalm,) are mercy: so that, we
cannot set our foot, but, upon some, or other. In the very describing of them,
we may say, as Jacob in respect of his deserving of them, we are less then the
least of his Genesis 32. 10.
mercies.

It is an act of mercy in God, when he does not punish: according to that, and
probeneficio habetur, cum possis, non nocere. So, the Prophet Jeremy confesses
it a mercy, nay, for, misericordiae, for, more then one too, for, mercies, in
the plural, only this; that they were not consumed. Lam. 3. 22.
And, it is an act of mercy in God* too, sometimes, when he does punish; when,
he takes away the wicked man, that, he may not go on, in wickedness. So, the
reason, why God smote the first borne of Egypt, and slew mighty Kings; is given
up to be, for his mercy, (in the Psalm:) Psalm. 136. 20.
no other cause, but that. So, in another Psalm, the Prophet does reckon
punishing, as a kindly effect of Gods mercy. Thou forgauest them, (there is,
mercy:) and what then? and, yet, punished'st their inventions, (in the 99.
Psalm, at the eight verse.) You see, with God, there is forgiving, even, in
punishing.

Such Acts, as these, are works of mercy, all; but, kind of night-workes;
somewhat darkened, and obscure: when, after this manner, God is pleased, to be
merciful unto us; we may well pray him, withal, to show us the light of his
countenance, (as it follows in the Psalm;) Psalm. 67. 1.
for, without some such Candle, little, or, no mercy at all, in such pieces of
work, as those, will be discerned; Gods mercy, there, like Jacob, with the
ruff hands of his brother Esau, is so coursly apparelled; that, she is
mistaken, and passes for his Justice. So; no wonder, if she produce fear: she
carries so much of it in her very face; that, it is a Quodlibet sometimes,
whether she be right mercy, or no.

But, the mercy of the text, is no dark, but, one of his tender mercies.
disputable mercy; but a mercy that breaks forth as the noone day, (in the
Psalm,) Psalm. 37. 6.
every man may discern it to be mercy. It is that, which consists in the
remission, and forgiveness of all our sins.

To take the height, and elevation of it. 1. not barely the habit.
It is not barely misericordia; which, is no more, then, the habit of mercy:
or, (as we say in the common prayer) the Property to have mercy, and to
forgive, mercy, newly 2. but, the act it self. Forgiveness.
upon the rising: but, it is propitiatio; it is mercy* actuated, mercy that
melts, from the bowels of Gods mercy; the very act of forgiveness; mercy, upon
the running.

I do omit, here, that some observe, in this word propitiare, there is prope,
and ire; that, this mercy is such a mercy, whereby God draws nigh, and comes
near unto the soul: which, they conceive one degree (at least) in the
elevation. But, I do not find, that Gods drawing nigh, or coming near, is
always used in the holy Writ, for a signum in bonum; for, some token showed
upon us, for good. Psalm. 86. 17.
Not, ever, a sign of mercy, that. The words, in the Venite exultemus, which
we read, offensus fui, thus; Forty years long was J vexed, (or angry) with
this generation; have most of the ancient read, proximus fui, thus; forty
years long was J nigh unto this generation. And, even to this day, not, the
mercies of God, usually, but his Judgments, are called, by the name of
Visitations; so not, always, mercy, in drawing near, or coming nigh unto us.
But, that, only, by the way.

Yet, there is one thing more, that brings this mercy, to her zenith, indeed;
that makes her, like Glory, to be Mercy in excelsis; to be mercy, in the top of
her altitude. And, it is this. It is noted by Grammarians, that the word (...)
which signifies misereri; from whence, the mercy of the text, proceeds; is
seldom, or never, used, but, with opposition to another word, of the same
Characters, but, inuerted in the order; and that is; (...) which signifies,
excidere: so that, this mercy, here, is, no prepared; no expected mercy; no
mercy, that is enticed down from heaven, by repentance, and showing mercy unto
our poor brethren. (That, indeed, is a common illex misericordiae Dei, (as
Tertullian calls it.) when, we show mercy, to the poor, here; we do, so,
imitate the mercy, that is in our God; we are merciful, so Like, as our father
in heaven, is merciful; that, Gods mercy comes Luke. ^. 36.
down presently unto us, as birds do unto a call; and, we lay hold upon
her.) No such mercy, this; but, a mercy, that comes (as we say) without
calling. A misereri; a mercy, that steps in, of her own accord, to save us:
when it should have bin, an exeidere; when we deserved, rather, to be cut off
in the midst of all our sin and iniquity: when, we were at that pass,
between God and our souls, as the Jews were, with our Savior; let him
deliver them, if he will have them: for, Mat. 27. 43.
as for liberaui animam meam; as, for delivering our own souls, that, we
never, so much as, think of; but, let them, (as we say) sink, or swim.

mercy of his; mercy, which we did not deserve, Yet, a Cause.
(that is nothing.) Nay; mercy, which we did despise, never so such as sought
after, (that is more.) Yet, (lo) for all this mercy, let us not castout fear.
We must 1. John. 4. 18.
fear, still. And, that is strange indeed; somewhat, it goes, (or, I am
mistaken) against the grain of this ages devotion Is a Psalm of mercy, turned
up? does God mercifully forgive the sins of his people? Is it once,
propitiatio apud te? why! what then follows, as the first lesson in our
ordinary service, but -- Caenabis apud me. Come; let us eat and drink; to
morrow shall be as yesterday, and much better. Is it once, O Son of David
have mercy upon us? we think presently, that both now, and ever, must needs
follow, as it does in the versicle:) and so, the care is taken. As, for
timearis; let that be, where it will: certainly, (as Abraham said, once) It is
not, in this place; That is Genesis 20. 11.
evident.

Nor, is it a mean stratageme, this, of Satan; thus, to separate those, whom
God Mat. 14. 6.
has joined together, namely, mercy and fear. His Kingdom has stood the
longer, for this division. Those two luminaries, Mark. 3. 24.
that govern the day of our salvation, (our repentance) and, should, ever be
in conjunction, does he divide, into their several quarters. Has the moon,
her appointed seasons? is it in mercy? why, then; the sun knows his going
down, (in the Psalm,) it is, out Fear, straight. Is it, he Psalm. 104. 19.
must increase? (as it was, with the Baptist and our Savior.) Is it, in Fear?
why! then, it is, I must decrease; it is, out Mercy, John. 3. 30.
straight. And, so, we cast out devils, in the name of Beelzebub; one evil,
with an other, Mat. 12. 24.
worse then that.

There were one sort of Heretics in the Primitive Church, that, did teach;
that, man could commit some sins, which could not be forgiven. Nouatus, from
whom the Nouatiani, or Cathari descended, Montanus long before him, (according
to Jerome) and others, did so. They excluded mercy. And, there were another,
that taught, that, no sin whatsoever could endanger the state of him that was
Justified and Predestined by God. The Ioviniani; the Beguardi and the
Beguinae; and others, whom, from their opinion, they called Praedestinati, did
so. They excluded fear. (And, it is thought, from that one Pinnacle of the
spiritual temple, Predestination, the devil has cast down too Mat. 4. 6.
many, that, heedlesly walk upon it.)

But, what do we raking up old errors, out of their forgotten dust? have not
we, even to this day, such an Eccles. 5. 12.
evil, under the Sun? It is, with mercy and fear, (as, with the child;)
neither mine 3. Kings. 3. 26.
nor thine; but, let it be divided. Mercy, all, or else, all fear; when,
indeed, repentance should be compounded out of both.

See you some, that pour themselves out into all uncleanness; that accustom
their tongues to execrations and fearful oaths, more, like speeches, then
like sins? whose throats, indeed, are open Sepulchers, where, Christ Jesus
himself, with his fresh bleeding wounds, is, (not, after three days,) but,
daily, yea, and hourly compelled to an unwilling resurrection? See you some,
whose whole discourse is so larded with obscenity and wantonness, vt verear ne
aliquorum castior incestus fiat, quam horum pudicitia, ('it is Origin, upon the
incestuous daughters of Lot:) that, it may be feared, that, even the sin of
some, is more chaste then their innocence? A little, timearis, would do well
with them. If they were cast into a fear, a little, they would do well: but,
they will none. Oh! John. 11. 12.
no fear, they; for fear of a stich, and gripe in the conscience. It comes,
commonly, with a fear; they like it not: give them mercy, even, for ever and
ever. You shall never satisfy them with mercy, (much less, and that, soon;
in the Psalm) whilst, taking Psalm. 90. 14.
in mercy, all their life time long, and never unloading any, either, at their
hands, in alms and charity; or, at their very mouths, till the hour of their
deaths, when they come forth with a formal miserere, (against the will of the
Prophet,) In the mercy of the most Highest Psalm. 21. 7.
they do miscarry.

See you some other (few, I grant, yet, some) that stretch and strain their
Conscience, above the key; (for, according to that of the Canons, that
Conscientia, is no more, but, Consonantia animae cum Deo,) and, still fear, it
is of too low a pitch? See you some, that cannot allow themselves that, which
the word of God, does? that, are, so a Law unto themselves (as the Apostle
speaks of the Romans 2. 14.
Gentiles:) that, they do arraigne and condemn in themselves, that, which,
the law of God, would not? men, that do fear, nay; all, their very best works
Job. 9. 28.
too? Sad, melancholy souls! some drops of mercy would do well with them,
but, alas, they dare not lift up their eyes; they dare not, so much, as, look
up to receive them. Ips^ si cupiat Salus -- if that Mercy, herself, should
come down from heaven, to have mercy upon them; they would, (like Adam, in the
garden) hide themselves from her, they are so afraid. (Genesis 3. 10.)

Of the two, our age is deepest in the first extremity. We sing of mercy, all
of us. Psalm. 101. 1.
Let us have but a sight of her, and she is our own. Commonly, indeed, the
verb that goes along with mercy, is, ostendo; as, O Lord, show thy mercy upon
us; in the versicle. Show us thy mercy, O Lord; (in the Psalm*) And shows
mercy unto Psalm. 85. 7.
thousands, in the commandments. Mercy, is only shown. It is, ostende and
sufficit, (as with Philip, concerning the Father:) Only show us this Mercy, and
it John. 14. 8.
suffices. If we but see her, we overcome her, too, straight. But, Fear goes
with a docebo. Fear is taught, and taught again; and we cannot skill i^. At,
si dominus, we are all good; we can say, Lord, Lord; we Mat. 25. 11.
can cry you Mercy, as often as you will; but, vbi timor? Where is fear, that
is joined with it? (1. Mal. 6.) what is become of that? We observed, before,
unto you, that, in, timearis, in fear; there was the Holy Ghost; and then;
sure, it is with us, as it was with them, in the Acts; We Acts. 19. 2.
have not so much as heard, whether there be any Holy Ghost, whether, there be
any such thing, as fear is, yea, or no. Non recepimus 2. Tim. 1. 7.
spiritum timoris, indeed; we have received no such Holy Spirit, yet, nor care
we for receiving it, at all.

As the world now goes; it is, Omnia vincit amor -- love, only love, is all in
all; that, only, now, is in fashion, as the sole cognizance of the Gospel:
fear, like a superannuated livery of the Law, is clean worn out of request.
Of, amor, as much, as you will; love, pure love; to love God, they will be
contented, with all their Luke. 10. 27.
hearts. But, take heed of. -- plena timoris, (in the same verse.) No fear; if
you love us, take heed of that.

But, let me tell you. Those fruits of repentance, Mat. 3. ^.
the Baptist speaks of, never come kindly forth; never have perfect color, on
both sides; when, these two, mercy, and fear, are not graffed, and inoculated,
the one in the other. When both of them, are mingled together, then, they make
the cup of salvation, fittest to be taken. Not fear alone: then, would the
drink be so waterish and small, that it would yield no comfort. Nor mercy
alone: then, it would be too strong: fume it would into the brain, and,
possibly, take away the sense of sin: but, mercy and fear, both: let them
meet together, Psalm. 85. 10.
let them kiss in the cup, and it will be a wholesome cup, indeed: neither too
small, Psalm. 116. 13
nor too strong. And, hic est calix (say I.) This, too, is the Cup of the new
Testament, Luke 22. 20.
drink ye all of this.

And; even from the beginning, it was so. Mat. 19. 8.
The Law (you remember it) carried terror in her face: for fear, all, she.
the people trembled: the mount quaked: not any Service, there, but, upon the
shaking-stop: all, to see too, was full of horror, full of fear: not the
least hope of any mercy to be looked for, there. Now, the Law is called the Law
of Moses, ever and anon: and, what was this Moses? why, Moses was the mildest
or, meekest man upon the earth, (Numb. 12. 3.) There is, you see. some mercy
mingled, with the Law it self, that spirit of fear.

Again. To the Arc, there belonged a Propitiatory, or Mercy-Seate, made of
pure gold. (Aquinas, by lapse of memory, calls it tabulam lapideam, in his old
Venice copies; and, is corrected in his latter editions:) and, what, but pure
mercy to be expected there? no parcel mercy in the very Seat of mercy; at the
least, no mixture, no ingredience of fear. And, yet, to the mercy-seat, there
belonged two Cherubins; and the Cherubins, are of that society that use to
cover their faces, for fear, when they come Esaias. 6. 2.
before God. So: there is not, all mercy, even, in the seat of mercy; even
there, there is a mixture of some fear.

And, in the volume of Gods book, they are ever, thus bound up together. It
was Peter's error, that, to be given to too much unnecessary building; he wished
not what he said, says Origin, because he talked of building three
Tabernacles, for the Law, the Prophets, and the Gospel; Moses, Elias, and
Christ; that do lodge best together, in one. Let us beware of that; not erect
sever all Tabernacles for mercy, and fear; that must habitare in vnum; like
brethren, (in the Psalm;) Psalm. 133. 1.
dwell together in unity.

It is, I know; an usual thing amongst us, when we see mercy, like the
prodigal in the Gospel, e longinquo, a great Luke 15. 20.
way off; when, we scarce plainly discern that it is mercy; why, presently the
whole country comes out, and desires Fear, that he would depart out of Mat. 8.
34.
their coasts. We think, we do, a little, despise the riches of his Mercy, as
the Apostle speaks, (for, that is the very best Romans 2. 4.
I can make of it,) if that fear, be thought worthy, to come under the roof,
M^^. ^. ^.
where her honor dwells. Take heed of that. It Is not good straining
complements with God: to be too provident, forsooth, of his honor. Let me tell
you. Heresy, was never so dangerous to the Church, as then, when it got some
respect, or other, to Gods glory; or honor, for the spring, that gave it
motion. The downright Arrians did less hurt, that denied the divinity of the
Sonnne, because they would not believe it; then, those, whom Origin speaks of,
that, in eiuility, would deny the Godhead of the Son, to the glory of the
Father* they thought it no small wrong to him, if the Godhead were made common.
They, that denied our Savior Christ, to be perfect Man, only, because they
would be perverse; were not so incorrigible in their opinion, as those, S.
Ambrose speaks of; that were worse provident; that, would not acknowledge him
to be perfect man, for fear of subiecting him to concupiscence; to which, the
nature of man is subject. But, take heed of that. The ways of God are smooth
and equal enough; let not the reason and providence of man, think to paue
them. If God, will have mercy and fear to kiss, (as you see, he will) let not
man, in the kiss, betray either. For, if Fear be once crucified; if that
fear once suffer without the gates: mercy will quickly betake her self to a
Tree; and loose her Bowels.

This* when it is misericordia super And that, 1. quia apud te.
nos; mercy, that is lightened upon us: not, to let go fear, then. But, it is
but, apud te, in the text. She, is yet, with him, and; we may well, fear. In
hhimmeka it is true, there is, as much, as in promptu; it is a sign mercy is
in readiness to come, upon us; when she is with him. But in hhimmeka, there
is, in potestate, too. So long, as she is, but, with him; It is in his power,
to choose, whether, she shall come, or not if he will that She tarry till thou
come to John. 21. 22.
fetch her, what is that, then, to thee?

But, come she will; that, we are sure of God will not show his Mercy to us;
2. quia propitiatio.
and, then withdraw it again, but, upon us. So, that, (...) or Iai^^; have it
we shall; that is certain.

And, what shall we have of it? no more, but Propitiatio: One single act of
mercy: and, as S. Andrew of the ^^shes; what is that among so many? How will
John 6. 9.
that satisfy the multitude of our sins? He that has it, will have none to
spare for others; ne forte non sufficiant nobis and vobis; least peradventure,
there be^ not enough for us, and for you. Mat. 25. 9.


St Ambrose, has a note; that, when God bade our first Parents eat of every
Tree in the Garden; he spoke in the singular: de omni ligno edes. But, when he
forbade them the Tree, in the midst of the Garden; he spoke in the plural;
non edetis; because (says Ambrose) Good, being simple and uniform; Gods
precepts, which command it, are, commonly, so, too: but, Evil, being various,
and of sever all kinds; his Probibitions, against them, are accordingly. He
would have set no such stamp upon Gods Mercies. The more, the better, they. He,
that has but one sin, (the Prophet. David, had no more:) may spread it, so
far, with circumstances; as, Adultery, with Murder; that, he shall need a
Multitude of mercies to cover it. Psalm. 51. 1.
And; happy man be his dole, whose sin is Psalm. 32. 1.
Covered, so.

Now, there is (I know) a Mercy, one single mercy; that, endures for ever, (in
the Psalm.) And, such a mercy (although but one,) would secure us; we should
not need to Fear. If we were sure, this mercy, though, but One mercy) would
follow us all the days of our life, all were Psalm. 23. 6.
well: then, we might bring our days to an end, indeed, like a tale that is
told, (as the Psalmist speaks,) that is, with pleasure, Psalm. 90. 9.
pastime, and delight: and, never fear at all.

But, for the elects sake, as our Savior 3. quia est.
speaks, (and, that word, Est, is the word of the Elect: as for Sinners, they
are not, properly, said to be: so says Origin, when the Apostle says, that,
God has chosen the things that are not, he does mean 1. Cor. 1. 28.
sinners: because (says he) peccatores non computantur Esse.) I say, because
of that word, est, (as it follows in the Gospel) Mar. 13. 20.
those days are shortened. That great cloud is, now, become no bigger then a
man's 1. Kings. 18. 44.
hand: this mercy (alas) only, is, Now: you may, but pass by it, and (lo) it
is gone; the place thereof will no more be Psalm. 37. 37.
found. Now, it is a day of mercy: we know not how soon the weather may
change: and, according to the providence of the very Proverb, it is good,
still, to fear the worst.

Some, among the Rabbis, observe, that God, is called, Deus Abrahami, The God
of Abraham (who was departed this life) but. Timor Isaaci, (in the 31. Genesis not
the God, but) the fear of Isaac, who Genesis 31. 42.
was yet living; to show, that so long as we are in this world, he that now
stands, should fear, least he fall. The mercies 1. Cor. 10. 12
of God, are not for lives. He does not entayle Salvation, upon his children,
as, the land of the living, so; but, that, Psalm. 26. 13.
our prodigal presumption, may cut it off. If we would be secure of heaven;
let us, take heed of security; and, we may. Ad securitatem quid superes^, nisi,
vt in virtute timeatur; according to that of Gregory. There is nothing, keeps
us, more, from being secure of our Salvation; then, that thinking of our
selves, secure. It is not good, in this respect, to put our whole trust and
confidence in his mercy, (as we say in our common Prayer) but, (as Job speaks)
Job. 4. 6.
rather, in our own fears. In this case, the mercies, even, of the godly
themselves, as well, as, those of the wicked, are cruel. Prove. 12. 10.


I will end, with the words of the Collect; (the Collect, for the second
Sunday after Trinity.) Lord* make us to have a perpetual fear and love of thy
holy name: (Such a fear, as may consist with love, too; not a fear, of thee;
but, a fear, to fall from thee.) that so, loving thee, for thy love to us,
(that is) for thy Judgment upon us, (for thou chasticest every one whom thou
Heb. 12. 6.
love:) and fearing thee, for (that for the which, thou art to be feared) thy
mercy; even, when thou do forgive us; we may, whilst we are in this world,
so fear our blessedness, that, in the next world, we may be blessed for that
fear. Send this fear, O God, down into our hearts; and, hear us for his
sake, who, was heard himself, in that, he feared, thy blessed Son Our
Savior, (the conduit-pipe of all thy mercy,) Jesus Christ our Lord. To whom,
with Thee and the Holy Ghost, three Persons, and one God; be ascribed etc.

FINIS.
OXFORD

IMPRINTED by John Lichfield Printer to the UNIVERSITY. ANNO. M* DC. XXXIV.


