A COMMENTARY UPON THE CANTICLE OF CANTICLES, WRITten first in Italian by
Antonio Brucioli, and now translated into English by Th. James fellow of New
college in Oxford.

Greater is he that prophecieth, then he that speaks diverse tongues, except
he expound it, that the Church may receive edification.

1. Cor. 14. v. 4. Come and eat of my meat, and drink of the wine that I
have drawn.

Prove. 9. v. 5. LONDON Printed by R. F. for Tho. Man. 1598.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR THOmas Egerton Knight, Lord Keeper of the great
seal of England, Thomas James wishes increase of health, wealth and
prosperity in this life, and endless joy, happiness and immortality in the
life to come.
SAint Hierome complained of the multitude and abuse of writers in his time.
Solomon to show the vanity of me^ in writing of books, begins one of his
books with Vanity. Vanity of vanities (says Solomon the Preacher) vanity
of vanities, and all is but vanity: and as he begins his book so he ends
it, as if from the beginning unto the ending, ^here were nothing but vanity in
all other books, the holy Scripture only excepted, no part or parcel whereof
may be guilty of the least thought of vanity in the world; the holy Ghost
being in the holy scripture as the soul is in the body, all in all, and all
in every part. And therefore in the later end of his book to lead us unto
the beginning of true wisdom, he pricketh men forward and exhorts them to
the diligent reading of Gods words, the words of truth, by comparing them unto
pricks and nails fastened by the masters of the assemblies. To avoid Saint
Hieromes complaint, and follow Salomons godly exhortation, the Author of this
present treatise upon the Canticles, did exercise him self from his infancy in
the study of Gods word, the which he read so earnestly and eagerly, as if (as
Saint Austin says) he could never have read it sufficiently, though h^ should
have begun never so soon, and lived never so long. But finding the scriptures
by his own experience so written in diverse places (though all Scripture be
written for our instruction) as if i^ were not written, as it was said of
certain books of Aristotle: in so much that when the Eunuch reads, Philip
had need to stand by and interpret. He thought it good, for the good of the
Church and glory of God, to bestow the greatest part of his time, partly in
translating the Bible into his mother tongue (which he did most exactly) partly
in writing such a commentary upon the Bible, as might in doubtful and hard
places fully satisfy and content the mind of the religious reader. Now there
are many which have written upon the Bible learned and godly commentaries in
all tongues and languages, many more now (thanks be to God) in these later
days, the^ in former times: but of all late writers, there is none (for any
that I have seen or heard) which may be compared with this Brucioli, for
absolute and exquisite knowledge in the tongues, great reading in the Fathers,
shortness and plainness in delivering of the meaning of the holy Ghost, and
last of all such soundness in Religion, and integrity of doctrine, as may
seem admirable in any man, but in Brucioli and Italian, wonderful beyond the
degree of^ admiration. For surely as it seemed stra^ge^ unto the Jews, that
out of Galile should come any good: so it is no less stranges unto some, that
Italy should afford us any good; Italy being the cage of uncleanness, and
seat of Antichrist. But God, the God of the Gentiles as well as of the Jews,
the God of Italians as of Englishmen, no accepter of persons, or respecter of
place, has even in Italy many (peradventure thousands) which have not bowed
their knees unto Baal, electing some out of each nation and country, to make
up the sum of his elect. Now as God in his mercy has stirred up some to
defend his glory in other countries, so has he raised up this Brucioli to be
a principal setter forth of his glory in Italy, which that man of sin the
Roman Antichrist perceiving, has therefore labored to suppress and abolish
his painful labors: but man purposes and God disposes. For as they have
been forbidden twice, so twice have they been printed, and that in no other
place then Venice, dedicated to men of the contrary religion, which (it should
seem) he professed, and submitted to the censure of our holy mother the Church:
provided that out of the Scriptures and Fathers they should be able to refute
his doctrine, which out of the^ both he had most learnedly co^piled. The time
wherein he lived I find not certainly set down of any: but this is most
certain, that he lived about the time of Conradus Pellicanus, some 70 or 80
years ago, and that Pelican did very much profit himself by Brucioli, or
Brucioli by Pellicans writings: which is the more probable, by how much the
more Brucioli has in his Co^mentary, besides that which is out of Pelican
translated into his books word for word in diverse places. The order and method
which he observed in his Commentary is such as deserves to be imitated of all
men that labor in this business, in easy and facill places of the Bible,
either to be altogether silent, or very short and brief: in harder places to
be more plentiful and copious, in no place spending paper and ink in idle and
unprofitable questions, such as tend not to edification. As to dispute the case
in this Commentary upon the Canticles, whether of the three books which
Solomon wrote, he wrote the Canticles in the first or second place, as the
Jews imagine, or last of all, as all the Latin writers do consent. Whether
there be more persons then four, or whether this book be meant literally of
Pharaohs daughter, or mystically of the Church: these questions being far
above the reach of the common sort of people, he omitteth purposely. And
because all writers with one voice consent that the Church is meant by the
Spouse, he so takes it without any further ado, instructing us in these
points of religion, necessary to be taught of him and understood of us. That
the Church here militant consists of two parts, a visible and an invisible:
that in the Church Christ must bear rule, and not Peter; that Gods word must
be heard, and not men's traditions: finally he teaches us the necessity of
faith, and fruit of good works: these are the principal points which he
handles in this book, every where joining with them matter of comfort and
exhortation: and thus much for Brucioli and his Commentary. Now for my self
and my translation, I could have wished that others which have the gift of
interpretation, would have taken the work in hand, but seeing they have been
slack in this business, I have for that exceeding great love which I bear
unto t^^ works of this learned man, a stranger, but not from the faith,
translated this book of the Canticles, with that mind which he wrote it, to
the glory of God and benefit of his Church. In translating of it I have not
yielded word for word, but sense for sense, and sentence for sentence. For the
text I have not followed mine Author, but taken the authorized translation in
our English Bibles, for that it is a matter of great difficulty, and not for a
young man to translate: and is besides warranted by Fulke against the Papists,
and learned Master Hooker against our adversaries at home; only I have noted
the differences which are not many, either by the side of the book, or in the
text of the Commentary. This small labor of mine, I am bold to present unto
your Lordship (right Honorable.) Others for other respects, out of the
treasures of their wits and industries, have presented you with greater
volumes: my self being young in years and poor in wit, do offer up into your
hands, all that I have as yet provided, which is at the most but a poor
Orphans mite. Which I do in this respect only; for that honorable regard which
your Lordship has of learning and religion, which are the loadstones to draw
the hearts of men unto you. For which cause my self being as yet unknown unto
your Lordship, am moved to sue unto the same for protection; for protection for
my self, and defense for mine Author, a mere stranger; the title of your
office and virtuous disposition to others does promise us great comfort. For
seeing God has made you a Keeper, and that as it is here in the Canticles, of
many vines, and that you have kept your vines so, that of the fruit thereof
has been made wine right comfortable unto many drooping hearts in this land,
what remains there in me, but to be confident in your Honors kind acceptance
of this book, and to beseech God the true keeper of Israel, which neither
slumbreth nor sleeps, long to preserve your Honor in health, to the
maintenance of learning and religion, the preservation of her Majesty, and
universal good of this land.

Your Honors in all duty, Thomas James.

The Translatour to the courteous and Christian Reader.
A Christian I presume thou art that read this book, courteous I call thee,
because I hope to find thee so: it is as much as I desire, and surely no less
does mine Author deserve His name is Brucioli, by birth an Italian, his
country (as I guess) Florence, and therefore a stranger; if a stranger,
entreat him as a stranger, that is, gently and kindly, and know that it is thy
duty, if it be not thy courtesy so to do: for there is a duty which belongs
unto strangers, commanded in the Law, and commended in the Gospel. As a
stranger by birth, so good must be done unto him in general, but as he is not
a stranger from the faith, so we are bound to show him special favor: for so
the Apostle S. Paul^ wills us for to do; Do good (says he) unto all men, but
especially or chiefly to those which are of the household of faith. Of this
household was Brucioli, and not of that other household of good works, where
none but merit-mongers and superarrogant or superogating Papists dwell. Read
his Commentary, and thou will confess as much: there is often mention of
faith, of justification by faith only, of faith and justification by
imputation: still faith comes in, as if our actions were as insipid and
unpleasant without faith, as the old sacrifices were unsavory without salt. The
Law requires salt in all sacrifices, Brucioli requires faith in every action:
he makes it the subject of his discourse, brings it in in every chapter, in
every page, yea almost in every line, as if it were the center whereunto all
the lines of his commentary must of force have been drawn. Embrace his book
therefore in thine hands, and entertain his doctrine into thine heart. Scorn
him not because he is not attired after the fine Italian fashion, for this
were to accept of him for his good apparel and not for his good parts, which
Saint James noted for a fault in the Jews. Brucioli is now in England and not
in Italy, and therefore must be content with such apparel as our country
affords, he has the best that could be gotten for him, for indeed it is all
that could be gotten, either he must have this or none, and better this then
none, for I hope it is good and strong, though it be not very costly and fine:
the finest thredes be not ever the best, for the^ spiders would undo weauers and
spinners, and be set a work more the^ they be, and yet I cannot say but they
work too fast many times: but alas it is in sucking sour out of sweet, and
drawing forth poison from honey. These creatures I do not like, the Lion
naturally hates the mouse, the sheep a wolf, and naturally I do abhor these
men from my very heart, and therefore if any spider come upon my book, it shall
be lawful for any man either to sweep, or else to blow him away, for he is but a
light person of himself, and easily blown away that spends his time in this
sort, how heavy soever he prove to others. They say there be no spiders in
Ireland, their houses are built of such a wood as breeds none: O that England
were as Ireland in this respect, and that all our houses were built of this
kind of timber, then would the house of God go better forward then it does, and
we should be fitter men to be temples of the holy Ghost the^ we are: but now the
world is as full of these wicked creatures, as ever Egypt swarmed with frogs:
there was no house, no place in Egypt but there were frogs to be found: there
is no place, no house almost in England where there are not some of these
venomous spiders to be found: a man shall find the^ every wherein city and
fields, in beds and at board, in court and country. If a young man write, they
say his head is too green: if an old man, they say his best is past: if a man
of middle age, they say at that time his body is more fit for actio^, then his
mind is apt to conte^plation: so that neither old, nor young, nor middle aged
writers can please the^, and no marvel, for I think they cannot please
themselves. But chiefly these spider-catching Zoilusses do shoot the venime of
their tongues against painful translators of books which seek other men's
profits, and not their own, reaping not the fruit of that which they have
sown, and like candles spending themselves to give others light. But what
says M. Momus with his crew of carping knights, these men mar all with their
translations, it was never well with us (that is, that are learned) since so
many books were translated into english, their labor were better spared the^
employed, they corrupt books, misinterpret writers, are enemies unto the
common wealth, and enemies to all good learning. If this be all they have to
say, they say in word somewhat, in effect nothing: for either they take that
for a salt, which is not so indeed, or else they know not how to distinguish
the abuse from the thing, and so speak against they know not what. Translators
have their faults and abuses as well as other men, as when they translate
foolish and unprofitable, or wicked and ungodly books, or else mistranslate and
misinterpret books, and then the abuse proceeds either of malice or of
ignorance: if of malice their reproof is just; if of ignorance, blame the^
not, unless it be affected: for the best that is may miss in a strange
language, when no man knows all in his own tongue. And thus far reaches
their complaint against the abuse of translations, which may in no wise be
excused. As for the harm that comes by making learning too common, me^ of
common judgment may by vulgar examples easily refute them. The sun and
moon, fire and water are profitable, and yet common: the Philosopher says,
Bonum quo communius, eo melius: good the commoner it is, the better it is: if
it be true in philosophy, it is true in divinity, and therefore S. Paul
wishes that all men were learned as he was, and that all men could speak with
diverse tongues as he did, etc. I would that these men which think they have S.
Paul's learning, had S Paul's zeal (so it were according to knowledge) to
seek other men's good and not their own; for now marcha^ts do not monopolize
the goods of a city more the^ these do appropriate unto themselves the
learning of whole universities, and when they have it, what do they with it,
but keep it unto themselves? Because I would not be of this odious sect of men
(most courteous and Christian reader) I have at vacant times translated
according to that measure of knowledge which God has given me, both this book
and some others, as the history of the Jesuits, and Moral Philosophy of the
Stoickes, which with permissio^ of my superiors, I mean shortly to publish, if
God will, and health permit me so to do. Take this book in good part: accept of
my good will, fault pardon and amend, whether they be the Printers or the
translators: the preface is the Authors and not mine, it escaped both me and
the Printer before I was aware, the rest read corrected in the latter end of
the book.

The Preface to the Book.
THis book of the Canticles is a holy and admirable book, very spiritual,
full of mysteries and most hidden senses; whereby it is most evident, that they
have been not a little deceived, which go about to diminish the credit and
authority thereof: for because herein are contained, sundry enterchangeable
discourses, and dialogues of mutual love between the bride and the
bridegroom, therefore forsooth have they thought it good to call this book in
question; as if it were not an usual matter with the holy Ghost in the holy
Scripture, to set down the sincere and unfeigned love of God and the Church,
under the figure of chaste and holy wedlock: as also to discover the force of
wickedness and Idolatry, by the similitude of the adulterous woman, as it is
to be seen in the second and third of Jeremy, and in the sixteenth Chapter of
Ezechiel. Besides all this, there are certain places in this book, whereby no
otherwise then as it were by certain beams and lights, this point is made so
clear and manifest, that we may very well say without any manner of doubt or
wavering at all, that this Treatise is not carnally and literally, but
spiritually and mystically to be understood. In such sort, that I hold this for
an infallible and certain truth, that there are comprehended and contained in
this small book, the exceeding great affection and love of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the holy Church of the faithful believers, the necessary use of
the word of God, the profit and pleasantness thereof, the efficacy of faith,
and heat of charity. Furthermore we learn to know what are the operations of
the spirit, and what are the works of the flesh: and briefly, that which does
any manner of way concern or respect the Church; and all this, under the
figurative talk and communication between the Bridegroom and the Spouse. Now
Christ is the Bridegroom, as it is in the 3. of John verse 29. He that has
the bride, is the bridegroom, and the Church is his spouse. Hosea Chapter 2.
Thou shall call me Ishi or my husband, and I will marry thee unto me for ever.
And this spouse is attended on with her young maidens, that is to say, with the
particular souls of the faithful, which do follow after the odoriferous and
sauery ointments of our Savior Jesus Christ. And the bridegroom likewise has
his friends that do follow and accompany him, to wit, the true Bishops, and
sincere Prechers of the word of God, which he calls unto him to eat and drink,
and make merry with him. These men hear the voice of the Church, that is to
say, the words of Christ. Nevertheless, this is not so to be understood, but
that all the faithful may rightly term themselves friends of the bridegroom.
The title or inscriptio^ is the Song of Songs, as if therein were contained
songs which did far exceed all other songs, in plenty of holy mysteries, and
they are called the songs of Solomon, or Salomons songs, because he writ them
being inspired by the holy Ghost of the true Solomon Jesus Christ. We read of
many Canticles or songs in the scripture, as the song of Moses, Deborah,
Joshua, Anna, David, Abacuck, and others, but this book compriseth not one
only song which Solomon song, but there are many songs herein contained, all
written in one book, but concerning one matter, and one argument; wherein are
expressed most truly the charity, faith, love, joy, delights, and diverse
kinds of benefits (not without vehement and earnest affections) wherewith our
most loving and merciful redemer does follow his elect with inexplicable
graces, by the grace and favor of the almighty God. So that they being stirred
up by the holy Ghost, do with certain unspeakable affections of love, regard,
behold, and approach near unto the divine grace and bounty of God: desiring
most earnestly and devoutly to be commended, approved, and daily more and more
esteemed and favored of him: in such sort that if there be found any error or
fault in their lives and conuersations (as spots and blots or wennes in their
forheads do sometimes happen) yet that they may not be refused or rejected for
this or the like things, or have any cause to distrust his merciful kindness
or loving favor, but that the falling out of lovers, may be the renewing of
love. For lovers being jealous one of another are mutually and suddenly
provoked unto wrath, and as sudde^ly reconciled and pacified, and afterward
they become greater friends then they were before. This then is the principal
intent and purpose of this book. This is the song of God the spouse, unto
every faithful soul, and generally unto all the Church. Neither are we to look
for any precise order in this dialogue or communication, which is not usual
amongst perfect lovers, where all things how soever and where soever done, are
taken in very good part, where, even errors, ignorances, and mistakes are
accepted of, and laughed at, and where quarrels, contentions, strife, anger, and
blows also many times, are heard of, approved, and in most friendly sort
admitted. And in this book, there be four sundry sorts of persons to be
observed of us. The bridegroom, and the friends of the bridegroom; the spouse
and her young damsels or waiting maids, and as the bride says one thing, and
the bridegroom another: so the young virgins that wait on the spouse, and the
friends of the bridegroom, are brought in speaking contrary and diverse
things, yet all of them betokening godly and kind affections. Now by the
bridegroom we may (as we have before declared unto you) understand Christ, by
the spouse the Church, by the friends of the bridegroom the Preachers of the
Gospel, and such as show us the way unto Christ, and direct us unto his
eternal marriage, and heavenly banquet. The young virgins are the faithful
souls, which do always accompany the Spouse, and we must note, that the
Spouse does always long to be in the house, bed, or other secret and inward
place, with her well-beloved, according unto the custom of women, and the
bridegroom, after the manner of men, calls the Spouse forth into the
vineyard, or abroad into the fields, or unto some such places: because so it
is, and it is most true, that the Church of it self would willingly (if so be
that it were possible) bring up her children in quiet rest and tranquillity, but
he on the other side, thinks it good to exercise her with many tribulations,
and persecutions, to the end that she may the better come unto the
consideration of eternal things, and also that if matters do happen well and
happily, yet, that amiddest her prosperity she may not be too far delighted
with the pleasures and entising baits of this present world: but always hope,
and groan after an heavenly country.

Thus ends the preface, the Commentary follows.
The first Chapter of the Canticles.
1 Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth: for thy love is better then
wine.

2 Because of the savor of thy good ointments, thy name is as an ointme^t
powered out: therefore the virgins love thee.

3 Draw me: we will run after thee: the king has brought me into his chambers:
we will rejoice and be glad in thee: we will remember thy love more then wine:
the righteous do love thee.


The Commentary.
THe words of the Spouse are these: Let him kiss me. Where first of all we
must consider, what is the meaning of these kissinges which the Church does so
earnestly desire and long after. A kiss is a testimony of friendship, love,
and goodwill, therefore the Church desires a kiss of our Savior, that is as
much as to say, to purchase and obtain his friendship, love and goodwill. Her
request is then that her sins may be forgiven her, and that she may reobtaine
the favor of God by him, she confesses her sins unto God, craving pardon for
the same, and she calls for the Gospel, because she would feign hear the
comfortable and pleasant voice of remission of sins* pronounced through Jesus
Christ: and the spouse requesteth the amiable kisses of the bridegromes own
mouth, to show and testify the great desire which she had to hear Christ
alone, and no other speak, and to make known the vehemency of her goodwill
toward him For it had been sufficient to have said: Let him kiss me: but the
love of faith, and holy delight of the soul, made her add these words, with
the kisses of his mouth: as if she should have said, The greatest thing that I
can wish for in this world, is to obtain the love and favor of God, which I
see I can not obtain by any other, but by thee my Savior Christ. For I know
this, and am most certainly persuaded of it, that I shall never be able to
compass my salvation by the merits of my works, but by thee alone, when it
shall please thee to vouchsafe me the benefit of thy sweet kisses, that is to
say, of thy grace and loves. For thy love is better the^ wine. Here the spouse
yields a reason, why she would so willingly be kissed of him, because his love
is better the^ any precious thing whatsoever, which she expresses by wine.
Where by the way we must note, that by his love is meant the doctrine of the
Gospel, and the graces which the bridegroom brought into the world with him:
especially if we consider, how much this doctrine which so proceeds from the
love of the spouse, is better then that wherewith she was sustained and
comforted before the coming of the bridegroom, and therefore seeing the
abundant grace and goodwil of this her bridegroom toward her, she breaks
forth into these words: Thy love is better then wine, that is to say, above
that doctrine wherewith she was comforted of the ancient fathers: so that this
is the sense of the whole verse: I desire the kisses of thy mouth, that is, I
look for my redemption at thy hands, because thy precepts and instructions are
milk and food to nourish me up unto eternal life, and they are better then
the Law, which strikes us down to the ground with remembrance of our sins,
and above all other doctrines which do not strengthen but kill the simple and
weak ones, as wine, which either kills young children, or else makes them
drunk. Thus then the Church being inflamed as the spouse toward her
bridegroom, cries out continually, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his
mouth. That is to say, let the Bridegroom himself, come to teach and
instruct, to save and deliver me, neither let him teach me any longer by the
mouth of the Patriarchs and Prophets, but let him come himself to inform me
with the words of his own mouth, and so be content to receive the kiss of my
mouth: that is, let him not despise me, or turn away his face from me,
seeking and asking after the way of salvation. And this was then fulfilled as
we do verily believe, when sitting on the mountain he taught his disciples,
when speaking as the Bridegroom is wont to do unto the spouse, he said:
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of god: and many
other things which follow there in the same chapter. Here he gave the Spouse
his Church a kiss, and opening his mouth promised unto his Apostles, that is
to say, unto his spouse the Church, the joys of the kingdom of heaven. Here I
say, the Bridegroom shows his love toward his spouse, better the^ wine,
that is to say, then the doctrine of the Law, or any other doctrine: because
the very instructions of the new testament, do make all those which shall be
borne again of water and of the spirit, fit for eternal life, which the Law
was not able to bring to pass.

The words of the Spouse unto the Bridegroom.
2 Because of the savor of thy good ointments, thy name is as an ointment
powered out: therefore the virgins love thee.


Because of the savor of thy good, etc. What is that thou say, o dearest
Spouse, of the name of thy Bridegroom and well-beloved? That it is like unto an
odoriferous ointme^t, poured forth, which being preached and published abroad
throughout the whole world, does yield a most sweet savor in the elect of God:
and last of all because this Bridegroom does most entirely love us, and show
his mercy toward us, to the end that he might take the Church to be his
spouse, and make his great name known abroad which is common unto him with the
father and the holy Ghost: he took flesh upon him, because the spouse should
run unto him with greater co^fidencie and boldness for help and succor. This
spouse looked for his coming a long time, in the end he came, and at the
presence and voice of the Bridegroom, she rejoiced that he descended that she
might asce^d: and she did run in faith behind him, to be partaker of his
ointmentes: for afterward when the eternal Bridegroom of the Church was made
flesh, as the ointment of his name was spread abroad and powered out throughout
the world, the young virgins, that is to say, the souls of the elect, did find
the sent thereof to be exceeding pleasant and sweet, the holy Ghost so working,
and bringing it to pass, and forthwith they were delighted with the
bridegroom, and believed in him, whom, after the manner of married women, they
do love most entirely and syncerely: and by the sweet smelling ointments are
to be understood, the wholesome gifts of the holy Ghost, whence come these hot
and zealous words of faith, hope and charity: and these young damsels, which I
told you before were the souls of the elect, renewed and regenerated in Christ,
the filthiness of the old man being put away, inflamed with these three
virtues or gifts of God (as I called them) do love and embrace this well-beloved
bridegroom, perceiving that by him, and through his means they have obtained
full remission and pardon for all their sins, and purchased unto themselves
these gifts of the holy Ghost, whence come these words: The love of God is
spread abroad in our hearts, by the means of the holy Ghost, which is given
unto them.

The spouseth speaks unto the bridegroom after this manner.
3 Draw me: we will run after thee: the king has brought me into his chambers:
we will rejoice and be glad in thee, we will remember thy love more then wine:
the righteous do love thee.


Draw me. The Church of the faithful cries out and says, o good God draw me
unto thee by the grace of thy election, to the end that after we have a little
smelled and felt this sweet odor, we may be fully united unto thee. And thus
both the spouse and her maidens, being allured with the wonderful pleasant
odor of the bridegroms ointme^ts, do run after him whom they love, and this,
word to draw, signifies a kind of violence or force, as if a man were to be
haled with ropes out of some deep pit: for the spouse as long as she lives in
this world, has the flesh which resists God drawing, but God which draws
her is able to overcome it, and therefore the spouse when she is drawn desires
him that he would never cease to draw and to pull her unto him: knowing full
well, that otherwise she should want of her rock and strength, because indeed, he
that is not drawn perishes, the holy ghost testifying thus much, that no man
comes unto the father unless the father draw him. We will run after thee. So
then the souls of the elect, so made by faith, and the virgins and damsels of
the spouse, whose minds are undefiled and unspotted, do say unto the
bridegroom, we will run after thee. As who would say, the savor of thy
ointments, does so forcibly draw us unto thee (although the flesh be unwilling
and refuse to run after thee with the spouse) that we cannot choose but do
whatsoever thou command us, for thy spirit makes all things, seem they
never so hard and impossible, possible, pleasant and easy to be borne.

The words of the spouse unto the young virgins.
The king has brought me in. Christ hears the petition of the spouse,
grants her request, and draws her after him: he brings her into his
chambers, that is, into quiet places, such as are true peace, quietness, and
security of Christian justice, and inward joys of the kingdom of heaven: and
in these cha^bers are hidden the secrets of God, that is to say, the truth of
his word. And in these cha^bers or closets of the kingdom of God, the church
is to consider those hidden things which neither eye has seen, nor ear
heard, nor has entered at any time into the heart of man: that is, which
cannot be comprehended by any sense of flesh, because the peace thereof passes
all understanding: and the spouse speaks unto the young virgins, that is, the
Church of Christ speaks unto her faithful which are regenerated in Christ:
and so indeed we ought all of us humbly to beseech our bridegroom Christ, that
it would pleas^ him to help and succor us, running after him for succor and
help, by reaching out him hand unto us, and keeping us from falling. Because,
that unless he put to his helping hand we are not able to stand up upon our
feet, much less to run about. And finally, the young m^^ being admitted into
the rest and quietness o^ the aforenamed cha^bers, do speak after this manner of
wise unto the bridegroom: We wi^ rejoice and be glad in thee. As if they should
have said, We desire to rejoice and be glad in thee alone, and in no other: and
furthermore they ad these words: We will remember thy love more then wine: that
is to say, to the end that we may truly rejoice, and that our joy may not be a
vain or transitory joy, we will remember thy loving kindness and amiable
comforts unto us ward, that is, we will call to mind, how for our sakes,
miserable and mortal men, thou tookest flesh, and sufferedst for our
salvation; and last of al, because they promise to approach near unto their
only bridegroom Christ, they commend and praise him briefly, saying, the
righteous shall love thee. The wicked praise and extol wicked things, neither
can any thing please them but that which rese^bleth the filthy cogitatio^s of
their wicked hearts, and therefore it is no praise, but rather a great dispraise
and disgrace to be commended of the wicked, but to be slaundered and backbited
of the^, it is the greatest praise and commendation in the world. Therefore it
is for the credit of the bridegroom, that he is loved of the righteous. But let
us hear what those righteous me^ are, which he here speaks of, they are
those which are restored again into that former righteousness wherein man was
created at the first, and which he lost by sin: and he says the righteous love
thee, because it is not possible for any man to love God, unless he be first
brought back again unto that righteousness, which he declined from, by reason
of the crookednes and perverseness of sin. Wherefore it is not without cause, that
they are called crooked and perverse men, which seek after earthly things, and
they righteous which seek heavenly and celestial things.

The Text.
4 I am black o daughters of Jerusalem, but comely as the tents of Kedar, and
as the curtains of Solomon.

5 Regard ye me not, because I am black: for the sun has looked upon me.
The sons of my mother were angry against me: they made me the keeper of the
vines, but I kept not mine own vine.

6 Show me, o thou who^ my soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou lie
at noone: for why should I be as she that turns aside to the flocks of thy
companions.


The Commentary.
The words of the Spouse unto the young virgins.
Lastly, because she that would so feign be made partaker of the bridegroomes
ointments, must needs be partaker of his calamities and adversities: therefore
the spouse by her own example instructs her virgins, saying, O daughters of
Jerusalem, that is to say, O ye faithful souls, I am black, as who should say,
you have smelled the sweet savor of Christ's ointments, you have been admitted
into his chambers and secret places, and all things please you, because you
seek by all manner of means to glorify the bridegroom, saying, the righteous
love thee: but now my darlings, I must tell you of one thing more, you must
study and endeavor as much as in you lies, that you do not depart and slide
away from that righteousness, which you have obtained and attained unto, either
for fear of any adversity, or cross which shall be laid upon you by the
wicked, and which you must needs suffer and endure will you nill you. For (mark
you) I my self which am the Church and his dear spouse, as long as I live in
the flesh, why I my self am black and as a castaway, afflicted of the
reprobate and carnal minded men, notwithstanding in the sight of God and
judgment of my dearest bridegroom I am comely and fair. And so indeed the
Church is made black and duskish, that is to say, deformed and vnhandsom by
the adversities of her oppressio^s, but is notwithstanding beautiful and
welfauored by reason of the comeliness and seemlinesse of her virtues: and
this is said in regard of the words before going, the righteous love thee. For
because she would show her righteousness, and strengthen the weak hearts of
the faithful, which in this place she calls daughters of Jerusalem, that is,
daughters of the heavenly country: she speaks unto them after this sort: Marvel
not to see me black with oppressions, for I am fair and beautiful in the
desire of heavenly things: true it is, that I am black with the study of
humility, but fair in the practice of virtues, I am black in the eyes of
fools, but fair in the understanding of the wise, black with the remembrance
of my sins, but fair in the conte^plation and beholding of heavenly matters,
black unto those who live wickedly and disorderly, by setting before their eyes
the terrors and horrors of eternal punishments: fair unto all those which live
righteously and holily, by promising the^ the joys of heaven, and everlasting
bliss: black in the vility and humility of my body: fair in the sanctity and
holiness of the soul: black here upon earth, but shall be fair in heaven:
black in suffering of momentary and temporary evils, fair in expectation of
eternal and everlasting goods. S. Paul was black, when he was almost stoned to
death, but on the contrary side, he was fair and amiable, when he was caught
up into the 3. heavens: in the deformity of his blacknes, he said these words,
We are the very excrements of the world, and sweepings, as it were, of all men:
in the pride of his beauty he said, The vail being taken away, we shall behold
the glory of God. As the tents of Keaar. Keaar was one of Ismaels sons, from
whence the people of the Scythians were derived, which dwell in tents which are
in outward show dark and obscure, but within they contain many precious and
costly things, and even thus and no otherwise fares it with me, says the
spouse, now at this present. For I am outwardly afflicted, and seem to the eyes
of mortal men obscure, aba^doned and despised both of God and man, although
indeed, both in respect of the bridegroms ointme^ts wherewith he has anointed
me, as also in regard of that rest of mind and peace of conscience which he
has granted unto me* I am within full of beauty and pleasure: thus the^, I am
within my self a sinner, an abject or castaway, but in my husband and
bridegroom Christ, just and glorious, in my self and of my self black, in him
fair and beautiful. As the curtains of Solomon. Here it is taken for that
veil which he made in the temple, and as those curtains within the temple were
most fair, so my beauty and ha^dsomnes is hidden, internal, and enclosed within
me, because the ineffable* and unspeakable peace and graces of my bridegroom,
are secret and unknown to the world, but known to me: for I content my self
with the^, knowing that the black clouds of my sins, and iniquities of my
persecutions and tribulations shall soon fade and vanish away. Regard ye me
not. The spouse being very careful for her young maide^s, and fearing least they
should be discouraged, because she told the^ that her beauty did not outwardly
appear, comforts and stre^gtheneth the^ with these cheerful sayings: Do not
you contemn or forsake me, because my light is somewhat obscured and darkened,
or because I live in adversity, and seem unto the world to be a reprobate and
castaway sinner, because the sun looks upon me, but what sun? our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ the son of God, the true sun of justice, which is the
true light that lighteneth every man that comes into the world. John. chap.
1. And this is said because every soul that stands in the heat of this sun
must needs become black, because of the exceeding great glory of his light,
that is, must needs truly humble and prostrate her self before his face
acknowledging that al her works, eue^ the best of them are nothing else but
darkness and sin: notwithstanding in the full confidence of her husband, she
perseuereth and continues in doing well, but trusts not in her merits or
weldoings, but rejoices in them, because the Sun does blacken and darken the^,
whilst that she from time to time does mortify the old man, by humbling her
self, and voluntary suffering of al manner of persecutions. The sons of my
mother were angry against me. And what is this mother but Eve the mother of
all the living, as well the just as the unjust: and the unjust have ever since
the beginning of the world, opposed themselves against the just, because they
hate the^ which are ruled by Christ's laws, and so perish in the reprobrat
sense of the flesh: and these are of the wicked synagogue of Satan, which do
still persecute, vex, and contradict the spouse, whence it comes that she is
grown so black and brown. They made me the keeper of the vines: as if she
should have said: I have obtained this by my persecutions, that I am made
keeper of more vines, that is of more churches, because the first Church was
founded in Jerusalem, and that which follows. But I kept not mine own vine,
is not to be understood of the mind, but of the place: for although the city
be ruinated and destroyed: yet nevertheless, the integrity of faith remains
inviolable for ever and ever, so that this is the meaning; he kept not that
place, that is, he retained not that place where the vineyard should have
been, and where it was planted at the first, being rooted by God the father,
out of that barren and vnfertile soil, and planted in a more fertile place
among the Gentiles. So the Church is this vine, or else by this you may
understand the souls of the faithful, which are planted in faith, rooted in
charity, trenched about with the furrows of good discipline, repaired with
the tears of the penitent, and watered with the words of the Preacher: and
hence comes it, that they do so abound in all manner of divine fruit, that
is to say, in gladness and holy devotion. In like manner we may say, that faith
is the vine, the branches virtues, the grapes good works, the wine devotion.
Moreover the vineyard is religion, the husbandman the father, the son the
vine, and the just the branches thereof. God the father is the husbandman,
because he digges and ditches it in confession and contrition, proynes it with
sprinckling of tears. And indeed the Son is the vine, because he is the
foundation of religion, because no man can lay any other fou^datio^ but that
which is already laid, which is Christ Jesus, by whom every building does grow
up to be a holy temple. The branches are the righteous which do shoot and
sprout out of the vine Christ, and are full of sap and moisture.

The spouse unto Christ.
Show me. Christ is all in all unto them that believe, a king, a sun, a
keeper of vines, a shepherd, and notwithstanding he continues always to be
their bridegroom and well-beloved, to whom the spouse flies for succor and
help: and seeing that she is not able to keep her vine any longer, she
refers the care thereof unto her husband Christ. Moreover, she has many
little goats about her, that is, many young ones which are but simple fellows,
nouices, and ungrounded in faith, which she would feign have fed with the
precious and wholesome bread of Christ's word, and not with the poisoned
doctrine of men. And this is the cause why she makes her recourse unto him,
knowing that he is the true shepherd of her soul, saying, O thou whom my
soul loves, o son of love and charity, and this charity is God, that is
as much to say, as, o thou my dear bridegroom and husband Christ, who^ my
soul loves, whom I can not choose but love most entirely and dearly: show me
where thou feedest, where the son of righteousness feeds and rests
himself, I mean Christ Jesus the son of God, which never sets, having
always a meridian brightness shyning round about him. And the Church knows
the time, that is to say, the noonetide, at what time the bridegroom does rest
and take his repast, but she knows not the place where. Also she knows,
that with the lantern of the word it is not possible to find him, unless it
please him to manifest and show himself by opening the hidden senses and dark
mysteries of the scriptures with his key: and this knowledge also can not be
gotten, unless it be obtained by the spirit of the bridegroom, and therefore
she requesteth him that it would please him to make himself known unto her,
and show her where he feeds and abides. And even now he feeds her, whilst
that he lighteneth, rejoices, and inflameth her, which is in the heat of the
day, to wit, at noone, or midday. So that we are not able to endure the great
glory of his face, unless we be covered with the veil of his flesh, which
he took; and even now we do rest under the shadow of his wings, by being made
partakers of his heavenly graces. For why should I be. And what is that the
spouse requires here in this place, unless it be that Christ should show her
these things, least that she should be compelled to turn aside to the flocks
of his companions. But what are these companions, but the faithful, and
chiefly those which have any office or superiority over the rest. But of these
there be some true, some lying and false brethren. The true brethren do not
gather the flocks unto themselves but unto Christ, neither do they make
themselves heads of the Church, but humbly submit both themselves and their
whole flocks unto Christ's government, acknowledging him to be their Lord and
head: and they are very much afraid least the flocks should follow them, and
therefore they do study by all manner of means how to prevent these sayings,
I am of Paul, and I am of Peter, I am of Barnabas, and I am of Apollo. But
their only care and desire is, to bring every one to say and confess thus
much, I am of Christ. Now contrariwise, they which are the false followers and
companions of Christ Jesus, do not lead or gather the flocks unto their
bridegroom Christ, but unto themselves, making themselves heads and overseers
over those flocks: wherefore, the true Church says, I will not turn aside to
the flocks of them which are called thy companions: choosing rather to do any
thing then this, because, that if the flocks do follow any other shepherd but
thee, they must needs perish and be destroyed: and these flocks do wander and
go astray, because during the time of their abode here in this wicked world,
they can find no rest or peace, but are always troubled and disquieted in
mind, and therefore the sense and meaning of these words is this: I do
heartily desire thee (o my God and Savior) that it would please thee, and none
but thee, to take the pains to teach me those things which it is meet for me
to know, to the end that my judgment and mind may not be offuscated and
darkened with the clouds of errors and heresies, but that my understanding may
be lightened with the truth of thy word, which shines as clear as the Sun
does at noone day: so that I may not fall into any error or false opinion,
being misled and misguided by them which make profession of great knowledge and
wisdom, and which continue to compare their doctrine and the precepts of
their fond hearts, with the truth of thy word.

The text.
7 If thou know not, o thou the fairest among women, get thee forth by the
steps of the flock, and feed thy kiddes by the ^ents of the shepherds.

8 I have compared thee, O my love, to the troop of horses in the chariots of
Pharaoh.

9 Thy cheeks are comely with rows of stones, and thy neck with chains.

10 We will make thee borders of gold with studs of silver.

11 VVhiles the king was at his repast, my spikenard gave the smell thereof.

12 My well-beloved is as a bu^dle of myrrh unto me, he shall lie between my
breasts.

13 My well-beloved is as a cluster of camphire unto me, in the vines of Engedi.

14 My love, behold thou art fair: behold thou art fair, thine eyes are like
the doves.

15 My well-beloved, behold thou art fair and pleasant, also our bed is green:

16 The beams of our house are Cedars, our rafters are of fur.


The Commentary.
The words of the bridegroom unto the Spouse.
If thou know not. Christ answers the Church, and teaches her all those
things which she before had demanded of him: he says unto her, O thou the
fairest among women, that is to say, among the Churches, because the Church and
congregation of the faithful howsoever it seem in the sight of men to be
black and contemptible, yet notwithstanding the only begotten son of God
Christ Jesus, esteems and judges her to be fairer and better, then all the
Synagogues of the wicked. O wonderful great beauty and fairenes, which God
himself does so greatly commend and approve, by calling her the fairest
among women. Indeed other women are fair, because they are Gods creatures, who
is most glorious, and admirable in all his works: but thou O my Spouse,
exceedest them all, because thou art to be preferred before them all, because
thou art adorned with my beauty, in regard whereof he says unto her, O thou
the fairest among women, if thou know not of thy self where I feed and rest at
noone day, then go forth out of thy self, and renounce thy self and all
things else for the love of me, bear thy cross particularly, and trust not to
thy own opinion or works at all. Furthermore, depart from the flocks of my
companions, and from the dregs and filth of humane traditions: and lastly, lay
aside all trust and confidence in the flesh, otherwise, never hope to find the
place where I do feed and rest my self at nooneday, because he is not worthy
of my love, that for the love of me is not content to forsake all things, and
himself also if need be. At length he shows where his feeding and abiding
is to wit, in the footsteps of the flocks of the Church, and near the
tabernacles of shepherds: of these flocks are all they which we know to be of
the Church, and their footsteps are those things which we read of them to have
been grateful and acceptable unto God, and these are the steps of the
Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles of the true faith in the word of God, and all
those things which God does work and bring to pass in them by charity. And
we must follow after those steps where he feeds and lies, because he
comfort all them, which truly feed on him in their hearts by faith, and he
grants them true peace of conscience, which is as much as to rest and feed
with Christ. The little goats, and the feeble and weak hearted are those which
believe in the Lord. The shepherds may be termed, those whom he sends
abroad with authority to preach the Gospel, who by publishing abroad among
the people the sincere word of God, do minister and give them food of eternal
life, by giving them the bread of Gods word in due season, which if they did
not, they would not be accounted true shepherds and ministers of the word, and
their tabernacles are the Churches, near which the flocks of the elect
children of God do graze and feed, and the pastures are the immaculate words
of God, and this is the food which Christ commanded Peter to feed his sheep
withal.

The words of the Bridegroom unto the Spouse.
I have compared thee, o my love, to the troop of houses. He compares the
blessed spouse of the most victorious king Christ, unto the troop of horses:
that is to say, unto the Angels, because no man of any understanding in the
world doubts, whether they be the messengers and ministers of Christ.
Wherefore Christ speaks as it were, after this sort unto the spouse, o my
dear spouse, the time was when thou wast in a miserable case, the prisoner and
bondslaue of the Devil, and therefore as far estranged as might be from me;
but lo, I have now set thee at liberty, I have freed and redeemed thee out of
the hands of the devil, and by the virtue of my word and spirit, I will so
glorify thee that thou shall be like unto the glorious company of Angels. But
wherein? In the Chariots and power of Pharaoh the king of Egypt, that is to
say, the Prince of darkness, the devil, sin, death, and hell it self, all
which things I have overcome for thee, that thou should trust and believe in
me. And this is spoken to this end and purpose, that we should know that all
those which are without Christ, are but as it were horses which draw in the
Chariot of Pharaoh, that is to say, are under the rule and guiding of him,
which drives the Chariot, to wit, the Devil: but as many as are of Christ, and
hold with him, they are put into Gods coach, that is to say, are altogether
ruled and governed by him. Therefore by the notable troop of horses of God, we
must needs understand the Church, by reason of the multitude of me^ that are
contained in it, and of store of spiritual armor and weapons of faith and
justice, and for the invincible force and strength of the spirit, and noble
victory over her enemies. Thy cheeks are comely. Finally he commends his
own works in the spouse, because the spouse is not otherwise fair or co^ly,
but as she is fair and beautiful in her husband Christ. And whereas it is
said, thy cheeks are comely, we are to consider the cheeks as they are in
the head and face, and the head of the spouse is the husband. Now as the
beauty of the cheeks does principally appertain unto the head, and the^
afterward unto the rest of the members: so the beauty and glory of Christ's
cheeks, which is the head of the Church, do first of all belong unto him, and
secondly they appertain unto his members, that is to say, unto the spouse,
because Christ is the honor and glory of the spouse, whose neck are the
Preachers and teachers of the Church, which are adorned and beautified with
chains and sundry jewels, that is to say, with the doctrine of the Gospel, from
whence come these golden chains, that is to say, true wisdom, which leads a
man unto eternal life, and these chains are pointed with points of silver,
whereby is signified godly learning, and zealous charity, wherewith the
faithful people and Church of God are pricked and inflamed both to the glory
of God, and benefit of the elect.

The Spouses words unto Christ.
Whiles the king. The bridegroom commends and extolleth his works in the
Church, now she returns all the glory back again unto him, confessing that
his works are admirable in her eyes, and that all her beauty comes from the
glory of her husband Christ, and that she receives from him all those gifts
and graces which are mentioned in the verse immediately going before. Wherefore
she speaks unto him as unto a third person, saying, Whiles the king was at
his repast my spikenard gave the smell thereof. Spiknard is a little herb, but
has a great smell, by which is to be understood the humility of the faithful,
because they confess themselves to be sinners, and that they are nothing of
themselves, notwithstanding they go onward always in well doing, whence it is
that they yield a most pleasant savor of a good report, which does inuit and
draw others to do the like: and this precious spiknard which has such a
perfect smell, is not to be gotten but when Christ is at his repast, and his
repast is the Church, and secure minds of the faithful Our Spikenard then is
our humility, which then sends forth a most sweet and pleasant smell, most
acceptable unto God, a smell indeed of good works, when Christ the king rests
in us: otherwise it is but the stinking smell of hypocrisy, and a savor of
death unto death.

The words of the spouse concerning her self.
My well-beloved is unto me as a bundle for myrrh. Surely it is a great
commendation for the bridegroom that without him the spouse has no smell at
all. And therefore this is her meaning, she knows that she does fully
possess and enjoy Christ, and that Christ must always dwell with her as a
bundle of myrrh, which is bitter, but has a most excel e^t smell in it self,
and has this power, to keep things from being corrupted. And verily the spirit
of the bridegroom does bring to pass these things in the godly. First of all
he sends the^ bitterness, because the sword of grief should pierce their
souls: secondly he pours forth the savor of the sweet ointments: thirdly
and lastly he keeps and preserves the^ from corruption, by bestowing
eternal life upon all those which believe and trust in him. Ioh. 3.14 And as
Moses lift up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the son of man be lift
up, that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life.
And indeed this same mirrhe* is a bitter thing, signifying hard and grievous
tribulations: but seeing that all these things are to come unto her for her
loving husbands sake, she gratifieth and cheereth up her self with these words,
hoping that god will give her the grace manfully and courageously to endure al
things, and therefore she calls not that an armefull or a whole burden which
she is to suffer for Christ, but a handful, bundle, or rather to speak more
properly, a bundelet, and well she may call it a bundelet, that is to say, a
little bundle, because the afflictions of this world are not worthy the glory
which shall be revealed unto us hereafter. My well-beloved is as a cluster of
camphire. Christ the only begotten son of God cease not to praise and extol
his well-beloved spouse, and he terms her to be like unto a most precious and
sweet cluster of camphire, which is a kind of aromaticall tree, and it is all
one, as if she should have said, my well-beloved husband is like unto a most
delectable cluster of some excellent vine which grows in the vineyard of
Engedi, to the which there is no vineyard in the world that may be compared,
because the comfort which we receive by the holy ghost does far surmount all
earthly cogitations and delights, and the consolations and co^forts of the
spirit are these, to know that God is favorable unto us, and to have the love
of God almighty enclosed within our hearts and conscience*

The words of the Bridegroom unto the Bride.
14 Behold thou art fair, behold thou art fair thine eyes are like the doves.
The Bridegroom commends the happy state of the spouse i^ this, that he does
work and bring to pass great matters in her, and herein consists her beauty
chiefly, that she has doves eyes* that is to say, a most right sense and
understanding of Gods spirit, which may be very fitly taken for a dove, because
it appeared upon Christ in the shape and similitude of a dove, and it is as
much in other words, as if the bridegroom should speak after this sort unto the
bride: doubt not my dearest dear of any displeasure of mine, because I am very
well pleased with thee, I reckon thee to be most beautiful and fair, howsoever
thou may seem to thy self to have a black and swart countenance, because
thou please me right well, and this love of mine does not come by any nature
of yours, but by grace from me. I desire not ornaments of gold, or look for
any costly apparel: that which I desire and look for, is doves eyes eyes of
simplicity, or singleness of faith, and perpetual chastity, and that nothing
may please thee, but me. I say, I desire honest and plain dealings and
meanings, not crooked and deceitful eyes.

The Spouse speaks unto her husband.
My well-beloved behold thou art fair and pleasant. She that before was praised
of her husband for her eyes, does now most ingenuously and plainly confess
that he is altogether fair and beautiful. The spouse as long as she lives in
the flesh, has some deformity or indecorum in her, by reason of the flesh:
notwithstanding she is beautiful with the beauty of her husband, and she
has doves eyes, but not as Christ has, because he is wholly and soly, and in
every part of him most beautiful and amiable, but to the faithful only, who
always and at all times are exceedingly much delighted with the sight of him,
as also with his words. And it follows, Also our bed is green, whence it is
manifest, that all things are common between the bridegroom and the bride, and
what other thing is meant by this green bed, but the ever flourishing peace
which we obtain by Christ, and by the houses the particular Churches of his
kingdom: and also we may hereby understand the faithful people of God. In
every one of these houses a man shall find a most sweet bed of peace, whereon
the holy Ghost does oftentimes repose and rest himself. The beams of this
house are of incorruptible and wel-smelling Cedar, that is to say, they
contain the soliditie and stablenesse of true faith in Gods words, which both
of them remain for ever, because it is not possible that faith should fail,
and be utterly abolished out of Gods kingdom, or that one jot or title of his
words should not be fulfilled. And here by the way, let the industrious reader
diligently observe this, that the Church speaks unto the bridegroom, and
inuiteth him unto the quiet rest and repose of his bed, because she knows
full well that all kind of rest and quietness without him, is grievous,
miserable, and ungodly: wherefore she says, Our bed is green, or our peace or
the peace which is common unto us both, is flourishing, green, pleasant,
sweet, and delectable: as if she should have said, that both of us are to lie
in the self same bed, which bed, is furnished and prepared ready for us,
therefore you must take me into the bed to you, that is, all the pleasure that
I take must needs proceed and issue out from you, and so the Church does show
us what an earnest desire she has to rest with Christ, and therefore she says
with Peter: It is good for us to be here. And that which follows in the
latter end of the chapter, Our rafters are of Cypress, is a type or figure of
the elect, which by contemning and despising of all earthly and temporal
things, grow to be eternal and incorruptible, as are our Cypress or Cedar
trees.

The second Chapter.
1 I am the Flower.
rose of the field, and the lilly of the valleys.

2 Like a lilly among the thorns, so is my love among the daughters.

3 Like the apple tree among the trees of the forest: so is my well-beloved among
the sons of men: under his shadow had I delight, and sat down: and his
fruit was sweet unto my mouth.


The Commentary.
The words of the Bridegroom.
THe words going before in the latter end of the first chapter where the bed of
the Church is called a flourishing green unspotted bed, and a bed to be
desired, are very easy to be understood by the beginning of this chapter,
because she is not said to flourish by reason of the flower, whose greenness
and beauty does soon fade and decay, but indeed because her flowers are
chiefly her husband. Esaias. chap. 11. There shall bud forth a branch out of
the root of Iesse, and of the root thereof shall spring a flower, and the
flowers thereof shall be the flowers of honesty and honor. Thereupon it was well
and truly said of him, I am the flower of the field, which budded forth out of
the root of Iesse, a pleasant and delectable flower of the field, that is to
say, of the whole world, and chiefly of the elect of the Church: and lastly,
he adds the lilly of the valleys, and what other thing may be understood
by the lillies of the valvalleys, but the sincere and faithful people, which
do truly prostrat and humble themselves, because these valleys shall be filled
up, exalted, and opposed against the hills, that is to say, against the proud,
of who^ Esaias speaks thus in his 40. chapter and 4. ver. Every valley shall be
exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made low: and the glory of these
valleys consists in their lillies, to wit, in their righteousness,
innocence, and whiteness Christ, which deposes the mighty, proud, and
unbelievers from their seat, and exalts the humble and meek: and so the
spouse speaks of himself much after this manner, I am made unto the elect as
a most pleasant flower of the meadows, whose beauties they do keep and
preserve, and the grace of whose bounty and sweetness they do smell and
perceive, which is to be gathered with joy of mind and without any peril or
danger of thorns at all. And finally, I am the lilly of the valleys, that is,
all pleasure, sweetness and delight unto my elect: and Christ may fitly be
called a flower, because whiles he weedeth up the thorns of sins, he does
not a little deck and adorn the hill of his spouse, and beauty of his
justice. Like a lilly among the thorns. The name of lillies is oftentimes
taken in the scripture for the beauty of the faithful, which is hid and had in
Christ. Hosea chap. 14. verse. 6. I will be as the dew unto Israel, he shall
grow as the lilly. And so Christ calls the spouse by the name of a lilly,
as who would say, As much as the lilly surpasses the thorns, so much do
thou exceed all other daughters that is to say, al other Churches and
congregations of the wicked and reprobate: and as the lilly which grows up
among the thorns is pricked of the^, yet notwithstanding flourishes and
increases: so it is necessary or requisite that the godly Church should be
pricked, afflicted and tormented with the reprobate Churches, but nevertheless
the holy Ghost will so work in her, that she repelling the fiery darts of sin
with the shield of faith, shall in the end become more glorious for her
persecutions, and so daily profiting and increasing by means of my gift and
protection shall never leave off to bring forth seed or corn until she be
brought and laid up quietly in the barn. Like the apple tree among the trees
of the forest. These words of mutual commendation and praises of the holy
Ghost are very strange, comfortable, and full of trust confidence in God: for
see how the spouse according to her power does mutually as it were, repay
praise and commendation unto her bridegrom Christ by saying these words, Like
the apple tree among the trees of the forest: so is my well-beloved among all
the sons: to wit, of God, that is to say, of the Angels and faithful people.
Verily thou only art holy, righteous and good, and from thee proceed those
everlasting fruits which we enjoy, and not of themselves: thou commendest me
for my flower, which notwithstanding thou thy self did cause to grow up
by the grace of thy holy spirit, but I must needs glorify thee for thy fruit,
which is better then all the flowers of the world.

The words of the spouse unto the virgins.
Under his shadow had I delight, and sat down. What shadow is that, I pray
you, which the spouse should so greatly delight in, unless it were the shadow
of Christ her husband, because he is the only delight and hope of the
faithful. They which enjoy true peace and tranquillity of mind, and trust only
to Gods protection and grace, may be truly said to sit under his shadow.
Wherefore the peaceable and quiet spouse of Christ willing that all her maidens,
that is to say, all the souls of the elect should have the benefit of Christ's
peace, which is so necessary for the^, do pronounce the Gospel of peace unto
them, as if she should have said: You seek and mourn after peace, but many
there are (God wot) which seek it where it is not to be found, for they know
not where to find it. Come ye therefore and learn of me, by my example I will
show you where you shall find this admirable and eternal perfection, and
never miss of it. I my self was as careful as any woman in the world could
be to find it, and I was content to endure any thing, so I might attain unto
it. I asked for her many times, and often, I did fast and pray, watch and torment
my body for the want of her, but she was not to be found any where but under
the shadow of thy wings, which I so much desire. And hence it is that she
says, that he is so among all the sons, as a fruitful appletree is among all
the trees of the wood. Draw near therefore and approach unto this happy,
blessed and most sweet shadow, and under it you shall be sure to obtain
perfect peace and rest, although it be in the midst of tribulations and
adversities, because our husband Christ is our only appletree or tree of life,
which brings forth fruit of eternal life, that is, true virtues and holy
works in all those which lie under the shadow of it, expecting the fullness of
time, when they shall receive of the fullness of his liberality, the apples
which he shall command them to take of Gods benefits and graces, that they may
be food unto them of everlasting and happy life.

The Text.
4 He brought me into the wine celler, and love was his banner over me.

5 Stay me with flagons, and comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love.

6 His left hand is under mine head, and his right hand does embrace me.

7 I charge you, o daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes and by the hindes of the
field, that ye stir not up, nor waken my love, until she please.

8 It is the voice of my well-beloved: behold he comes leaping by the mountains
and skipping by the hills.

9 My well-beloved is like a roe, or a young heart. Lo, he stands behind our
wall, looking forth of the windows, showing himself through the grates.


The Commentary.
He did not only bring me unto this tree of life and true felicity, which
yields us a defense from the heat of the Sun, and also pleasant fruit: but
furthermore, he brought us into the wine celler: by this wine is meant the word
of God: the houses or cellers which contain this wine, are the holy books of
both the old and new testaments, where Christ brings the Church as into a
celler, when he informs her in the right understanding of the Scriptures.
Wherefore after that the spouse had once tasted of the pleasant drink of
everlasting truth, and therewith comforted and cheered up her self in the
spirit, presently she declares the benefits of her husband unto her maidens
and young virgins, because she would inuit the^ by little and little unto the
love of him, and so cause them to run after him, and she says: The king
brought me in, as if she should have said: His wine is so pleasant and good,
that I would willingly have you brought into his cellers to taste of the goodness
thereof: and she continues her old vain of setting forth her husbands glory,
saying thus, And love was his banner over me. What banner was that which was
lifted up over him? the banner of love. Well then love is the banner which
draws all things after her, with her wonderful and strange gifts of
insinuation and allurement, and Christ continually commends unto his Church
the gift of love and charity, in such sort, that he cannot with greater tokens
of kindness testify his love and kindness to us wards.

The spouse speaks unto her damsels.
Stay me with flago^s and comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love. You
see how effectual, how precious and admirable is the banner of Christ that as
soon as ever the spouse saw it, her heart was inflamed within her, and she
constrained to break forth into these words, saying, for I am sick of love.
And why should thou be sick, o thou well-beloved spouse? Is it for the want of
the glorious presence of thy husband that thou do so torment and vex thy
self? why do thou cry out unto the young maidens, that is to say, unto the
faithful, what would thou have them to do for thee? why call thou unto
them, and biddest them stay thee up with flagons, and comfort thee with apples?
Surely by the flago^s of wine we must understand the faithful, and by the
apples the holy Ghost, or the words and operations of Christ. And it comes
all to one pass as if she should have said, I am grown so impatient in
striving to show forth my exceeding great love unto my best beloved Christ,
that I had need to be stayed up and strengthened with the sweet smelles and
wine, that is to say, with the comfortable words of the faithful, and with the
holy spirit of the Bridegroom, abounding in them unto all manner of perfection
and increase of faith, and therefore I do long to be comforted with the delicate
apples of the spiritual pleasures and delights of his heavenly promises. His
left hand is under mine head, and his right hand does embrace me: that is to
say, my request is unto my husband, that he would comfort me in this present
world with the word of God, least happily I may take occasion through the
consideration and conscience of my sins to fall into desperation: and I desire
to have him embrace me with the clear sight and fruition of his bounty, and
that he would preserve and deliver me being now in this vale of miseries, from
all manner of sin and danger of despair or diffidencie at all, and that it
may please my husband to bestow upon me the graces and gifts of the mind, or
otherwise confirm them in me with his glory and perpetual love. By the right
hand of God, is signified prosperity, and by the left adversity: and these
are called the two hands of the Bridegroom, because he works and effects al
things by the^. The spouse has the left hand of Christ but under her head:
that is to say, under Christ by whose will and commandment they most willingly
suffer and endure all manner of crosses, troubles or persecutions whatsoever.
For she knows this most certainly, that not an hair of her head shall fall
to the ground, or that she shall suffer any bitterne^ of grief in the world,
unless the Bridegrom^ will. And furthermore, that this left hand cannot
always be under her head, although the fruits and effects thereof, to wit,
true riches, and godly glory shall endure and continue for ever. Besides all
this, she is most certainly persuaded that her happy days, which God holds
in his right hand, shall neue^ cease: Psalm. 16.11
for as the Psalmist says, In thy presence is the fulness of joy, and at thy
right han^ are pleasures for evermore. And truly if i^ were so that Gold should
hold his left han^ only under our heads, as we have showed yo^ before, we
should soon be brought to nough^ and never be able to come unto the everlasting
pleasures in his right hand. Gods left hand is said to be under their heads,
what is meant by that? but that when the just man f^lleth, he should not be
broken in pieces: wherefore the spouse feeling his left hand under her head,
rejoices notwithstanding, because of the loving imbracings which she is sure
to enjoy by the benefit of his right hand.

The words of the Bride unto the young maidens.
There be four things which cause me exceedingly to rejoice: first, because of
the flow^rs, that is to say, for the faithful, because there ^re enough of
the^: secondarily, for the apples of the most fruitful tree Christ: thirdly,
because he has his left hand under his head, that is to say, under the spouses
head, for he ^s the head of the spouse: last of all, because of the certain
hope and assurance which ^ have, that he will embrace me with his right hand,
that is to say, with the pleasures and joys of everlasting glory. And thus
whiles the Church* the spouse of Christ ^oth take her quiet rest and sleep*
the word of God commands her not to be troubled or disquieted any thing at
all: and it is as if Christ ss;hold speak unto the souls of the faithful
after this manner, I charge you, o ye faithful souls, and which is more, I
conjure you by that which is most dear and pleasant unto you, that you stir
not the love of your husband in the elect, by judging and condemning them, by
the wrath and favor of God showed more or less toward them. I say, find not
you fault with God for being sometimes displeased with the elect, and showing
forth his anger toward the^, accuse not his divine providence, or the manner of
his proceedings, either in justice or mercy, because he does most certainly
guide and direct all things unto the good of his elect: but submit your wills
Always unto the good will and pleasure of almighty God, praying continually,
that hi^ will may be done, and his name hallowed. And we are to understand by
the roes and hinds o^ the fields, by the which he charge the soule^ of the
faithful, the Apostles and preacher of Gods word which wander up and dow^ in
the world, preach^^g the Gospel every where, whersoeuer they come, fearing
the policies and sleights of their adversary the devil*

The spouse unto the young maids.
It is the voice of my well-beloved, behold, ^^ comes leaping by the
mountains, and skipping by the hills. This is a notable place to pro^^ that
all those that are of Christ's Church (...) know their husband Christ's voice,
that is t^ say, his words, and can judge thereby Gods words from men's. Because
she says flatly unto the virgins, that the words that she does hear are
undoubtedly the words of her loving husband Christ: for she says, she knows
them well enough; and indeed to say the truth, who should better know the
things which concern the Bridegroom, then the Bride her self? Now I am the
Bride, which have espoused the only begotten son of God: wherefore me thinks
I should know his voice better then any other. So then first of all there is
showed unto us the Church, by the voice of the bridegroom which she knows
most readily: afterward there is declared unto us the fruit that arises and
redoundeth unto her by the knowledge of his voice, that is to say, the
knowledge of perfect charity. And Christ the husband of the faithful is likened
unto him which is most fair in the fairest things, most excellent in the
excellents that that can be gotten, exceeding beyond the degree of admiration,
and abounding beyond measure in all manner of things that may be desired,
coueted, or obtained. Finally, the end and term of Gods promises contained
within the compass of the scriptures, and written of, either in the Law or in
the Prophets. This Christ the sum of all happiness and felicity, came unto his
own under the form of mortality, having a wall set between him and the
wicked, because he would not be seen of the unworthy, ungodly, or vnelected
ones: and yet he stood in the midst of them, and spoke the words of life,
partly unto them which did see him, and partly unto those which despised him
and voluntarily suffered themselves to be seduced or deceived: and so as he
looked forth of the windows, and showed himself through the grates he might
be seen and heard after some sort of the wicked, but only the godly and elect
of God unto salvation, may fully see and behold, and lastly receive him into
their hearts by faith. And the words of Salomo^ in the next verse before, how
he came leaping by the mountains, and skipping by the hills, signifies
nothing else but this, how his spirit leaped upon the Patriarchs and Prophets,
and skipped in the Apostles and preachers of the Gospel, who being more
eminent and excellent the^ the rest, did teach men the simplicity and
plainness of their lives and doctrines, and the similitude of a roe or a heart
which follows in the next verse, is all one in effect with the former,
because it is only proper unto goats to leap and skip about, although they may
be likened unto the^ for another reason, because of their sharp sight: for
unless their sight were as good as their running, they should not be able to
discern their way* and know either how to leap or skip. By the swiftnes of
their leaping and skipping up and down, we may note the earnestness of a
willing and charitable mind: by the quickness of sight, the sharpness of
judgment, and so in both these things we may observe both judgment and mercy
crying out with David in the Psalms, Mercy and judgment will I sing unto
thee ^ Lord.

The Text.
10 My well-beloved spoke and said unto me, arise my love, my fair one, and come
thy way.

11 For behold, winter is past, the rain is changed, and is gone away.

12 The flowers appear in the earth: the time of the singing of birds is come,
and the voice of the turtle is heard in our land.

13 The figtree has brought forth her young figs, and the vines with their
small grapes have cast a savor: arise my love, my fair one, and come away.

14 My dove that art in the holes of the rock, in the secret places of the
stairs show me thy sight. Let me hear thy voice* for thy voice is sweet, and
thy sight comely.


The voice of the Spouse unto the virgins.
My well-beloved spoke and said unto me, etc. The spouse being once awaked out of
her sleep, tells her maidens what her sweetheart said unto her, Arise my love
and fair one, and come thy way, to wit, arise from rest to labor, from joy
and peace to sorrow and grief, and rise thou thy self, let no other rise for
thee, because I will have thee and no other to gather my flowers and fruits,
that is to say, unto the ministry of my word, by the which the flowers (to
wit, the souls of the faithful) are gathered together into the Church. And
come thy way, that is, follow me, and continue to believe in me by faith,
because he may be truly said to follow after Christ, which believes in him:
and then the spirit of Christ the bridegroom of the faithful speaks after
this manner unto the elect dispersed throughout the face of the whole earth:
Rise up my faithful spouse by a lively faith in Gods words, and put all thy
trust and confidence in him that calls thee unto him; and he shows that
there is a convenient time for all things to be done in, by reason of the
vicissitude and change of things: for whereas her well-beloved had but erst
before visited her in her green bed, now he wills her to dress the vineyard,
and drive away the wild beasts out from it, that is to say, to build up his
Church, and weed out all manner of heretics out of it, and it is as if
Christ should have said unto her, Rise up out of thy bed of contemplation and
rest, wherein thou now slumberest and yet think not that I will utterly
forsake thee, because thou art my love, but go and gather the faithful
together in the spirit of gentleness and lenity, because thou art my dove:
come thy way and suppress thy adversaries, because thou art fair and adorned
or beautified with all manner of virtues, for behold the winter is past, the
rain is changed and is gone away. That is to say, the old and ancient errors
are vanished away at the coming of the glorious Son of God Christ Jesus, and
the tedious dark, and dyrtie time of winter is past and gone, when all things
were wrapped and infolded in ignorance and blindness, in neglect and contempt of
Gods good will and benefits: but lo now the joyful and hopeful time of
Spring is come, when the pleasant and wholesome blast of Gods favor shall blow
upon all the hearts and minds of the faithful, filling and inspiring them
with the word of God sent down from heaven for the behoof and benefit of us
mortal men: and now is the time or never to repent and amend our lives, by
awaking out of sin, and preparing our minds and consciences unto the study or
godliness and meekness, and to do the true works of piety, to root up the
concupiscences of carnal senses, and follow the old and ancient discipline of
the Church. The voice of the Turtle dove has been already heard upon the
earth, which is a sign of a most happy year, or spiritual abundance and
plenty of all manner of goodness and gladness in the hearts and consciences
of the faithful, and the pleasantness of the Gospel is coming upon you with
all manner of comfort and consolation: and now the time approaches, when you
shall reap the fruit, and receive the benefit of your godliness: the fig
tree brings forth her young figs, and the vines begin to bud forth, so
that we have all the signs of a rich and plentiful year, which is likely to
abound in all manner of love and true holiness, perfect joy and everlasting
comfort: and we have certain infallible and true tokens of the Churches
perfection, which consists in the true unity thereof, and knowledge of Gods
love, and in the multitude of the Gentiles and faithful souls which are
called. Moreover we may, if we will, allegorically interpret the hardness of
the winter, to be the hardness and rigor of the law, which is already
vanished away, because of the coming of the Gospel of glad tidings, and
therefore we see the promises of the Prophts to flourish, and the gracious
proceedings thereof, which we may call the flowers, which appearing in the
spring time, do show forth a fruitful and happy year: and the time of
pruning or dressing, is, when laying aside all manner of lying and deceit,
every man shall speak the truth unto his neighbor. And by the voice of the
Turtle, is signified the voice of the Preachers of Gods word, which begins
to be heard abroad in the world. And the fig tree does bring forth her young
figs, that is to say, the Apostles are already come into the world, which
bring forth the most delectaable and pleasant food of the Gospel, and minister
it unto the faithful, according to their necessities.

The Bridegroom speaks unto the Spouse.
My dove that art in the holes of the rock, in the secret places of the
stayres show me thy sight, let me hear thy voice, for thy voice is sweet and
thy sight comely. By the dove is signified the holy Ghost (as it is evident out
of the third of Matthew, the first of Mark, the third of Luke, and 1. of John.
Wherefore the Church which is inspired and filled with the holy Ghost, made
altogether spiritual, may well be called here in this place a dove, and
whereas he replyeth and calls her his love, we are to note, that all her love
comes from him which is the fountain of love, and that it is from him, and
for him, that she is called beautiful and fair, or a dove: that is to say
spiritual, and she is provoked and stirred up afresh by the Bridegroom to
come. but in the holes of the rocks, and secret places of the stayres. This
rock is Christ. 1. Cor. 10 v. 2. We did all drink of the spiritual rock
that followed them, and the rock was Christ, and by the secret places of the
stayres, is meant the inward ascension and lifting up of the heart, which every
faithful man must needs have. And it follows, show me thy sight, because the
bridegroom was desirous to see the face of the Church, as I showed you before
in the holes of the rocks, and in the secret places of the stayres, and to
hear her voice, or rather his, because otherwise the words of God cannot be
acceptable unto her, neither is it possible for her to find her husband by any
other means, for thy voice is sweet, and thy sight comely, and here we see
the goodness of her loving spouse toward her. For without all question, it is
indeed his voice and his words which the Church speaks, and to conclude, all
that the Church has, is his: but why then calls he it her voice? thy voice
is sweet: because we should know that his voice is common between him and the
spouse, for Christ's voice is nothing else but the ministry of Gods word in
the Church: so that always Christ's words do concern and regard the Church,
and the good of the people. It follows, and thy sight comely. We are to
observe in these words, that whereas every one is known by his face, that the
Church here in this place is said to be known by her sight, face, or
countenace. Now the face of the spouse, is the righteousness of the just, I
mean the believing just, of the light of whose countenance it is written, to
the end that they may turn the hearts of fathers unto their sons, and the
unbelievers unto the wisdom of the just. And whosoever has this wisdom,
walks not after the will of man, but after the will of God the holy Ghost,
that is to say, when his mind and understanding is ruled and governed by the
holy Ghost, which comes then to pass, when he judges all things rightly
according to the word of God. And likewise she may be then said to have Christ's
face, when in the midst of prosperity she does nothing by chance, or
otherwise then as a true Christian woman should do, but in effect and deed, and
makes it manifest unto the whole world, that she has rightly put on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and his face is seen in her adversities and troubles, if she
willingly bear the cross, and crucify the old man by suffering patienly all
manner of adversities.

The text.
15 Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes, which destroy the vines: for our vines
have small grapes.

16 My well-beloved is mine and I am his: he feeds among the lillies.

17 Until the day break, and the shadows flee away: return my well-beloved,
and be like a Roe, or a young Heart upon the mountains of Bether.


The Commentary.
The Fox is one of the craftiest beasts in the world, and hereby are signified
and painted out unto us, the false believers and enemies to the truth, and this
text may be fitly applied against false teachers and dissembling Prophets,
which destroy the little vines, that is to say, corrupt those which in the
particular Churches of the world, do begin to believe: and he repeateth the
word Foxes, by saying little Foxes, the better to make known unto us their
weakness and infirmity, which is such, that they cannot be able to bring any
thing to pass against the Church of God, unless they first receive power from
the darkness of God: and this he forewarneth the friends of the bridegroom,
to wit, the ministers of the word, to the end that they should girde up
themselves to take them, by the mutual help of the bridegroom, and of the
bride, as often as they would, like fishes fast caught in the nets of Gods
word: now he is said properly to be taken or caught, which is co^uinced by
the truth. And in that he says, Take us the Foxes, we must note this, how the
preachers of the Gospel, which are commanded to do this, do take and keep
them for Christ and the Church, laboring to please and obey them both, because
they are ministers both of Christ, and also of the Church. The vines are the
particular Churches, which the heretics and false hypocritical Doctors and
teachers do corrupt and pervert, because they pare away the greenness and
beauty of the Church, that is to say, suck out the principles of good fruit,
which they have gathered out of the word of God, and allege them under a show
and pretense of godliness unto a most wicked end. Wherefore all such must be
driven away which go about to deprave the word of God with their heresies and
inventions.

The Spouse speaks.
My well-beloved is mine, and I am his: he feeds among the lillies. As who
would say, I do most constantly and inuiolably hold the friendship of my
well-beloved, for because I know his love is most constant toward me, which I
perceive by his great familiarity, in that he feeds among the lillies. By
the lillies are to be understood, the souls of the faithful, which do always
yield forth a pleasant sent of good works among their neighbors: so that the
spouse being invited to them by the word of God, and now joined with her
husband Christ, is embraced of him, and desires to dwell with him for ever:
and that she may in the devotion of her mind, as it were among the lillies and
roses, continually enjoy the comforts of the Saints and holy ones, until the
clear day star, and meridian brightness of Gods good will and pleasure, do
shine forth: whereby all manner of clouds and shadows may be compelled to
flee away, to the end that all manner of men from the highest to the lowest may
know God, without fear of sin, or danger of heresy. It is certainly a
great suit which the Church has unto Christ here in this place, and although
she be most fully persuaded that it shall be most fully granted unto her: yet
nevertheless, she interposeth and offers up her prayers unto God, because
she would not be deprived of this happiness in any sort, saying: Return my
well-beloved. Return (I say) my well-beloved, and be to me both in word and deed,
a most joyful goat, to spy out our wantes and defects with sharp and quick
eyes, and to look down upon our miseries with the eye of pity and
compassion, as a most loving young Heart: take the old serpent away from among
us, which lies in wait to do us harm, and kill him with the breath of thy
mouth: overcome all our enemies, o, thou which art so loving over all mankind
and faithful souls: grant this (O Lord) if it be but for the promises which
thou made unto our forefathers, whom verily thou did choose out amongst
the Gentiles, and commandedst them to look for their saving healthes and
salvation, and the salvation of all others at the hands of Christ Jesus their
Savior, which was promised unto them from the beginning of the world.

The third Chapter.
1 In my bed by night I sought him that my soul loved, I sought him, but I
found him not.

2 I will rise therefore now, and go about in the city by the streets, and by
the open places, and will seek him that my soul loves: I sought him, but I
found him not.

3 The watchmen that went about the city found me: to whom I said, have you
seen him whom my soul loves?

4 When I had past a little from them, then I found him whom my soul loved: I
took hold on him, and left him not, till I had brought him unto my mothers
house, into the chamber of her that conceiue^ me.

5 I charge you, o daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes and by the Hindes of the
field, that ye stir not up, nor wake^ my love until she please.


The Commentary.
THe souls of the righteous are said t^ make them beds, when flying the care^
and troubles of the world, they take a course how to live quietly and
peaceably. And to seek the bridegroom in the night time, or in the dark, is as
much as to seek him in their own works, or in the traditions and constitutions
of men, where it is not possible to find him, because they are full of
darkness and obscurity. So then the spouse the Church speaks these words,
or the like in effect; Being pricked with the guiltiness of mine own sinful
conscience, and laboring in my chamber and bed, that is to say, trusting in
mine own merits or worthiness, I sought the favor and love of my husband,
because indeed I thought to have obtained and purchased eternal bliss and
happiness by the works of the law, and thus having a long time sought it
here, I could not find it: because his love comes not from our merits and
worthiness, but of his mere good will and favor. I will rise therefore now,
that is to say, whiles that I do go about to seek him out of me, and go
about in the city by the streets, and by the open places to seek my Savior
and husband, the foundation of my happiness, and that in the religion of the
Gentiles, and doctrine of the Philosophers, I found him not likewise. And to
seek Christ is to be willing to trust in him, and sincerely to believe all
his sayings, and be directed and governed by them: and lastly, to hope most
constantly for their saluations by the merits of Christ's works, wherefore the
spouse here in this place shows, that she was not a little deceived, when she
sought him diligently, but with human diligence and industry, and upon the
full confidence of her own works. Go to then, rise up, and go about the
city, that is to say, all human counsels, because they which seek Christ
without the word and spirit of God, do as i^ were fetch a compass, and go
the farthes^ way about. Now the wicked do trace up and down in this way in
vain, because tha^ whereas no care and industry of man is available unto the
finding of him, they can never find him out this way. The watchmen that went
about the city found me, to whom I said, have you seen him whom my soul
loves? The watchmen, etc. that is to say, those which follow the constitutions
of ancient fathers, revelations and studies of men, which seem to ward and
keep the Church, I asked them also whether they could certainly tell me of
any place where to find out my loving and gracious spouse, when I might
securely embrace him, and secretly comfort my self. To conclude, I asked them
whether they could bring me any certain tidings of my salvation: but having
past a little from their human studies and speeches, to see whether I could
find any more certain steps and footings, as it were of my salvation and
peace of conscience, which I had sought a long time, but never as yet found, at
the length, leaving all human helps and Doctors, I busied my self to make
inquiry after him in the books of the holy scripture, being written by the
instinct of the holy Ghost, whom I do love most entirely, as being the sense
of piety and solid truth: for it is only Gods spirit, which satisfies and
fills the mind of man, desirous of knowledge, and leads his disciples into
all manner of truth, by teaching them the words of God. And here I find, that
not only my understanding is informed, but also that my affections are
inflamed within me, and that I am presently able to discern errors and
falsehood from the verity of true doctrine, and to receive and intertaine in
my heart the true peace of conscience, quieting and contenting my self in my
husband, and all this happens for no other cause, but because I have found
out Christ my Savior and redeemer, that is to say, him who has obtained the
spirit of grace, which is never separated and abstracted from the truth, that
which is his is mine, for otherwise I know that I should suddenly perish and
come to naught, and forthwith Christ does seek the salvation of those which
live in wickedness and error. Wherefore the Church being once converted from
the wicked, promises to bring in Christ, whom she finds in the house of his
mother, that is to say, in the Synagogues and congregations of the wicked, from
whence he came: and verily the true believers do study and endeavor by prayers,
by the ministry of the word, and by all manner of means possible, to reduce
the poor wandering souls of the Church, to the truth of Gods word, that they
may receive Christ into their houses, and into the secret chambers of their
hearts, because it is not enough for the servants of God to seek their own
saluations, unless they may compass it for others also, and direct them as
well as they may, unto the like speeches of God, which they ought to seek so
carefully and diligently, that they should not leave off seeking of it, until
they know that they have receuied mercy as well as they, which is declared
unto us in the next words following: I left him not till I had brought him into
my mothers house, into the chamber of her that conceived me. That is, I left
him not till even the wicked, such a one as I my self had heretofore for a
certain space been, being turned and converted unto him, received him.

The words of the Bridegroom unto the Virgins.
I charge you, o daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes, and by the Hindes of the
field, that ye stir not up nor waken my love until she please. I charge
you. The faithful spouse of Christ does most willingly obey his will and
commandment, by seeking the salvation of her mother which conceived and bare
her, which yet wandreth up and down in darkness, and in the danger of
death, so that the word of truth does not a little thing profit by her, by
making her fit to receive him that was coming, Christ Jesus, and to change her
by the power of his spirit, to the end, that they that were wise should become
fools, and they that were fools, should become wise. Hence is it that she is
become one of the Churches daughters, or rather to speak more properly, a true
member of the Church and spouse of Christ: afterward the Bridegroom
dispatcheth unto her heart, the pleasures of his spirit, and peace of God,
which passes all understanding. Therefore both the mother and the daughter
being both of them together, made a faithful spouse of the Lords, do rejoice
and are merry, whereupon she sleeps and takes her quiet rest in the holy
Ghost, whom the holy Ghost does so preserve and keep from fear of any danger,
that the quiet rest and peace of their minds and consciences cannot be
disturbed or hindered at all. He says unto the young virgins, * I charge you,
which words were expounded before. He charge them not to stir or waken his
love, until she please, but then he would have the young maids to waken her,
when they are moved thereunto by the word of God: and this verse is repeated in
the Canticles, to show that God has no less care over the Church which is
made of the Gentiles and wicked, being once converted, then he has of the
Jews and others, which in the beginning were made righteous by him, but that
he has an equal care and love of them both, being made one in him and
thorough him.

The friends of the Bridegroom unto the young maids.
6 Who is she that comes up out of the wilderness like pillars of smoke,
perfumed with myrrh and incense, and with all the spices of the merchant?

7 Behold his bed, which is Salomons: threescore strong men are round about it,
of the valiant men of Israel.

8 They all handle the sword, and are expert in war, every one has his sword
upon his thigh for the fear by night.

9 King Solomon made himself a palace of trees of Libanon.

10 He made the pillars thereof of silver, and the pauement thereof of gold,
the hangings thereof of purple, whose midst was paued with the love of the
daughters of Jerusalem.

11 Come forth ye daughters of Sion, and behold the king Solomon, with the
crown: wherewith his mother crowned him the day of his marriage, and in the day
of the gladness of his heart.


The Commentary.
The blessed spouse resting her self under the protection of Christ, does
daily more and more profit in the knowledge of Christ: and this is done even in
the wilderness of this world, and in the midst of the wicke, dall manner of
adversities and troubles whatsoever, to the words which come after, like
pillars of smoke perfumed with myrrh and incense, teach us, that as sweet
swelles and perfumes being laid upon the fire, do yield a greater and better
smell, even so the elect out of the very, fire of their temptations, by the
works of Christian justice, do s^nd forth the sweet smell of mirrhe and
incense, which the friends of the Bridegroom perceiving, cry out with great
admiration and wondering, saying, Who is she that comes up, etc. so that these
words and the rest that follow unto the end of this chapter, do in my opinion,
properly belong and appertain unto the friends of the Bridegroom, and
ministers of the word, and therefore they contain matters of doctrine, which
concern the Church and glory of God. First of all therefore, as if they were
astonished and surprised with admiration, they tell us what wonderful things
God has wrought and brought to pass in his Church, that is to say, how by the
virtue of the spitit at one and the self same time she does both rest and move,
or ascend like a pillar of smoke, perfumed with mirrhe and incense. A very
strange thing and worthy to be noted: and in the fire of tribulation at the
same time she has peace, at what time she goes and grows from virtue to
virtue by the spirit, and her faith increases daily more and more, which is
effectual and powerful in her by means of love, and peace. And this is the
peace which passes all understanding, because the flesh cannot conceive how
this should be, that she should at the self same time be vexed and troubled,
and yet have such peace and rest thereby, that she should become more
righteous, godly and pure then she was before. And look as the smoke mounteth
upward, so long, that at the length it cannot be seen any longer, so as it is
partly seen, and partly not seen: so the Church consists of her members,
the number whereof is daily renewed, and which are partly known, partly
uncertain and unknown. And as the smoke which is engendered of the fire,
mounting up on high, does by little and little vanish away out of a man's sight,
even so the church which kindles the love of God in our hearts by the fire of
the holy Ghost, leaves not to ascend and mount up higher and higher until she
be clean lifted up above the sight of all earthly things, and transported
unto the consideration of the invisible things which are in heaven above.
Behold his bed, which is Salomons, threescore strong men are round about it,
of the valiant men of Israel. Behold. Finally, they show what and how great
the security is of the flourishing green bed, that is to say, of the power
and wisdom of Christ, and what vehement and wonderful great love he bears
toward the spouse and her maidens: and all this is done under the figure of
Solomon. Furthermore, they lay before our eyes certain tokens of his love, as
namely these, in that he keeps, preserves and defends his Church from the
tyranny or treachery of such as lie in wait to destroy it, and likewise in
sending of his Prophets at their appointed time, to forewarne them of the evils
to come, and fore-arme them with all sorts of armor necessary for them
against their enemies the flesh and the devil: for the Prophets must by their
offices still watch and ward for the profit and commodity of the Church. And
the number of ten being multiplied by six, makes up just 60. Where the number
of ten is taken for the Law or decalogue, and the number of six for all that
space and time wherein God made all things. Wherefore by the threescore strong
men we are to understand all the perfect and righteous men of the Church, who
whilst they fulfill the ten commandments in six days, they may be rightly
said to be set round about Christ's bed, because they do confirm and
strengthen the godly minds of the weaker sort of their brethren, both with
good words and good examples, and so by this means they do drive away all their
enemies from them. They hold the swords in their hands when they obey and
fulfill Gods words, and are expert in war, whiles they teach and instruct
others, which by their godly means are preserved: and the sword, to wit, the
word of God, teaches us that no malice of man is able to overcome the wisdom
of God, and the hands wherein they hold his sword, are nothing else but good
deeds and good works: and the elect which are already come unto perfection,
have this sword upon their thighs, that is to say, are able to endure and
bear the rigor of their conversation, by the which they learn to beat down
the unruly appetites of the flesh, and despise the force and strength thereof,
by putting all their hopes and confidences in God, to the end that their enemy
the devil may not cause them to fall into the snares of his nets, by the
intising baits of the flesh in the night time and ignorance of the world. King
Salomo^ made himself a palace of the trees of Libanon. King Solomon: these
words may be well understood either of the ark of the Lord, which our Lord
Christ the husband of the Church caused to be made of sundry kinds of
precious woods, or else of the Temple which king Solomon built: but chiefly
and principally they are to be understood of the whole Church and congregation
of the faithful, which is so precious and costly in the sight of God, that it
is to be preferred before the most precious and dearest matter of all the most
stateliest buildings which are* be they never so curiously framed and built:
because it is builded of stately high trees of Libanus, that is to say, of
notable good teachers and preachers of the Church, which are eminent above the
rest, and famous, as well for the pure silver of their doctrine, as for the
glistering gold of zeal and charity crowned and adorned with the beauty of
many virtues in such sort, that the minds of other faithful men are
constrained as it were to behold and admire them, as also for to glorify God
in his Saints.

The words of the Bridegromes friends unto the young virgins.
Come sorth ye daughters of Zion, and behold the king Solomon, with the crown
wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his marriage, and in the day of
the gladness of his heart. Come forth ye daughters of Zion, that is to say, ye
daughters of Zion, as many among all the nations of the world as have received
the words of life through Christ, and the hands of the Apostles to believe,
come forth out of your errors and vanities, being before instructed by the
holy scripture, behold the peaceable king Solomon, which made of two churches
one, by taking away the hinderance and let, as well of God toward man, as of
the Jews toward the Gentiles, by his death and passion on the cross: come see
and behold the humanity of Christ crowned with a crown of the deity O good
God, how great was the love of God toward man, that he gave his only
begotten son in the flesh, to the end that every one that believes in him
should not perish, but have eternal life, either that they shall receive it in
that day when he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead, or that they
have received it already, in that day, when his humanity was glorified the
third day after his resurrection and triumph over the devil the great enemy
of all the faithful people of God.

The fourth Chapter.
1 Behold thou art fair my love: behold thou art fair, thine eyes are like
the doves: among thy locks thine hair is like the flock of goats, which
look down from the mountain of Gilead.

2 Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep in good order, which go up from the
washing: which every one bring out twins, and none is barren among them.

3 Thy lips are like a threde of skarlet, and thy talk is comely: thy
temples are within thy locks as a piece of a pomegranate.


The Commentary.
The words of the Bridegroom unto the Bride
THe Church of God is commended for diverse things in the Canticles. First, for
her doves eyes, that is to say, her simplicity and synceritie of mind and
judgment which is given her by the holy Ghost, which is signified by the
similitude and shape of a dove: secondly, for her ornaments and jewels which do
not a little beautify and adorn the face, because they are the ornaments of
the head, and the head is Christ, whose face shines most gloriously, and in
whose countenance is all the glory of all the faithful wheresoever. Thirdly,
she is praised for her hair for as the hairs do grow on the head, so the
truth which we have and receive from our head Christ, does take fast root, and
increases in us: now it grows and increases in us by reason of the
preachers of the Gospel, which are as it were the hairs of this head, which
depends on Christ the true head of the church. And the hairs of this head of
the spouse are very properly and fitly compared unto Goats hairs, because
whiles they attend wholly unto the precepts of the Law, and meditate upon
nothing but upon heavenly things, they are clean creatures, which feed in high
steep places. And by Gilead, which is as much to say by interpretation, as an
heap of testimonies, is meant the multitudes of martyrs, which confirm Christ's
doctrine by their deaths and passions. Thy teeth are like a flock^ of sheep in
good order, which go up from the washings, which every one bring out twins, and
none is barren among them. Thy teeth. The teeth are the power of the holy
Ghost, by the which the true Bishops do overcome the wicked, and crush them in
pieces by the preaching of the word and Christian conversation, and either
convert and turn them to the truth, or else confirm and establish them in the
truth by the power of the aforesaid word. Again, the Bishops are teeth,
because they reprehend and reprove the wicked by the word of truth, and make
them members of Gods holy Church. Moreover, they are teeth to break and bruise
the bread of doctrine, so that it may be food for the weak. And the teeth of
the Church are described to be like unto sheep after they are washed and
shorn, because the spirit of truth does make the true professors of the
Gospel, and generally all the faithful to become pure, innocent, and simple
or harmless as sheep: neither are they barren or fruitless, because as the
sheep they bring forth twins, and always abound in all manner of good
works. Thy lips are like a thred^ of skarlet, and thy talk is comely: thy
temples are within thy lo^kes as a piece of a pomegranat. Again, the Church is
commended for her lips: that is to say, for her words. And her lips are said to
be red, because all her speeches tend only to this end and purpose, to set
forth the death of Christ our Savior: red with blood for the salvation of the
elect. And her words are fyery hot with zeal and faith* not knowing how to
l^e, but able to overcome the false and lying brethren. And by her cheeks, is
signified modesty and shamefastness, because when a man is ashamed he
blusheth, or his cheeks do look red: and because the pomegranat is red in
hew, therefore it may be most fitly applied unto the passion of Christ. Now,
because the Church is not ashamed of Christ's cross, but rejoices rathe^ in
her passions and persecutions, which she is to suffer for his sake, and is wont
to bear^ the sign of the cross very patiently: therefore it was well said,
that her cheeks were like a pomegranate, and especially like a piece of
pomegranat, because the redder part of it was hid, and the white only was seen.
And as the number of grains which are in a pomgranat cannot be seen, unless
the pomegranat be broken or bruised in pieces: so likewise the virtue and power
of the Church is not seen but in tribulations and troubles.

The Text.
4 Thy neck is as the tower of David, built for defense, a thousand shieldes
hang therein, and all the targets of the strong men.

5 Thy two breasts are as two young roes that are twins feeding among the
lillies.

6 Until the day break, and the shadows fly away, I will go into the
mountain of mirrhe, and to the mountain of incense.

7 Thou art all fair my love, and there is no spot in thee.


The Commentary.
In this place he co^me^deth the spouses neck as a tower built up of a
reasonable height, hanged round about with strong shields: and what thing else
is this in the spouse but the sweet agreement of holy manners, or true
strength and fortitude against all adversities that shall happen, being always
adorned and decked with strong champions and Christian warriors, which they
keeping and preserving, do not only praise them, but also in the power and
virtue of him that is able to strengthen their weak souls endure and suffer
all manner of adversities. The great Cannon which defends this Church, is
nothing else but the lively words of the holy scripture which do pearce even to
the soul: and the thousand bucklers or targets, are the hoped for helps and
succors of Gods divine providence, by the which he does so much sustain and
relieve his servants, that it is not possible that they should be overcome or
overthrown. Thy two breasts. Finally, because he means not to proceed so
far in this place, as to speak of her girdle, after he had spoken of her head
and neck, he addresseth himself to say somewhat in commendations of her two
breasts: whereby is meant the doctrine of both the old and new testament, then
the which there can be nothing imagined more pleasant more amiable, or more
profitable: and he likeneth them to two young roes, because as they do lightly
leap and skip up and down, so the doctrine of both the old and new testament
is spread abroad throughout the face of the whole world, and their feeding, is
said to be among the lillies: whereby are signified the faithful, amongst whom
there is always abiding the love and charity of the Church, which feeds,
that is to say, recreateth her: and this love does remain for ever in her full
state and perfection among the faithful. But what is the food wherewith she
feeds the^? It is the food of the spirit and word of God: for because the
Church does always feed on that food which shall make her strong to persevere
and continue out unto the end. Moreover, the faithful people of God are fed
and nourished with faith and love of the Church: but how long are they fed
after this sort? until the day break, that is to say, to the end of the
world, and that the shadows of errors, men's inventions, and all the works of
darkness do fly away. And Christ may rightly then be said to come unto us,
when he helps us, and to go away from us, when he takes all hope of help and
succor from us. Now the spouse as long as she is in this world, is not without
tribulations and crosses, and doubtless she would soon perish and come to
naught, if Christ should not come to her to comfort and strengthen her with the
power of his spirit, and therefore the Bridegroom speaks unto the Church, as
if he did speak unto a third person, saying, I will go into the mountain,
that is to say, I will indeed help thee, which arta mountain of mirrhe, and a
hill of incense, that is to say* so full of my sweet ointments, as a mountain
of incense and mirrhe. Thou art all fair my love, and there is no spot in
thee. Thou art, etc. He comes then, and slacketh not to come unto his
well-beloved spouse: for he is no liar, to say that he will come, and not to
come: and he says, thou art all fair, and there is no spot in thee. How
fair? how without spot, or blemish? by the bountiful and beautiful presence
of the immaculate son of God, and for the sweet smell of his ointme^t wherewith
he has perfumed us: and hence it is, that the Church is called a mountain of
mirrhe, and a mountain of incense because that she albeit in her self, and of
her self she is most miserably foul, and black as any blackamore can be: yet
notwithstanding in her bridegroom Christ most amiable, admirable and fair,
pure without spot in Christ, because he wipes away all her spots, and blots by
forgiving her her sins, and imputing them no longer unto her.

The Text.
8 Come with me from Lebanon my spouse, even with me from Lebanon, and look
from the top of Amanak, from the top of Shenir and Hermon, from the dens of
the Lions, and from the mountains of the Leopardes.

9 My sister, my spouse, thou have wounded mine heart, thou have wounded mine
heart with one of thine eyes, and with a chain of thy neck.

10 My sister, my spouse, how fair is thy love? how much better is thy love
then wine, and the savor of thine ointments then all spices?

11 Thy lips, my spouse, drop as honeycombes: honey and milk are under thy
tongue, and the savor of thy garments is as the savor of Lebanon.


The Commentary.
Here in this place we are to consider thus much: that by the four hills of
Israel is to be understood the vocation of the Church of the Gentiles unto
Christ her husband, which is called, that she may not dwell any longer with
Lions and Leopards, but may be freed from the power of the^, that is to say,
that her body may not be torn in pieces with the cruelty of bloody tyrants,
or distracted by the diversity and variety of wicked sects: but that she being
reduced, and brought from heresy and error to the true understanding of the
faith, may make one true Catholic Church of all the elect, which are gathered
and assembled together of all nations, tongues, and kingdoms of the earth, as
who would say: This my beautiful spouse flies unto me for refuge, not only
from Libanus, but from all the corners and quarters of the earth, eschuing the
subtilties of Satan, and treacheries of false teachers and heretics, such as
they have meditated and thought upon lying on their beds, to destroy and annoy
the Church. And in that he says, that his heart was wounded, we are to note
the greatness of his love which he bears toward the Church, which he for
good cause calls his sister and spouse: first, because she is become his
heavenly bedfellow, and partaker of the benefit of his celestial bed: and
secondly, because he vouchsafed to take flesh, and put on man's nature upon
him, that he might be our natural brother. The eyes of the Spouse are the
judgments and proceedings of the holy Ghost: the neck is faith, and the
chains about the neck, the works that are done in faith. Again, the spouse
has two eyes whilst she lives in the flesh, to wit, the judgment of the
spirit, and the judgment of the flesh: the first pleases Christ greatly, the
second displeases him as much as the former pleases him, because it is
contrary to the former, which the church shall be quite and clean freed from,
when mortifying the old man, she runs unto the tabernacle of the body by
death. Furthermore she is said to have two chains about her neck, the one a
chain of hypocrisy, that is to say, of seming good works that issue forth from
faith, one of these chains the bridegroom loves, and the other he hates to
the death, because it is a sinful chain, wherefore he says, thou have wounded
mine heart with one of thine eyes, that is to say, with the judgment and
understanding of the holy Ghost, and with one of thy chains, that is to say,
with the works which come from faith, have thou wounded mine heart, that is to
say, thou have done things very grateful and acceptable unto me, and he
repeateth these words, of wounding of his heart twice, to make known and
declare the singular great love which Christ bears toward his Church. And
these loves are better then wine, because neither wine nor any other outward
thing, can be more pleasant or acceptable, the^ the works of Christian
charity. And finally the savor of thine ointments is better then all spices,
because the Church is made partaker of Christ's ointments, which yield forth a
far more precious, gracious, and loving smell, then the smell of any outward
unguent or any thing else whatsoever. Thy lips my spouse drop honycombes:
honey and milk are under thy tongue, and the savor of thy garments is as the
savor of Lebanon. Thy lips. The lips of the church are ever like honycombs
dropping: but what do they drop or distill? milk and honey which is under their
tongues. By which words we are to note the honey sweet, and milk white,
unspotted words of God. These words may be said to drop from the mouth of the
chaste spouse, whiles she delivers them unto her neighbors, and they flow
from her most easily and fluently, which is signified by these words in that
they are said to be under her tongue. Indeed she is indewed with her husband
Christ's spirit, by means whereof she both perfectly knows, and easily
pronounces all things, because it is a general rule, the more perfectly we
know a thing, the more ready shall we be able to utter and pronounce the same.
And it follows in the text, and the savor of thy garments is as the savor
of Lebanon. What garments are these which the Church wears, unless it be
these, wherewith she which is Christ's most sacred body is covered and
apparelled withal? and these are the garments indeed wherewith the grace of
Christ, his justice spirit, truth peace, and all those good gifts and graces
which do accompany them, are greatly glorified. The sent and smell of these
things is wonderful strong and strange: for it is as the savor of the hill of
Lebanon, or of many odoriferous trees, and yet nevertheless the garments of
the spouse are more odoriferous and well smelling, then all these things. But
it is God alone, and his Christ, the Angels and elect which do smell the odor
thereof, and are delighted therewith; because it is not possible at all for them
to please either God or man, which have not received of the fullness of Christ's
spirit.

The text.
12 My sister my spouse is as a garden enclosed, as a spring shut up, and a
fountain sealed up.

13 Thy plants are as an orchard of pomegranates with sweet fruits, as
camphire, spikenard.

14 Even spikenard, and saffron, calamus and cinnamon, with all the trees of
incense, myrrh and aloes, with all the chief spices.

15 O fountain of the gardens, o well of living waters, and the springs of
Lebanon.

16 Arise, o North, and come o South, and blow on my garden, that the spices
thereof may flow out: let my well beloved come to his garden, and eat his
pleasant fruit.


The Commentary.
The Bridegroom in this first verse commends the spouse for abounding in all
manner of fruit of good works, and he uses the similitude very fitly of a
garden, which because it may the better bring forth herbs, trees, spices, and
all sorts of fruits, men do use to set a hedge round about it, to keep out
cattle from hurting of it, and last of all, it is watered with wholesome,
sound, and vnpoysoned waters: and even so for all the world is it with the
Church. What booteth it then, for the Church to be never so fertile and
fruitful in good works, unless God preserve and keep it with a fatherly
providence and care, setting (as it were) a hedge round about it, unless he
water it with the water of life, and shadow or refresh it with the comfortable
gifts and graces of the holy Ghost: and therefore it is said, as a spring shut
up, and a fountain sealed up, because it is confirmed and strengthened with
the protection of the Almighty, as also for an other reason, because it is not
lawful for us either to add or diminish any thing from the fountain of the
Gospel, because it must not be infected with the puddle of men's filthy
doctrines or wicked constitutions. Thy plants are as an orchard of
pomegranates, with sweet fruits, as camphire, spikenard. Thy plants. That is to
say, the fruits of good works which follow the planting of faith, are as dear
unto me as a garden, and as pleasant unto me as any orchard can be in the
world: and thus by the variety of costly spices, and odoriferous trees of a
paradise, that is to say, of a wide orchard or delectable garden, we are to
learn, that the elect although distinguished by degrees and persons, yet are
they notwithstanding all of them within one paradise, that is to say, within
the odoriferous and pleasant trees of the Church, which abound in most precious
and sweet plants of the elect and faithful ones, and every tree, that is to
say, every one which is not planted in this pleasant Eden or garden, brings
forth poisoned and corrupted fruit. And to conclude, there is no good herb or
fruit growing in the world out of this garden: and contrariwise, all that
grows here is wholesome, pleasant and a fruit to be desired.

The words of the Bride unto the Bridegroom.
O fountain of the gardens, o well of living waters, and the springs of
Lebanon. O fountains. This sentence appears to be an exclamatorie sentence of
the spouse, breaking forth into the praise of her husband, for all the good
things which she has received of him, as if she should have said in other
words, Thou, o my gracious and loving spouse, art the cause of all my good,
the fountain of eternal life: all our gardens had need to be watered with
this lively water: thou art the wellspring of all heavenly graces, from who^
all good things are powered down upon us in most plentiful sort: thou art the
conduit which conuayest these wholesome waters unto thy Church, which is
Lebanon. For as Lebanon is full of odoriferous plantings of the faithful: so
the particular Churches may be called small orchards, and pettie-gardens of the
great paradise of the Church: and there is but one fountain of lively water
which runs thorough out all the gardens of Lebanon, that is to say, there is
but one fountain of grace and truth, namely the holy Ghost, wherewithal the
several congregations of the faithful must be watered and refreshed. So then
the fountain of the gardens, that is to say, of the particular Churches and
congregations is nothing else but the fountain of the Catholic and Universal
Church, because it is in her first, and from thence derived unto all the rest.
Arise, o North, and come o South, and blow on my garden, that the spices
thereof may flow out: let my well-beloved come to his garden, and eat his
pleasant fruit, Arise, o North. The spouse inuocateth the succor and help of
the holy Ghost, by whose inspiration her young and tender plants may as well in
adversity as in prosperity, flourish, increase, and bring forth fruit worthy
of the bridegroom, to recreate, delight, and content him, which is a most
careful and diligent husbandman over the flock that is committed unto him: so
that the breath of his mouth may cause the sweet spices to fall off from the
trees, and to ripen the dainty fruits upon the trees, to the end, that he that
is the true husband of the Church may eat and be delighted with the fruit
thereof. In fine, her hearty desire and affection is, that she may be
commended of the Bridegroom for her fruits of faith, which she can not bring
forth without his special assistance, help, and favor.

The fifth Chapter.
1 I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse: I gathered my myrrh with my
spice: I eat mine honey comb with mine honey, I drank my wine with my milk:
eat o friends, drink and make you merry o well-beloved.

2 I sleep, but mine heart waketh, it is the voice of my well-beloved that
knocks, saying, open unto me my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled: for
mine head is full of dew, and my locks with the drops of the night.


The Commentary.
The words of the Spouse unto the Bridegroom.
THe Church calls her husband Christ her well-beloved in her garden, that is to
say, she ascribes all glory unto him, for making her so fair a garden, and
causing her to bring forth such trees and wonderful strange and odoriferous
fruit: whereby she confess, ththat both her self and her fruit do come from
Christ, to the end that he may be always ready to help her, and that he may
be glorified in all, of whom all things are, and have their being: therefore she
speaks these words, my well-beloved Christ came into his garden, that is to
say, unto me which am his, and in whom, if there be any good or pleasant thing,
it must be acknowledged to proceed and come from his bountiful goodness, and
he eat his It, the fruit fo his pleasant apples.
pleasant fruit, so that these are the words of the spouse, promising her
service and devotion unto the Bridegroom. Furthermore her garden and all her
delights, (as it has been before showed you) must be watered by Christ with
his heavenly water.

The Bridegroom speaks unto the Bride these words.
I am come into my garden, etc. The Bridegroom hears the prayers of the
Church, and accordingly addresseth himself unto her, and he comes to help
her, he gathered myrrh and spice, that is to say, the good works of the
Church, which are done in faith, do fully please, and are right acceptable
unto him: afterward then he calls her to come into his garden, into what
garden I pray you? unto her self, for she is Christ's pleasant garden, she is
his paradise: for it is Christ's desire and will, that she should retire back
again unto her self, and return unto her heart, and he calls her, because
no man can truly return unto his heart, unless it please him to call, and
instruct him with his holy Spirit: and the reason thereof may be this, because
there is no man so righteous or godly which sins not at one time or other,
as long as he lives in the flesh, and therefore he has great need to return
unto himself, and be renewed and repaired in Christ, because in deed no man
can be truly said to return, but he that crucifieth the flesh, and is
reformed and informed afresh again by the holy Ghost. It follows, and eat
his pleasant fruit. Before we heard that Gods words were taken for honey,
milk, and wine: for honey because of the sweetness thereof, for milk, for the
meetenesse and conuenientnesse thereof for young children, lastly for wine,
because it fills our hearts with true joy and gladness, all these the
bridegroom may be said to eat and drink* when he delights in them, eat, o
friends drink and make you merry, o well-beloved. Among the number of those
which are of the Church of God, there are called unto the aforesaid banquet of
honey, milk, and wine that is to say, unto the tasting of Gods wor^ first of
all, all Bishops and true professors o^ the Gospel: he wills them to eat
an^ drink, and be drunken also, because h^ would have them to take enough of
God words, that is to say, to give themselves whol^ly unto the meditation of
them until the be dronken therewithal. O happy drunkenness, which comes
not of the fr^ of the vine, but of the sweet liquor of Gods words, which makes
us forget all temporal affairs, in such sort, that men being once inflamed
with the love of heavenly things, never feel any temporal pain or grief, as
a drunken man in his drunkenness forgets all his business.

The words of the Spouse.
I sleep, but mine heart waketh, it is the voice of my well-beloved that
knocks saying: open unto me my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled, for
mine head is full of dew, and my locks with the drops of the night. I
sleep. There be some, in whom the desires and affections of the flesh are yet
to be seen, as in the be^eeuers which have not yet altogether crucified and
mortified the same, because whiles ^hey live in this world, the flesh
pre^ayleth and works something in them: and therefore the Spouse says, I
sleep, but ^^ne heart waketh. She sleeps whiles that he is somewhat kept
back by the weak ^esh, that she cannot follow Christ so per^ectly as she
would: for she would not ^^ne nor offend any more by her good will, yet
nevertheless she does sin and ^ffende many times whether she will or ^o,
because oftentimes it so happens, that she does those things which she should
not, and would not do, and those things which she would do, does she not: and
yet for all this, her heart waketh, by the grace and favor of the bridegroom:
whence it comes to pass, that according to the inward man, she rejoices in
the law of the Lord, and delights in it, saying, the voice of my well-beloved,
as if she should have said, although I sleep in the flesh, yet my heart is
still waking, I hear and know the voice of my well-beloved Christ, calling me
into his garden, that is to say, willing me to return unto my self, open
unto me my sister. He says not sister, but my sister, this word my, and yo^
mark it, is always added to the former. No^ he calls her sister, because of
the bond o^ charity, a friend for her faith, a dove for having the spirit of
God undefiled, because o^ the righteousness of her husband, his, because all
these things, being put together, or every one by themselves in particular: do
flow from Christ. So then the Bridegrom knocks saying, open unto me, this is
great and weighty commandment, an^ there cannot be a more necessary precep^
the bridegroom would have every one t^ open unto him, and why so? for because ^
he says himself, mine head is full of dew, (...) my locks with the drops
of the night. Go^ the father is Christ's head, as it is in the first Epistle of
S. Paul to the Corinthia^s, chap. 3. verse. 11. and Isaiah says, thy dew is the
dew of light, that is to say, his truth and his justice: again Christ is the
head of the spouse, and the locks of his head are those things which she
obtains thorough his means at the hands of God, as grace and remission of
sins, the peace of mind, help and succor in time of trouble and necessity,
and a hundred such like things, the night, or darkness, are the wicked, the
drops of the ^^ght, are those things which are derived from them, as poisoned
doctrine and wicked works. Wherefore to conclude this point, all wicked men,
and all the power of darkness which Christ sustayneth, or restrayneth rather
from doing of any evil, both to himself, and his servants, they are the
drops of the night, because they are the works of darkness.

The Text. The words of the spouse unto her self.
3 I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet how
shall I defile them?

4 My well-beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, and mine heart was
affectioned toward him.

5 I rose up to open to my well-beloved, and mine hands aid drop down myrrh,
and my fingers pure myrrh upon the handles of the bar.

6 I opened to my well-beloved: but my well-beloved was gone and past: mine hea^^
was gone when he did speak: I sought him but I could not find him: I called
him, b^ he answered me not.


The Commentary.
Our old Adam, being not yet altogether mortified in the Church, is somewhat
slu^gish and sleepie, and opposes himself again the wakefull and vigilant
spirit, making the answer unto the Bridegroom, when h^ commanded him to open
unto him, and ^ceiue him for his eternal salvation. I have p^ off my coat, as
if he should have said, I ref^ not to open unto thee, but the flesh does son
what trouble and molest me, and thorou^ thy favor and grace I have put off the
c^ of the old man, that is to say, all manners trust and confidence in my own
works have washed and cleansed my feet from a manner of affections, and have
already couched my self in the most joyful bed of thy peace, and now if I
should rise up out of my bed to open the door for to let thee in, I should all
to befoule my feet, and disquiet my self, grant this, that I should go to bed
again, and enjoy my happy rest with thee. I am well pleased with the amiable
dew of thy head, that is to say, of thy eternal and heavenly father, but the
drops of the night which ^ang in the locks of thy head, do amaze and terrify
me, and who knows whether it shall so happen, that when I shall suffer and
endure the sharpness of these drops, that is to say, of the cross I shall
offend thee, and defile my self, and so consequently, exclude my self from
all manner of partaking of the dew of Gods favors, and loose the quiet rest
and peace, which by thy gracious mean I have obtained and purchased unto my
self: thus being plunged in extremities, and doubs, I can not see any manner
of means how I should rise and open unto thee.

The words of the Spouse unto the virgins.
My well-beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, and mine heart was
affectioned toward him. My well-beloved. Christ's hand does betoken his mighty
operation power and help, the door of the spouse, the works and judgments
of the flesh, and this door is fast shut or locked, that is to say, the
impediments and hindrances of the flesh are not as yet taken away, which, as
long as they remain it is impossible for the spouse to entertain or receive
Christ, or to set all her affection upon him: but he perceiving this our
natural dullness or frowardnes rather, puts his hand, that is to say, his
mercy, and brings succor thorought the hole of the door, that is to say,
of the flesh which is weak, and full of holes and infirmities: and he may be
truly said to put his hand into the Church by the hole of the door, when he
lightneth her with the light of his grace, inflameth her with a true and arde^t
heat, draws her after him, and finally confirms and establishes her with
other gifts of the holy Ghost: wherefore as soon as ever she perceives
Christ's necessary and helping hand, she shakes off al kind of drowsinesse and
slothful sluggishnesse; and her bowels are moved toward him, that is to say,
all her inward parts are moved within her, together by the motion of the holy
Ghost, to the end, that she may be able to do all that which her well-beloved
wills and commands her to do, and now she makes as much have as may be to
rise up, which before could not find in her heart so much as to rise and open
to her well-beloved when he knocked. And here we may note the wonderful force
and efficacy of the bridegroms hand: for she did not only rise up when she
opened to her well-beloved, but furthermore, her hands did drop down mirrhe. Now
the hands of the spouse are her works, which do not always drop down mirrhe,
but then only when she opens unto her husband, and obeys his commandments:
and look whatsoever she does in the faith and confidence of the bridegroom, is
but as it were hands dropping down mirrhe through her fingers: because the good
deeds of the Church, be they done never so secretly, yet nevertheless they do
yield forth a most sweet smell, and incorruptible savor, most acceptable unto
God, in whose presence they are done, and accepted of him.

The spouse speaks.
I opened to my well-beloved: but my well-beloved was gone and past: mine heart was
gone when he did speak: I sought him, but I could not find him: I called him,
but he answered me not.

I opened, etc. After that Christ had comforted the Church with his hand, and
succored it with his help, and comfort, she opened: by which word we are to
note all that which does any way favor the wicked desires of the flesh, that is
to say, all inventions of men whatsoever, which we must open, that is, take out
of the way, otherwise we shall not be able to open the wicked door of the flesh,
that is to say, to mortify and crucify it with the wicked lusts and
affections thereof, which comes to pass as often as he enableth her to
subdue and crucify the wicked flesh, and takes away from her matter and food
of impiety, planting in her a desire and longing after heavenly things, so
that she is forthwith filled with Christ's spirit, and verily she asks many
things at his hands, because she is all in all in the glory of his name, but
he passes and goes away along by her, that is to say, he does not grant her
all the desires and petitions of her heart: but how then does the chaste spouse
behave her self after Christ is departed and gone away from her, that is, when
he does not fulfill all her desires, and do all that she would have him for to
do? she rehearses the wonderful works of God, and laudeth the great power
and force of his word, saying, my soul shall go forth when he speaks. The
speech of the Bridegroom is his word, which speaks most absolutely in the
hearts of the faithful by the operation and working of the holy Ghost, and as
soon as the faithful man hears the sound of these words, he believes and
trusts in them, and his heart or soul goes forth, because he renounceth
and denies himself, and all that lives or is within him, for Christ's sake:
and the soul may be truly said to go forth at the voice of the bridegroom,
which leeseth her voice and life, and all that ever she has for him, but
whosoever does so, shall be sure to keep them unto eternal life. So then, it
is all one in effect, as if the spouse should speak after this sort, so
amiable and effectual is the voice of my well-beloved husband, that I am wholly
bent and intent upon him, still looking and following after him. It follows,
I sought him, but I could not find him. What should the spouse of Christ be by
the delights and joys of Christ, but ready to seek him and run after him,
and this with as much have and diligence as may be. Thus then she makes
diligent search and inquiry for her husband, and continues still seeking of
him* but he withdrew himself from her, and would not suffer her to find him
out, although she desired it so as nothing more, for albeit she puffed and
blowed, and labored till she swet again, to find him out, yet she could not
find him, till he manifested himself unto her, which may be found at any time,
so that a man have faith which faith comes from God the giver of al good
things. Nevertheless it pleases him for a while to withdraw himself from the
flesh, to the end that it may be more holy, and more sanctified. Again, the
spouse adds these words, I called him, but he answered me not. She calls
the Bridegroom, because she has need of his favor and help, and desires it
most earnestly, and he answers her, when he grants her the desires and
petitions of her heart: but she says, that her well-beloved answered her not
when she called him. Because he did not presently yield unto her request, by
giving that which she asked: for oftentimes it so comes to pass, that God
does not presently bestow that on us, which we desire at his hand, because
indeed by withholding and withdrawing these things from us for a certain time,
he makes us to be more earnest and willing to seek those things, according
to the institution and prescript of his word.

The Text.
7 The watchmen that went about the city found me: they smote me and wounded
me: the watchmen of the walls took away my veil from me.

8 I charge ye, o daughters of Jerusalem, if you find my well-beloved, that you
tell him that I am sick of love.

9 O the fairest among women, what is thy well-beloved more then other
well-beloved? what is thy well-beloved more then another lover, that thou do so
charge us?


The Commentary.
Whiles the Church was thus earnest in the pursuit of her well-beloved, the
watchmen, and those that went round about the city found her thus perplexed:
and by them we are to understand those which are Bishops and chiefepriests in
name and word only, being indeed so far from showing where Christ is, and
comforting the weak consciences of the ignorant people with the words of life:
that they do rather beat the spouse, and vex the Church, as the evil servants
in the Gospel, did afflict and beat the rest of their masters family, and
fellowseruants, whiles their master was abroad in a foreign country. These
be the men that lade men with an infinite number of humane precepts and
commandments, and these false teachers took away her veil from her. When
under the pretense and pretext of true religion, they became destroyers or
corrupters of the word of God, by taking it away out of the Church, to the end
that their own doctrines might take place.

The words of the Spouse unto the virgins.
I charge you, o daughters of Jerusalem, if you find my well-beloved, that you
tell him that I am sick of him. I charge you. The faithful spouse of Christ,
being wounded, beaten, spoiled and deprived of her own garments, and being now
altogether out of hope as a man would say, to find him in the doctrines of men,
yet nevertheless for all this, she cease not to call upon him, and seek
after him: neither wants she any desire or godly affection to stir her up
unto the earnest and vehement pursuit thereof: for it is most certain that the
elect of God, are so inwardly provoked and stirred up unto those things by the
mere instinct of the holy Ghost, that they would rather choose to die a hundred
times, then once to leave off from doing those things. Wherefore as the spouse
could learn nothing of the false teachers and enemies of godliness, which
carried a great show of piety and learning, she turns her self unto those
which of her knowledge made no great show of knowledge and learning, to wit,
unto the young maids and daughters of Jerusalem, signifying the faithful and
godly sort, living here in this world which are accounted fools, and deuoyde
of judgment of the world. And it is most evident that hereby they are meant,
because the daughters of Jerusalem are always taken for the faithful whom the
Church charge, that if they find Christ, they would be a means unto him for
her to obtain his love by telling him that she was sick of love, and
languished for the desire of him, which is the greatest desire the elect can
have, because they do both seek to find out Christ together with the spouse,
and also desire him to help and succor them at all times and hours.

The virgins words unto the Spouse.
O the fairest among women, what is thy well-beloved more then other well-beloved?
what is thy well-beloved more then an other lover, that thou do so charge us?
It is not possible for the young virgins the Churches best beloved, unless
they first hear, to understand what his state and condition is, wherefore here
in this place they do ask after his condition and qualities demanding what he
is. Wherefore the faithful people of God do earnestly desire to receive
instructions of the Church, and be informed of her what is her well-beloved (for
it appertains only to the Church to define of these things) provided always
that she do it by the tenor and prescript of Gods word, which is her only
life and rod of direction: how he was begotten of the father before all ages:
and how in the fullness of time, he came into the world, to take the Church to
be his spouse, saving and redeeming her from all her sins.

The Text.
10 My well-beloved is white and ruddie, the chiefest of ten thousands.

11 His head is as fine gold, his locks curled, and black as a raven.

12 His eyes are like doves upon the rivers of waters, which are vvasht with
milk, and remain by the full vessels.

13 His cheeks are as a bed of spices, and as sweet flowers: and his lips
like lillies dropping down pure mirrhe.

14 His hands as rings of gold, set with the Chrysolite: his belly like white
iuorie covered with saphirs.

15 His legs are as pillars of marble set upon sockets of fine gold: his
countenance as Lebanon, excellent as the Ceders.

16 His mouth is as svveet things, and he is wholy delectable: this is my
well-beloved, and this is my lover, o daughters of Jerusalem.

17 O the fairest among women, whither is thy well-beloved gone? whither is thy
well-beloved turned aside, that we may seek him with thee?


The Commentary.
In these verses the Spouse describes unto us the beauty of her immaculate
spouse. And first, in general terms, speaking of his whole person: then in
particular, by entreating of each part and member of him. She says then, that
he is white and ruddy, the chiefest among thousands. By his whiteness, we are
to understand his divinity, according to that of S. John, God is the true
light, and there is no darkness in him. His redness or ruddinesse is a token
or sign of his humanity, because of the blood which he shed, and rebukes which
he suffered, and bitterness of torment which he endured: and lastly, because
his blood does wash us clean from all our iniquities.

It follows in the words of the Spouse, that her well-beloved was the chiefest
of thousands, that is to say, among all the multitudes of men, because a
thousand in this place is taken for all men, there being one only Mediator
left between God and man, Jesus Christ. But why is he the chiefest and
principal above all other? Because he should be a fit Savior and redeemer of
the Church: for whereas we are all the sort of us wicked, reprobate and sinful
men, he is therefore principally good, and the chosen and chiefest among all
others, to the end that we that are by nature wicked, should by his grace
become good, and of a vile and cruel nation, an elect and chosen people unto
him, being by faith made fully partakers of his goodness and graces, and whom it
has pleased God the Father, for his Son Christ Jesus sake, to elect,
predestinate and preordaine unto salvation from the beginning, because no man
can be chosen or become good, unless it be by Christ, and a true and lively
faith in his death. His head is as fine gold, his locks curled, and black as
a raue^. His head, etc. Now the spouse goes about to describe all the
particular ^ several parts of the bridegroom: and first she begins with his
head, affirming it to ^ like the finest gold. Whereby is signified the most
precious nature of God, which is called Christ's head, as S. Paul says: the
head of Christ is God. Secondly she praises him for his locks, because, as
the hair does great^^ grace the head, if it be finely curled, and somewhat
black withal: even so the lock^ of Christ's head are most decent and fair,
that is to say, the doctrine and works done in faith, preached by the
Apostles, and Doctors of the Church, which hang round about this head like so
many curled locks. For albeit the wicked, as much as in them lies, do daily
resist and strive against them, yet they have a most notable victory over
them, and are more and more enlarged, though peradventure the wicked may think
them to be black, because they cannot please them; for they do always labor
as much as they may, to impugn them, and obscure their doctrines with lies and
inventions. His eyes are like doves upon the rivers of waters, which are washed
with milk, and remain by the full vessels. His eyes, etc. Here she praises
him for his eyes, by the doves, upon the rivers of waters, which are washed in
milk or spices, we are to consider the exceeding great knowledge, and fulness
of the holy Ghost which was so plentifully abounding in our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, as in no creature else. Wherefore S. John faith, that he was full
of grace and truth: and shortly after it follows, and of the fullness of his
grace we all receive: and truly such are the eyes, that is to say, all the
judgments and proceedings of Christ, to wit, most sincere and pure, and
proceeding from the fullness of the holy Ghost: his cheeks are as a bed of
spices and as sweet flowers, and his lips like lillies dropping down pure
mirrhe. His cheeks, etc. Here is the perfect description of his cheeks, which
are in the face, and whereby every man is known: and therefore we may very
well take these cheeks for the commandments and writings of God, because they
do rightly teach and instruct us how to know Christ: and therefore it was well
said of John, Attend diligently unto the writings of the scriptures, because
you may have eternal life by them, and they are they which testify of me. So
then it appears most plainly, that the scriptures and word of God are the
face and cheeks of Christ: which do give us most evident tokens of him: and
they are as it were beds of spices, because their speeches are distinguished
and divided into diverse books, which smell most sweet unto the godly minds
and this sweet smell is caused by the operation of the holy Ghost, which
happens so often as the stately sense thereof is unfolded and expressed: and
the sent thereof is increased not a little, when those thinge^ which may seem
to be little of themselves are for a certainty known to be most divine
celestial and heavenly things. But wh^^ do these sweet spices grow? In the
heart of the faithful, which only do esteem and make account of them. And
he says, tha^ the smell of them is increased by reason of them which fell
sweet spices and drugs which are the true Bishops and ministers of the word:
Thus it is in Italian.
who whiles they by the special direction and inspiration of the word
pronounce and minister it unto the people, as a most sovereign ointment, to
recreate and heal their wounded souls. Afterward she comes to describe the
Bridegromes lips. Now the lips of the Bridegroom Christ, are his doctrine,
which is published abroad by his Apostles and Saints, which like unto certain
odoriferous lillies, do render forth a most gracious smell of righteousness
and truth. His hands as rings of gold set with the Chrysolite: his belly like
white iuorie covered with Saphirs.

His hands, etc. The hand of Christ is the power of Christ, wherewith both in
himself and in others he brings to pass strange things, and he declares
the exceeding great value, and inestimable goodness of these hands, in that he
likeneth them to rings of gold, set with Chrysolits and precious stones:
because that it is not possible for any mortal man to comprehend the height
and depth of Gods omnipotent power. Furthermore, she praises him for his
belly: understanding by his belly, his affections and cogitations: and she
says, that his belly is like white iuory covered with saphirs. Because all the
cogitations, affections, and purposes of Christ, and the faithful are and
appear in the presence of God, most white, most precious, and most acceptable.
Iuorie is made of an Eliphants tooth, very hard, and very durable, or
incorruptible, and the Sapphire is a kind of precious stone, which shines most
brightly: and even so the judgments of Christ and his elect are most sincere,
firm, and incorruptible: and furthermore they are bright and Orient Saphirs,
lightning the whole body of the Church with their good works: so the^ men
seeing them, may glorify God, which is in heaven. His legs are as pillars of
marble: set upon sockets of fine gold: his countenance as Lebanon, excellent as
the Cedars. His legs. Here in this place the spouse goes about to commend
Christ's legs. Now all the strength and nimblenesse of a man is in his
legs: wherefore by the legs, we may note the invincible strength and
fortitude of Christ, which is able both to break all his enemies in pieces,
and preserve his servants from all manner of evil: and therefore they may be
well likened unto pillars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold, because
they are invincible, and the strength of them can not be overcome: for he came
into the flesh, and overcame sin, death and hell it self; because he might
subdue them unto the faithful, and strengthen their fearful hearts. And
hence it is, that you may read in the holy Scripture, that he is called a
rock, because of his exceeding great force and strength, against the which
nothing shall be able to prevail. Thus then the force of Christ consists in
this, that he is a pillar of marble, which has none like unto him, or to be
compared with him: and as many as believe in him, may truly be said to be
pillars also. So that as many as are strengthened and confirmed by him, may be
said to be pillars of the Church. And now after all this, she sets forth
his beauty at large, which only the believers see, and are delighted with the
beauty thereof: and yet they see no more then it pleases him to reucale unto
them. And his countenance is likened unto Lebanon, which is a most stately and
pleasant place, because indeed all the beauty, and sweet smell of Lebanon,
that is to say, of the Church, which is mystically to be understood by
Lebanon, is hid in Christ, and among all the trees of Lebanon, he is compared
unto the high, incorruptible, and odoriferous Cedar: for look how much the
Cedar does pass all other trees in height, eue^ so much and more does he
exceed and surpass all others in the Church; because he is more high, more
precious, and more odoriferous then any other, yea there is no good smell, no
precious and good thing whatsoever, which is not derived from him as from the
fountain of all good. His mouth is as sweet things, and he is wholly
delectable: this is my well-beloved, and this is my lover, o daughters of
Jerusalem.

His mouth, etc. Last of all, she describes the bridegromes mouth, taking it
for all his inward sweetness, that is to say, for that inestimable great love
which he bare unto mankind, in seeking their saluations, his peace which
passes all understanding, the righteousness of Gods eternal truth, and in a
word, his ineffable and inestimable spirit. Finally the spouse wondering at the
altitude of Christ's glory: and seeing that all the praises that she could heap
and accumulate upon him were many degrees inferior unto his deserts,
concluding much matter in few terms she says, that he is wholly delectable,
and indeed this is her principal intent and purpose every where in the
Canticles, to prove Christ to be most earnestly desired and sought after, that
she might inflame and kindle the love of all men toward him. And it follows
in the text: and this is my lover, to show how greatly she did glory in him.

The words of the young virgins unto the Spouse.
O the fairest among women, whither is thy well-beloved gone? whither is thy
well-beloved turned aside, that we may seek him with thee? Whither, etc.
Consider that which went before, how the elect not as yet wholly and fully
perfect, but tainted with some small errors and faults, have a kind of form of
godliness, and some certain knowledge of God, which they desire might be
increased every day more and more, and they are willing to be better
informed, and taught better things. The young virgins, that is to say, the
faithful servants of the immaculate spouse, had learned and heard before what
Christ was: now they desired to know where his abiding is, whither he is gone,
and where they should find him, and they promise to seek him with her: and
they may well say with her, for no man can find Christ, without he have that
which shall bring him unto the knowledge of christ, or confirm and strengthen
him in it. Now we know, that a true faith is a true companion of the faithful
Church and spouse of Christ, which he himself names, the fairest among all
women, that is to say, among all congregations and nations, because she is most
wonderfully perfect and excellent, by reason of that unspeakable beauty,
which she receives from her heavenly husband and celestial bridegroom Christ.

The sixth Chapter.
1 My well-beloved is gone down into his garden, to the beds of spices, to feed
in the gardens, and to gather lillies.

2 I am my welbeloueds, and my well-beloved is mine, who feeds among the
lillies.

3 Thou art beautiful (my love) as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, terrible as an
army with banners.

4 Turn away thine eyes from me: for they overcome me: thine hair is like a
flock of goats, which look down from Gilead.

5 Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep, which go up from the washing which
every one bring out twins, and none is barren among them.

6 Thy temples are within thy locks, as a piece of a pomegranate.

7 There are 60. Queens and 80. concubines, and of the damsels without number.

8 But my dove is alone, and my undefiled, she is the only daughter of her
mother, and she is dear to her that bare her, the daughters have seen her,
and counted her blessed: even the Queens and the concubines, and they have
praised her.


The Commentary.
The words of the Spouse unto the young damsels.
IT is a strange thing to see how the Church which but a little since sought
after her well-beloved, whom she could not find, charged the young damsels, that
is to say, the faithful, that if they did find him, they should bring her
tidings of him, because she was sick for the love of him, and yet the Church
knew full well, that the young virgins could never find out Christ, unless
they were first joined with him in perfect charity, and therefore she teaches
and instructs them, how they should seek Christ, if they meant to find: and
it is as much as if she should have said in other words, my loving spouse, the
only begotten son of God, came down from heaven out of the bosom of his
father, into his garden here in this world, which he created for the elects
sake, adorned and beautified it, commending it to them as a paradise of
delight, for to dress and keep it, to the end, that they having once rooted
out the thorns of errors and impieties, might make deep furrows in it, with
the plough of Gods word, wherein might be sown spices and sweet odors, which
afterward taking deep root might grow up, that is to say, the elect and
faithful souls might receive profit thereby, and in process of time gather
roses, that is to say, the sons of God divided in the world, but united in
faith and charity: and afterward translate or lay them in the barn or heaven
of all happiness. And there she says, I will embrace and love my well-beloved,
and my well-beloved shall embrace and love me, in such sort, that I cannot hope
for greater happiness and joy, to bring me unto the top of felicity: because
this is the cause why the bridegroom came into the world, to draw all things
unto him, to the end, that amongst the elect and regenerate, the fullness of
joy of the Bridegroom might be fulfilled in the Spouse, as it were among those
that feed among roses and lillies. And the second verse is an exaggeration,
showing that her mind was pricked with wonderful great zeal of charity,
because it was inflamed and burned within her: as if she should have said, He
descended and came down into me, and therefore if you will find him, you must
seek him in me.

The words of the Bridegroom unto the Bride.
Thou art beautiful my love, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, terrible as an
army with banners. Thou art beautiful, etc. Whence is it that the chaste
spouse of Christ is so courteous and charitable? unless it be of Christ's
spirit, in whom she believes: and therefore he does well to call her
beautiful and comely. And he calls her his love or friend by grace, because
by nature she merited not this love of the Bridegroom. But therefore was she
comely and fair, because he elected and chose, decked and trimmed her, and so
loved her, that he provided all things necessary for her salvation in most
plentiful and abundant sort. And because Jerusalem in the time of king
Solomon was richer then any other city, in gold, silver, strong men, peace,
joy, and abundance of all corporal and temporal goods: therefore was there
no better way to set forth the beauty of the Church, but by co^paring it unto
Jerusalem, the city of God: especially whereas the Church is a certain
pleasant city of God, abounding in all manner of spiritual goods. Neither is
the Church only beautified, and adorned with all manner of graces and virtues,
which shine in her: but she is terrible also, or rather maiestical and portly,
made invincible by the power of the Bridegroom: and always triumphing over all
the world, and wicked worldlings therein contained. Turn away thine eyes from
me, for they overcome me: thine hair is like a flock of goats, which look
down from Gilead.

Turn away, etc. The Bridegroom falls afresh in comme^ding and praising of
the bride, using the very same words which she used before in the 4. chap.
wherefore whereas the spouse is so glorious and great, by means of the
bridegroom, he desires no further thing at her hands, but that she would
withal manner of confidence and trust, behold and look upon him, nothing
distrusting his love or kindness toward her, assuring her self, that it could
not but be right pleasant in his eyes, which is the husband of the Church, that
his goodness and loving kindness should be believed, and embraced of the
faithful: and he goes forward in commending the spouse for many good parts
which were in her, because he him self is the head of the Church, and therefore
he should not seem so much to commend himself, as his spouse: but he commends
the hairs of her head, which may be taken here in this place for the chief
of the Church, as Apostles, teachers, and expounders of the word: hanging down
his head, that is, depending upon the spiritual influences of his graces for
the better ornament of the bridegroom with mutual love and concord. And these
hairs are likened unto a fair flock of goats which come from the pleasant
pastures of mount Gilead, the spouses eyes, as it has been above declared in
the fourth cha. signify the judgment of the holy Ghost, and whereas it is
said, that the Spouse was overcome, Thus it is in Italian.
waxed proud, or took great glory in them, and all this after a good and
godly sort, therefore the bridegroom wills them to turn them away from him,
not but that he was greatly pleased with them, for so we must always
understand him, least we mistake him, and be deceived our selves: for the
meaning of the words is this, I am already delighted and pleased with thy eyes,
that is to say, with the knowledge of the godly and righteous judgments of the
spirit of God which fully rests in them, in so much that they do is it were
kindle my love toward thee, inflaming my zeal, and increasing the joy which I
conceive by thee, so that I can hardly endure the veheme^cy of my love, it so
burns within me. The other words which follow are expounded in the aforenamed
place and chapter. There are 60. Queens and 80. concubines, and of the damsels
without number. The Church of God is one Church in the true unity of the
spirit, this Church has two mothers, one a fleshly mother, and the other a
spiritual mother, of the first we have entreated already in the third chap.
of the second, that is to say, of the spiritual mother, are these words
spoken here in this verse: for out of doubt these words are not intended of the
carnal Church, and therefore they must needs be meant of that Church which
consists in the spirit. The Bridegroom calls this Church a dove, that is to
say, spiritual: and he adds moreover, his dove, because it is by means of
his spirit, that she is spiritual: for without it she could not be accounted
a dove. Furthermore, we may, for ought that I know, take this mother for the
regenerating grace of God, which electeth the simple, and sustaineth and
vpholdeth the elect: and this is commended of the Queens, concubines, and young
damsels: by whom we are to understand the faithful, because they are made of a
wicked and incredulous generation, a Church and congregation of the elect,
which is continually reviled, blasphemed, and contradicted Furthermore, these
concubines and Queens are the kings wives, because it is no strange phrase in
the scripture, to call the concubines by the name of wives: although it be
evident out of the old testament, that the chief of them were called wives,
and the rest concubines: as it is manifest by Abraham's wives. Thus the^ the
whole Church being considered together, is one perfect spouse of Christ, called
a dove, because of the gifts of the holy Ghost, which are contained in her:
and the more special, particular, and greater Churches are called Queens, the
lesser concubines, because although they be threescore in number, that is
enough, yet these are fourscore, that is more, for indeed the lesser Churches
are more in number then the greater, the young damsels are the faithful souls
without number, because there are many which are unknown to us.

The Text.
9 Who is she that looks forth as the morning, fair as the moon, pure as
the sun, terrible as an army with banners.

10 I went down to the garden of nuts, to see the fruits of the valley, to see
if the vine budded, and if the pomegranates flourished.

11 I knew nothing, my soul set me as the chariots of my noble people.

12 Return, return o Shulamite return: return that we may behold thee, what
shall thou see in the Shulamite, but as the company of an army?


The Commentary.
THe Church is the morning, which has not yet received the fulness of her
light, which she shall receive in glory: the M^^^e is the truth of Christ's
doctrine* which shines in the darkness, but the darkness comprehended it not,
Ioh. 1. The Sun as Christ Jesus. Esa. 60. verse. 20. Thou shall have no more
Sun to shine by day, neither shall the brightness of the moon shine unto
thee, for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and thy God, thy glory.
Thy ^un shall never go down, neither shall the moon be hid: for the Lord shall
be thine everlasting light. Thus then the Church is fair, but fair as the
moon, that is fair as the truth, because all her beauty and fairness
comes from thence: for so great is her beauty and comeliness, as her faith
is great in Gods word, if her life be answerable thereunto: afterward she is
elected as the su^ Christ, who in all the elect is said to be the first borne,
because others are elected and predestined unto salvation from the beginning
for his sake: that she is terrible as an army wit^ banners. It has been
already showed yo^ in the beginning of this chap: where you may read the very
same words. And this interrogatiue kind of speech, Who is she? are the words
of Christ spoken by the way of admiration, to make the glory of the Church
more known unto all the world. I went dow^ to the garden of nuttes, to see the
fruits of the valley, to see if the vine budded, and if the pomegranates
flourished. I went down etc. He calls the Church a garden of nuts, because
the kernel and sweetness thereof is contained under an hard shell of
adversity. Christ came down into this garden, to preserve the fruits of the
waters or torrents, Thus it is in Italian.
that is to say, of the elect, which are as trees planted by the rivers of
waters, as it is in the first Psalm. To see whether the vine budded, (...) to
say, the faith of those elect, of the elect which continually have their faiths
acco^pani^d and followed with good works: and we may, observe this in these
words of Christ unto the Church, I went down, that there is nothing which may
any way belong or appertain unto the good of the Church, but he reuealeth and
makes it known unto her.

The Spouse speaks unto the Bridegroom.
I knew nothing, my soul set me as the chariots of my noble people* I knew
nothing, etc. Christ delivered unto the spouse the manner of his coming down
unto her, and that in the verse immediately going before, to whom she replyeth
after this manner, I knew not, that is to say, I marked not that you were so
near me, till you bewrayed your self unto me by your sweet and pleasant
words, likewise I knew not when thou departed^ from me, unless it pleased
thee to reveal the same unto me, and the reason is, because no man knows the
hidden secrets and mysteries of God, unless it be God and him* unto whom God
reuealeth them: and it follows, my soul. The soul of the Church is Christ,
and it is a very usual and significatiue kind of speech to express a man's
love, because he that loves a thing earnestly and vehemently, calls that
which he loves, his soul: so that the righteous man which loves Christ,
says, that Christ is his soul, he set me as the chariots of my people* which
run willingly in the course of Gods words, but although they be willing in
spirit, and ready in mind, yet they draw after them heavy and weak chariots
or burdens, and therefore I will go draw those chariots, I will enter into
them, and confirm the weak and frail ones, with the doctrine of piety,
comfort those that are comfortless, and as much as I can frame my self wholly
unto their service, caring not what shall happen unto me, so that I may win
some unto the Gospel. And hence it was that S. Paul boasted of his infirmities
and labors which he suffered, and endured for Gods people.

The words of the young damsels unto the Spouse.
Return, return, o Shulamite return: return, that we may behold thee, what
shall you see in the Shulamite, but as the companions of any army? Return
etc. It has been oftentimes declared unto you before, that by the name of
damsels, or young virgins, are signified the faithful people of God, which are
all renewed in Christ, and every one of them has a youngnesse or youth of
mind: these viewing and beholding the great care, and diverse troubles of the
Church, which she suffers and endures for their sakes, are constrained to
rejoice in the true charity thereof, because it is proper unto the faithful
alone, to rejoice and be glad in the Lord, when they see the love of others
toward the^, which they desire and study (as much as in them lies) to
immitate and express. Therefore these are the words of the faithful unto the
Church of God, which is so careful and pensive for their good. Return o
Shulamite, that is to say, O thou peaceable and quiet spouse of Christ, because
that she ought to be a peaceable spouse of her peaceable husband Christ, to the
end that her nature may be answerable unto her name, and the thing concord and
concur with the words. The doubling and repetitio^ of the word return,
discovers the greatness of their affections, and whence should she return?
whence should she come? from labors and grief, from sorrow and trouble^ for
verily we can not but see how the Church is vexed and tormented, watches and
fasteth, labors and sweateth, and all this she is content to receive at the
hands of the wicked, for the behoof and good of the godly, and therefore no
marvel if they have compassion on her, and call unto her, not to disease or
disquiet her self, by putting her self to much trouble and sorrow, but that
she would rest a while from her labors, and return unto the comfortable places
of the holy scriptures, to the end, that out of the scripture they may learn
and see what things are to be done with ease and quietness, and what with care
and trouble. And briefly, this is that which the young virgins desire and
covet for to know, what the Church of God is, and where it is in time of
prosperity and adversity: and this is a thing most studiously to be observed
and noted, that without the knowledge of the Church, we cannot well attain
unto the knowledge of Christ, and they are so fast linked and bound together,
that if you know one, you may easily know to other.

The seventh Chapter.
1 How beautiful are thy goings with shoes, o Princes daughter: the joints of
thy thighs are like jewels: the work of the hand of a cunning workman.

2 Thy navel is as a round cup that wants not licour: thy belly is as an
heap of wheat compassed about with lillies.

3 Thy two breasts are as two young Roes that are tvvins*


The Commentary.
The words of the Bridegroom unto the Bride.
HE begins here in this place, as it is manifest by the sequel thereof to
praise and command the Church whom he cannot choose but love, as being his only
dear spouse: and his meaning and purpose is to say, and show no more then
Isaiah says in his 52. cha. Nahum. 1. and Romans 10. How beautiful are the feet
of the^ that declare and publish peace, that bring good tidings and publish
salvation, And the Church of God, the true spouse of God is she which does
truly preach these good tidings, because she alone declares unto us the word
of God, whereunto we must lean, and these goings are said to be beautiful
with shoes, which words are spoken by way of similitude, to show and instruct
us, that as those which will go any far journey must be well shod: so the
professors and ministers of the Gospel, which are to go a far journey to
preach the Gospel throughout the whole world, must be most ready to declare
the truth unto all men; and verily they may be then said to be ready, and
never before, when they do teach his word faithfully and sincerely. So then
beautiful are the goings of the. Church with shoes, because when she is sent
of God, she is most willing and ready to declare unto all men the words of
salvation, and thus you may see, how Christ commends his own good gifts in
the Church, and that before the young virgins, to wit, the souls of the
faithful, because he would have us all to know, what manner of thing the
Church is, and I doubt not, but that it so comes to pass by the singular
providence and wisdom of God* that there are so many places in this book of
the Canticles, where the Church commends Christ, and is again commended of
him, because we should know what a necessary point of doctrine this is to be
repeated, and ingeminated in the ears of the faithful, seeing that the
ignorance and want thereof, has almost seduced and beguiled the whole world.
In the second place he prayseth the Church for her unspotted fruitfulness,
because her thighs signify the power and virtue of bringing forth others by
the word, being like unto precious jewels, and hereby is meant the divine gifts
of the holy Ghost, which do adorn, beautify, and make fertile the souls of
the faithful. And be says, that they are the work of a cunning workman,
because they are, the works of almighty God, the most ingenious and cunning
workemaister that ever was, who has all power and virtue to do whatsoever him
lists, who powers his graces down upon us, which make us to be far more
excellent and pure then we were before, and without whose help we cannot do
any thing at all, thy navel is as a round cup that wants not licour, thy
belly is as an heap of wheat compassed about with lillies. Thy navel, what
is this round basin or cup, but the doctrine of the Gospel, which never
wants the licour of Gods spirit, which is still put into it? And here by the
way we are to consider of how little estimation the faithful are at the first
time when they are borne, unless they be recreated and refreshed with the
lively licour of Gods word, which when they have once tasted, they shall never
need any more moisture, having the continual dew of Gods spirit, whereby they
are enabled and made powerful to multiply and beget other sons unto their
husband, and the seed whereby they do conceive and bring forth, is the word
of God, and then this is the exposition of these words; To the end that thou
sholdest beget children unto me* there needs no carnal imbracings or
copulation, as in the generation of men's bodies, because that when thou were
first affianced and betrothed unto me by faith, thou did receive the spirit
and gifts of the holy Ghost, whereby thou may be able to conceive, and
bring forth children unto God. Faith and unfeigned charity is the copulation
which is requisite in the procreation of these spiritual children, and
therefore there needs no outward seed of the flesh, because we have the
seed of Gods word, which is most effectual to the conceiving and bringing
forth of the fruits of good works, and this wonderful, strange and pure
kind of fertility, is yet made more plain by these words following, thy
belly is as an heap of wheat, compassed about with lillies. Thy belly. As if
he should have said, even as in a heap of wheat there are many grains of
corn, so within thy fertile womb, there are contained many multitudes of
those which thou have conceived for me, and because thou art full or heavenly
blessings, no doubt of it, but thou will bring them forth in their due time
and season, and she conceaueth these blessings when she believes, but brings
them forth when they are done in faith, and this belly is compassed about with
lillies, by the lillies we may understand the faithful, because the womb of
the Church is wholly compassed about with the lillie-white innocence of the
faithful, thy two breasts are as two young* Roes that are twins, thy two, the
two breasts in this place, signify the old Testament and the New, the doctrine
of the Prophets, and the doctrine of the Apostles which may be very well
compared unto young Roes, either for their purity and whiteness, or else,
because they do run about the whole world, as the young Goats do leap and
skippe about the hills, and for the farther exposition of this place, we must
entreat the gentle Reader to return back again unto the fourth Chapter,
where he shall find this verse wholly interpreted: only we will note this by
the way, that he calls them twins, because it is the self same God and
father, which is the author and father of both Testaments.

The Text.
4 Thy neeke is like a tower of iuorie: thine eyes are like the fish pooles in
Heshbon, by the gate of Beth-rabbim: thy nose is as the tower of Lebanon, that
looks toward Damascus.

5 Thine head upon thee is as a skarlet, and the bu^ke of thine head like
purple: the king is tied in the rafters.

6 How fair art thou, and how pleasant art thou, o my pleasure?

7 This thy stature is like a palm tr^e, and thy breasts like clusters.

8 I said, I will go ^p into the palm tree, I will take hold of her boughs:
thy breasts shall now be like the clusters of the vine: and the savor of thy
nose like apples.

9 And the roof of thy mouth like good wine, which goes straight to my
well-beloved, and causes the lips of the ancient to speak.


The Commentary.
The neck is faith, as it is evident out of the first and fourth Chapters, and
this place may be thus expounded, as if a man had a tower of iuorie, doubtless
it would be a very precious and strong place: so in like manner, if a man have
faith, he has a most firm, strong and precious tower and rock of defense,
against which the gates of hell shall never be able to prevail: but of this
there has been sufficiently spoken in the places above mentioned. Moreover, he
commends her for her fine eyes, which signify nothing else but the
judgments of the Church, which are as clear, bright, and pure, as the most
^^eare waters in the fish-pooles of Hesebon, which are the lively fountains of
truth, and pure waters of Gods word, which the bridegroom has in great
abundance, and of the abundance of his goodness we all receive that belong
unto the faithful churches. And these fish-pooles are near unto the gate of
Beth-rabbim, that is, if a man interpret it, the gate of the daughter of a
multitude, that is, wherein many are contained, or to whom many belong,
according to the phrase and manner of speaking of the Hebrews, is the Church,
which may be very fitly called, a daughter of multitudes begotten by the word
of God, whose gate is Christ. In this gate is their great abundance and
plenty of fountains and fishpooles of living water, that is to say, of truth,
grace, and Gods divine justice. Furthermore, he goes onward in praising her
for her nose, which is a signification of virtue; for thereby do we smell the
sweet savors of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ: wherefore, as they which
are situated upon the top of a tower on the pleasant hill of Lebanon, do
partake the sweet sent of the spices which grow thereon; so he that stands
upon the strong tower of the Church, and has sure footing on this rock, to
wit, of faith, which is noted by the similitude of a rock or tower must needs
be perfumed with the sweet smell of Christ's ointments: for because he is in
the Church, and the rest not so for the same reason: and he says, that this
tower of faith looks toward Damascus. Where he takes Damascus for all the
carnal minded men, which are indeed nothing else but a sack of blood: because
this is the right signification of the word in the original. Against these
does the strong tower, that is to say, the faith of the Church, look most
oppositely and directly, because the judgments and affections of the Church
are clean contrary unto them: and the head of the Church, as we have before
proved unto you, is the Bridegroom Christ: a pleasant and worthy Bridegroom,
high as mount Carmel, and fruitful as mount Carmel: for all these things have
been truly spoken, and may be very well verified of Christ, the head of the
Church, for he is most high and stately, fruitful, and abounding in the
corn of truth, or rather all manner of fruits spring from him, and without
him it is not possible for any man to budde, or bring forth either fruit or
leaves. Finally, we are sed with his corn, that is to say, with his Spirit
and truth, as often as we believe in him, as it is in the sixth chapter of John
and 32. verse, where he commanded the Jews to eat and drink him by faith.
And Christ here, as in many other places of the Canticles, commends himself
in the Church, and the Church in him: for when he praises the head of the
Spouse, what does he else but commend himself? by and by afterward he
commends the Spouse in commending himself: for otherwise the Spouse
deserves no commendarious, unless it be for his sake. He proceeds further
yet to magnify and extol her hair: now the hair is nothing else but the
doctrine and deeds of Christ, and the king which he talks of is God, the
purple the holy Ghost, and perfect charity, the watering places, the writings
of God and the Prophets, where all the flocks of the Christians are to be
watered. And the hair of Christ is compared and likened unto the purple of
some mighty Prince, because all that which he either did or taught, was
derived from the source of the holy Ghost, and fountain of true charity, and
the king is tied to the watering places, because Gods holy spirit is inserted
and ingrafted within the writings of the holy scripture, and books of the
Prophets, where he is always present, and by them he makes known the love of
God unto the godly minds: moreover he continues to praise the Church, by
rehearsing the general commendations thereof, and confounding or huddeling the
praises thereof, together into one short sentence, saying, o fair art thou. O
thou Church and congregation of the faithful, which art most loving and
pleasurable unto thy spouse, and that in the pleasures of thy Christ, whilst
thou reioycest in him alone, and none but him, for otherwise thou sholdest be
the most miserable and distressed wretch in the world, receiving no help and
succor from him, for no man that walks in strange pleasures from Christ, can
have any comeliness or beauty before the Lord. Again she is commended for her
husband, and for her stature, in these words: This thy stature is like a
palmetree, and thy breasts like clusters. The palmetree is a tree that has a
sound trunk, high and straight; but the bark or rind thereof is rugged,
hard, and deformed, being broad and equally big at top, bowing her head every
way downward, which yields plenty of a kind of sweet fruit called dates,
which grow so plentifully upon this tree, that they be like unto the clusters
of vines: and this is the stature of Christ's spouse: for she is sound because
of the root and strength of faith: somewhat high and tall, which is so
straight in the top with faith, and the consideration of heavenly things:
that she boweth or swaggereth not at all, neither to the right hand, nor to
the left from the word of God: she has a hard, rough, and filthy bark,
because she is yet a sinner, having not crucified the old man, but being
always subject unto adversities, storms and troubles: above on the top of
the tree, that is to say, in Christ the head of the Church there be many fine
heights and breadthes, and works of charity stooping every way unto the
necessities and infirmities of her neighbors and brethren: here are to be
gathered most sweet and pleasant fruits, because there is nothing more pleasant
and sweet then the love of the Church, and as it is said, the Church is the
palmetree, which our savior Christ went up into, when he powered down his
heavenly graces from heaven. Again, he went up this palmetree, when more
particularly he revealed unto his faithful the knowledge of his majesty.
And he took hold of the boughs thereof, that by touching of him, he might give
them some influence, and cause them more and more for to prosper and increase.
The breasts of the Church are compared and likened unto the clusters of the
vine: because as there are many stones in a cluster of grapes, so true and
perfect charity is not idle, but brings forth many godly works. The last
commmendation which he gives of the spouse, is of the roof of her mouth,
which is the taste and feeling of Gods spirit, which is like the best wine,
because it is most pleasant in taste, comfortable to the mind, and without any
mixtion or infusion of any strange liquor, makes a man drunken after a most
profitable and wholesome kind of sort.

The Text.
10 I am my welbeloueds, and his desire is toward me.

11 Come my well-beloved, let us go forth into the field: let us remain in the
villages.

12 Let us get up early to the vines, let us see if the vine flourish, whether
it has budded the small grape, or whether the pomegranates flourish: there
will I give thee my love.

13 The mandrakes have given a smell, and in our gates are all sweet things,
new and old: my well-beloved, I have kept them for thee.


The Commentary.
The words of the Spouse unto the Bridegroom.
These are the words of the spouse directed unto the Bridegroom, containing
thus much in effect. As long as I endeavor and study to please thee, so long I
may persuade my self most assuredly that I shall want nothing. And
furthermore, that he will love and embrace me as his most dear spouse and
loving married wife, according unto the holy and godly laws of matrimony,
because my desire shall be toward him. Come my well-beloved, let us go forth
into the field, let us remain in the villages. Fields, vines, and villages
are out of the town, within the town hurres, sturres and tumults: abroad a
man may find rest and quietness, but at home, that is, within Gods City, to
wit, the Church, we are to look for nothing but stirs and tumultes, either
whiles she is tossed up and down, and vexed with the care of providing things
necessary for the welfare of the Church, or in making continual war and
fight with old Adam and the wicked: and she is said to go forth, when she
is delivered and freed out of the hands of them, or when she can be most
willing and content to suffer and endure all manner of rebukes for the
testimony of a good conscience, or for Christ's sake: reposing all her trust
and confidence in God, and utterly distrusting her own works or merits.
Afterward she may be truly said to remain in the villages, when she has
the benefit of Christ's peace. Early in the morning, that is to say, when she
is illuminated and lightened thereunto by Christ, because all things must be
done in his name, and in his name we are to seek for the flower of true faith.
And the grapes which are not yet fully ripe, are the works and deeds of faith,
which are said to be green, unripe, or somewhat sower, because as long as we
live here in this wicked world, and carry about us this frail and brittle
flesh, there remains some dregs of imperfection in us. And furthermore, it
is said that they went to see whether the Pomegranates did flourish: that is to
say, they did seek and inquire after many good works, done in good and
orderly sort: likewise we may understand hereby the well ordered and governed
congregations of the faithful which are red with charity: and this is the
only order and method to be observed of us in governing and guiding the works
of the Church, that all things be done and ordered according unto the
prescribed rule and Canon of Gods word: for otherwise how can they be said to
be ordered at all? The violets have given a smell, and in our gates are all
sweet things, new and old: my well-beloved, I have kept them for thee. So then
the Spouse goes unto the villages with Christ, that is to say, by his means
she comes unto the full fruition of true rest and tranquillity, because the
violets, which do most commonly grow abroad in the fields, are taken for the
faithful, whose place and habitation is in the fields, that is to say, in
peace: because as they are sometimes oppressed with the tumultes of the City,
that is to say, assaulted with diverse and grievous temptations: so at another
time they enjoy such rest of mind, and peace of conscience, that they seem to
have arrived at the haven of all happiness, and to be safely brought unto the
pleasures and delights of the country. It follows, And in our gates are all
sweet things, to wit, in the gates of our villages, which are these, justice,
righteousness, hope, the grace of God, wisdom, a clean heart, and a pure
understanding: because the faithful do remain and dwell in these villages most
peaceably and securely: and the gates of these villages or towers are these,
faith and truth, together with the fear of God, which is the beginning of
wisdom: and these are for the most part common with Christ and the spouse,
and therefore he calls them our gates. Round about these gates and villages
there is great plenty of good works growing, which are to be reaped, when
the harvest and seasonable time of charity comes.

The eight Chapter.
1 O that thou vverest as my brother that sucked the breast of my mother: I
would find thee without, I vvoulde kiss thee, then they should not despise
thee.

2 I will lead thee and bring thee into my mothers house: there thou shall
teach me: and I will cause thee to drink spiced wine, and new wine of the
pomegranate.

3 His left hand shall be under mine head, and his right shall embrace me.

4 I charge you, o daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not up nor vvaken my
love until she please.


The Commentary.
The words of the Spouse unto the Bridegroom.
OH that thou werest as my brother, etc. Christ is as it were a brother unto
those that are of the congregation of the faithful as he says in the third
chap, of Mark. verse. 35. Whosoever does the will of God, he is my brother, and
my sister, and mother, and Saint Paul in the 8. chapt. to the Romans, calls
him the first borne among many brethren. And he was made, as it were a
brother, when he took flesh, and was in outward show like unto us men. Now
as every brother, that is to say, every faithful man sucketh the breasts of
his mother the Church which begat him by the word of God, that is to say,
receives aid and comfort of her charity and love: so in like manner Christ,
although indeed he received not any comfort from her breasts, yet
nevertheless we may truly say, that he did suck her breasts, because he
took delight and comfort in them. For the two breasts signify love and
charity, as it has been before showed you. And this husband Christ is he
whom the Church desires to find in the streets of the City, that is to
say, in the multitudes of peoples, because it is her hearty desire and wish,
that if it be possible she may be seen and known of all by faith, and
finally to the honor and glory of God, and example of others: she desires
to kiss him, that is, humbly to request Gods favor and grace through Christ,
wherefore the Spouse here in this place seems to be willing before men to
confess her self to be a most wretched, vile, and miserable sinner, making
daily intercessions and prayers unto God through Christ for his merciful
favor, and therefore she desires that she may have leave to kiss him
publicly in the streets* and what is meant hereby? it appears by the words
following, then they should not desp^se me. As who would say, I know that thou
do most lovingly embrace and kiss me in secret, but I beseech thee, o my
gentle and most loving Savior, to kiss me openly, and in the presence of
whole multitudes, to the end that all men may know and learn by my example, to
confess themselves to be miserable sinners, wretched persons, and in the state
of damnation, and so consequently sue for Gods favor and remission of sins,
thorough thee their Savior and Redeemer, again thy desire and prayer is, that
thy most glorious and holy name, may be sanctified among all men, and that no
man would despise thee, but contrariwise, every one would magnify and extol
thee with all their hearts. I will lead thee, and bring thee into my mothers
house: there thou shall teach me: and I will cause thee to drink spiced wine,
and new wine of the pomegranate. I will lead thee, etc. Finally he shows the
duty of the spouse, she says, I will lead thee. Christ is led of them that
pray unto him by faith, whither they will, because he hears them, and
grants their requests. Thus the Church brings him into the house of her
carnal mother of whom we have spoken sufficiently already. It follows,
there thou shall teach me. She which was but lately informed and taught by
Christ's spirit, waxes now more earnest and zealous to be taught and
instructed in higher points of doctrine, and she will have none to teach her
but Christ, to whom she speaks with great boldness and confidencie, saying,
thou shall teach me, and no other but thee: for there is nothing which the
Church does so much desire, as to be taught of her husband and bridegroom
Christ, and to hear his voice, that is to say, his words and no man's else,
and after that she has been taught of the bridegroom, what remains then for
her to do? then she must cause him to drink of the best wine, or spiced wine.
Now this new wine of the pomegranates, is the knowledge of the truth, and
verity of the scriptures, which is seasoned with the taste of the holy Ghost:
and the pomegranates are the congregations of the faithful, being red with the
holy Ghost, and directed or governed by charity, that is to say, living
altogether by the rule and canon of Gods holy word, which is most pure and
undefiled, which order must necessarily be kept of all those which mean to
attain unto salvation. Their new wine, is the delectation and sweetness of
Gods spirit, whereby they live and walk, and have their being, and the
bridegroom may be very well said to drink of this wine, because he is greatly
delighted therewithal, for he may be said in some sort to drink which finds
a thing which pleases him greatly. Last of all, she thirsts to drink of
this new wine, that is to say, after the works of faith, which Christ may be
very well said to drink, whiles he sees these things in the faithful, and is
well pleased with them. His left hand shall be under mine head, and his right
hand shall embrace me. The careful and loving spouse enters into the house of
her carnal mother, and brings Christ along with her, she brings him
thither by sincere prayers, and preaching of the Gospel, and she follows the
matter so earnestly and faithfully withal, that she receives the truth of her
mother, and so embraces it. For having once received the truth of her mother,
that is to say, of carnal men, from whom the Church issued and came, she
becomes both the mother and the daughter, that is to say, the Church and
spouse of Christ, and last of all* being converted unto the truth, she
begins to make experience and trial of the cross, together with her
daughter, because it is impossible indeed that the cross should not be a
companion to the love of the truth* Furthermore, she sends Christ unto he^
which is her true spouse by faith, I mean his peace: and among all the
crosses, perils by sword, rebukes, tribulations, and all manner of adversities
he sends us by means of his peace, the comfortable joys of his holy spirit,
whereby his left hand is comforted of the right, unto a certain hope of
salvation* as these words are expounded above in the second Chapter, where the
very same words are to be read.

The words of the Spouse unto the young damsels.
I charge you, o daughters of Jerusalem, that you stir not up, nor waken my
love until she please. I charge you. After that the spouse the Church, had
made sufficient trial of the sharpness of Gods left hand, that is to say, had
suffered crosses and tribulations enough, she was sustained and vpholden by
Christ's right hand, wherewith he did most lovingly embrace her in her greatest
temptations, sitting even in the shadow of death, and caused her to rest most
quietly with the holy Ghost, and enjoy that peace which passed all
understanding: resting thus securely on her bed of rest, the bridegroom
(because he would have no body to trouble her) spreads the couerlet over her,
and says these words unto the young virgins, I charge you stir not up, nor
waken my love* and why then do you raise her up and waken her, by sending her
abroad amidst the troubles and turmoyles of the world, which are always
opposed against her, nay rather let her alone for a while, trouble her not,
suffer her to repose and rest her self a while in the beds of the holy
scripture, and let my holy spirit abide and dwell in her.

The Text. The speech of the young virgins.
5 Who is this that comes up out of the wilderness leaning upon her
well-beloved, I raised thee up under an apple tree, there thy mother conceived
thee.

6 Set me as a seal on thy heart, and as a signet upon thine arm: for love is
strong as death: jealousy is cruel as the grave: the coals thereof are
fiery coals, and a vehement flame.

7 Much water can not quench love, neither can the floods drown it: if a man
should give all the substance of his house for love, they would greatly
contemn it.


The Commentary.
We see here, that the Church does turn her carnal mother, and she being
converted or turned, is made one and the very self same with the Church, and
together with her, cleaves and inclines unto Gods word, notwithstanding any
cross or adversity whatsoever. And she that was before converted by her
daughter, does now seek to procure the salvation of her mother, that is to
say, of those from whom she came, for this is always a general note, that the
Church of God does seek the salvation of the wicked, and their ungodly
congregations, from whence she came, and was derived, because we were all of us
once sinners and offenders, and sprung up out of the Church of the wicked. I
say of the wicked, and not of the reprobate, because every reprobate is a
wicked person, but it follows not, that every wicked person is a reprobate:
and albeit the elect were said to be of Satan's Church before they did believe
and embrace Christ in their hearts, by a lively faith: yet nevertheless in the
eternal decree of almighty God, they were always reckoned to be of his
Church. But the young virgins look upon the spouse, and see how quietly she
sleeps amongst the daily troubles of the Gospel, profiting daily more and
more in the knowledge of the Gospel, and therefore breaking forth into a kind
of admiration, they ask who is this? as if they should have said, it is a very
strange thing, beyond all sense and reason, that she should persevere among so
many evils as do assault her. And they say, that she came up out of the
wilderness, because they sprung out of the dry and dead stock of that
abominable sect of the unbelievers, as it were out of a plain desert, whither
went she, whither did she ascend or go? verily she mounted from terrestrial,
carnal, and momentarie things, she went up unto the glorious hill of Christ,
the true Sion.

The words of the Bridegroom unto the Church after her conversion.
Under an appletree, etc. The preaching of any man whatsoever, be his gifts of
utterance and persuasion, never so good, profits us nothing, unless Christ
preach and teach us inwardly by moving of our hearts to hear the word, and
afterward by confirming and strengthening the same in our minds, when we have
heard it. The Church (as we declared unto you before) brought Christ unto her
mother, and he converted her because Christ can not be truly and properly
said to be brought to a place, unless he be entertained and lodged there. So
then he being once in friendly sort received and entertained, vouchsafes to
teach and inform her himself, delivering her the whole sum of the doctrine
of the Gospel in few words, for he says no more unto her but this, under an
apple tree, as if he should have said, thou wast before in a miserable case,
dead in sin, but I have raised thee up, and that under an appletree: that is
to say, under me, for he speaks of himself, as if he meant a third person.
We are then raised up under Christ, the true appletree of life, if we do but
believe in him by faith, and wholly depend upon him: who are there, that is to
say, under the appletree, borne by the Church, the mother of the faithful, as
under that other tree of delight in paradise, our grandmother Eve conceived and
brought us forth the sons of wickedness and corruption. Set me as a seal
on thine heart, and as a signet upon thine arm: for love is as strong as
death: jealousy is cruel as the grave: the coals thereof are fiery coals,
and a vehement flame. Set me, etc. He may be rightly said to have set Christ as
a seal on his heart, and as a signet on his arm, which can subdue and keep
under the wicked affections of the flesh, together with the works thereof: so
that he frame him self wholly unto Gods glory. For what thing else is the
heart, but the affections of the heart? and what is meant by the arm, but the
strength and force thereof, with all the works of our hands? And she yields a
reason thereof, because as she says, Love is strong at death, to wit, the love
of Christ, because he loved unto the death, and this jealousy is cruel as the
It. Hell.
grave, that is most dreadful and horrible toward hypocrites. And the
meaning of all these words is this: draw near unto me with all thy heart,
with all thy mind, and with all thy strength, and do all things in my name,
because such is the love wherewith I love thee, that I was content to die for
thee. And as for those which say they are of me, that is, of my Church, and yet
have not any seal, that is to say, faith, but the lying signs of the flesh
and the world, my jealousy and indignation shall be kindled against them as hot
as hell fire. And in that it is said, The coals thereof are fiery coals, and
a vehement flame, we are to note the vehemency and heat both of Christ's
love, and also of his jealousy, because they cause such a fire as is the fire
of Gods spirit, that is to say, a most lively and mighty fire, because the
fire of love, that is to say, the holy Ghost makes us to be inflamed with a
profitable and wholesome kind of heat. And the jealousy of this fire, that
is to say, sharp revenge and indignation consumes all the wicked and ungodly
men of the earth. Much water can not quench love, neither can the floods drown
it: if a man should give all the substance of his house for love, they would
greatly contemn it. Much water, etc. Here in this place the constancy and
stabilitie of the aforenamed Love is described and deciphered unto us: and this
is that love wherewith Christ loved his Church. And verily such was the heat of
this love, that many violent streams of inconveniences, troubles, reproaches,
tribulations, and all sorts of evils that could be devised, could not quench
it: for by the parable of a house built upon a sure rock, mentioned in the
sixth Chapter of Saint Lukes Gospel, it is evident that floods do sometimes
signify adversity. Now the love which by the virtue of the same spirit
abides in the elect, is firm and strong unto them, in as much as they are
built upon the most sure and strong rock Christ. That which follows
afterward, If a man should give all, etc. does declare to us the exceeding
great efficacy of this most sacred and holy love in all those which are truly
possessed therewith: for it is the nature of true and perfect love which
comes from the holy Ghost, to cause a man to renounce all that ever he has,
and to order him self wholly after Gods will and commandment. When riches
are offered them, they regard or esteem them not: for we see by daily
experience, that they are ready and willing to forsake all that ever they have
if occasion serve, and time so require, rather then they will seem to deny
the truth. And truly it is no great marvel neither: for where the love of
heavenly things is once accounted and esteemed of, there the possession and
fruition of all earthly and transitory things is vilified, neglected, and
disesteemed.

The Text. The words of the Spouse unto the young maids.
8 We have a little sister, and she has no breasts: what shall we do for
our sister, when she shall be spoken for?

9 If she be a wall, we will build upon her a silver palace, and if she be
a door, we will keep her in with boords of Cedar.

10 I am a wall, and my breasts are as towers: then was I in his eyes as one
that finds peace.

11 Solomon had a vine in Baal-hamon: he gave the vineyard unto keepers: every
one brings forth the fruit thereof, a thousand pieces of silver.


The Commentary.
This is the voice of the Primitive and Apostolic Church, which grew out of
the Synagogue and people of the Jews, rejoicing for the grace of God which was
spread abroad throughout all nations: and it is very fitly spoken of Solomon, to
call the Church of the Gentiles sister unto the synagogue of the Jews, because
God is father to them both, and Abraham also, by whose faith the Gentiles are
proved to be lawful sons. This is that young Church, which must be chosen
from among the Gentiles, which is called little or small, because it had but
small beginnings at the first, till afterward in process of time, by little
and little it grew up in spirit and truth, She has no breasts: because the
doctrine of the Law and of the Prophets belonged not unto the Gentiles,
neither received she any instruction of faith in God, and charity toward
her neighbor of her self: for so she was not able to minister unto her young
ones the spiritual food of both the Testaments. What then shall we do unto
our sister? Ask the Patriarchs and Prophets, ask of Christ and his Apostles,
and they will show you how the churches were to be taught, how they should be
united and knit together of the Gentiles, how they should grow up, how they
should be nourished and fed, how they should be joined in marriage with so
noble a bridegroom as the Church, how partakers of Gods favor through Christ,
how they should adorn and beautify the spouse at such a day of solemnity,
what they should do at that time, loving those things which they ought to love,
and which they knew to be loved of the bridegroom, how and in what terms they
are to commend themselves unto the bridegroom when they are brought unto him.
If she be a wall, we will build upon her a silver palace: and if she be a door,
we will keep her in with boordes of Cedar, which is thus expounded. If she be a
wall: that is, if the Church of the faithful be as strong in faith as a wall,
so that she cannot be easily overthrown, doubtless she will stand fast unto
the authority of the Scriptures, and be a spouse worthy of the holy Ghost,
and of her husband Christ: but without faith it is not possible for her to
please him, or to profit in any kind of exercise or study whatsoever.
Wherefore if she be faithful, we will build upon her a palace of silver, that
is to say, the bright shining, precious, and eternal truth, by which we may be
able without all other helps, to overthrow and fiustrate the wicked attempts
of our enemies. Afterward they devise and common among them selves how to
shut the door which is Christ, with boords of Cedar: hereby endeavoring as much
as in them lies, to make the works of the Church continually from time to
time more perfect and sincere: for this is meant only by the going in and
going out of the door.

The Church of the conuerts unto the Spouse.
I am a wall, and my breasts are as towers, then was I in his eyes as one that
finds peace. She replieth unto them and faith, that she is a wall, that is
to say, founded and grounded in the faith of Christ: for it is very necessary
for every Christian man or woman, to yield a reason of his faith to every one
that shall demand or ask it of him. Likewise she says, My breasts are as
towers, that is to say, charity and love in entertaining and receiving others.
And this is meant hereby, being directed and guided by my well-beloved husband
Christ Jesus, I shall be able to teach others and strengthen them which are
borne sons unto God by the Gospel: and since that time I have received such
favor and kindness at my husband Christ's hands, that I am in his eyes as one
that finds peace. And in these words she seems to ascribe all the glory
unto God, for comforting and strengthening her, and giving her such strong
breasts.

The Church of the Conuerts.
Solomon had a vine in Baal-hamon: he gave the vineyard unto keepers: every one
brings forth the fruit thereof, a thousand pieces of silver. Here she yeldeth
yet a more ample testimony of her faith, saying, in that, that is to say, the
Catholic Church, which contains so many nations. Salomo^, that is to say,
Christ our true Solomon and peaceable king, had a vine in the beginning, to
wit, his universal Church, for that is his vine, And he gave the vineyard unto
keepers: as who would say, I know that it is needful and requisite, that every
one to whom the charge and ministry of the word is committed, should be
thrisecarefull to keep, and not to wast and spoil: te defend, and not to
destroy my vineyard. Every particular man of the elect may be said to bring
forth the fruit thereof, a thousand pieces of silver, that is, all that he
has, and himself also. And the fruits of this vineyard are these, the grace
of God, peace, righteousness, justice, truth, and other particular signs of
the holy Ghost and life everlasting: So that this is the sum of a Christian
man's confession, to confess Christ to be head of the vine, that is to say, of
the Church of the conuerts.

The Text.
12 But my vineyard which is mine, is before me: to thee o Solomon,
appertains a thousand pieces of silver, and two hundred to them that keep
the fruit thereof.

13 O thou that dwell in the gardens, the companions hearken unto thy voice:
cause me to hear it.

14 O my well-beloved fly away, and be like unto the Roe, or to the young Heart
upon the mountains of spices.


The Commentary.
The words of the Bridegroom unto the Church of the Conuerts.
The bridegroom confirms her sayings to be true, affirming the Church to be
before the Lord, because he is always most ready to succor and help her in
all her necessities. Wherefore he sends not wolves, but faithful ministers
and Apostles to be her keepers, in such sort, that it is not possible that any
one of them should perish.

The church of the conuerts unto the Bridegroom.
To thee appertains a thousand pieces of silver. Because the number of a
thousand is the term and bound of all other numbers, therefore it is taken for
all numbers, and then the words go thus, O Solomon; O my peaceable and loving
Christ, to thee appertains a thousand, that is, the greatest and farthermost
number: And two hundred to them that keep the fruit thereof, that is, not so
much a^ appertains unto thee.

The words of the Bridegroom unto the Bride.
O thou that dwell in the gardens, the companions hearken unto thy voice:
cause me to bear it. Here Christ speaks unto all the Church in general,
showing how acceptable and pleasant her voice is to him which she so greatly
longs for to hear, because her voice is Gods word: therefore he speaks
after this manner unto the spouse, O my loving spouse thou that dwell in the
gardens, that is to say, in the particular Churches, which are taken for
gardens. Thy companions or friends; namely those which preach and teach the
Gospel: Hearken unto thy voice; that is, are obedient unto thee, because thou
alone art able to teach them my words. Cause me to hear thy voice: which is
nothing diverse (I am sure) from my words, or contrary to the scripture: and
therefore most acceptable and pleasant unto me, because all other words which
proceed and come from the flesh, they are not my words, they are adulterous
and false words, and therefore most abominable in mine ears.

The words of the Spouse unto the Bridegroom.
O my well-beloved fly away, and be like unto the Roe, or to the young Heart upon
the mountains of spices. This mountain of spices is the Church, and therefore
the lesser and particular Churches are called mountains of spices. Christ
desired to hear the Spouse speak: the Spouse answers him by uttering the
words of perfect charity: by which words it appears how zealous she is of
Christ's glory, and the knowledge of his truth. And furthermore the great
desire wherewith she is inflamed toward the salvation of all men. And this is
briefly the sense and meaning of these words, O my well-beloved fly away: as a
man when he flies away in great have; or as the Roes or young Hearts do skirre
it along most nimbly upon the tops of the hills: so do thou make have, and
tarry not to come unto the mountains of spices, that is to say, to come both
unto the Church universal, and also to be present and ayding unto all the
particular Churches, least happily they may be constrained to receive any other
besides thee, and so by estraunging themselves from thee, perish eternally.
Therefore gentle Christ come quickly, to help and succor, to direct and guide
us unto the right way, which leads us unto life everlasting.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
In the Preface, for the title or inscription of the Song of songs, read the
title or inscription is the Song of songs.

Page 8. line 12. for man, read men. p. 14. l. 6. for sunnie, read sin. p.
21. l. 23. for particularly, read patiently, p. 23. l. 10. for houses read
horses. p. 39. l. 13. for with the svveete, read with svveete. p. 40. l. 28.
for gold, read God, p. 51. l. 7. for the people, read his people. p. 51. l.
30. for and makes it, read makes it. p. 64.1. for to, read and p. 79. l. 7.
for of seeming works that issue forth from faith, read of seeming good
works but not proceeding from faith: the other, a chain of good works
indeed, that is to say, of works that issue forth from faith. p. 108. l. 12.
for then, read that. p. 121. l. 11. for those elect which is a companion,
etc. read of the elect which continually have their faiths accompanied and
follovved with good works.


