A TREATISE, HOW BY THE WORD OF God, Christian men's Almose ought to Be
distributed.

Math. VI. WHen thou geuest thine Almose, let not the Trompettes be blown
before the: as Hypochrites do in their Sinagoges, and Streates, to have Praise
of Men.

To the Reader.
BEcause in these days, like as not many years sithc, many lusty and sturdie
persons be suffered to beg, men counterfaitinge horrible deseases and
infirmities, fit by the commen ways crauinge Almose: diverse go about
Westminster Haulle, and other places, with gloves, under pretense to gather for
the marriage of poor Maidens, but in dead to have wherewith to coople with
Harlottes, or to riotte at Dice: And some crafty Hypocrites, no Friars in
coats, but more subtle the^ Friars in manners, under color to relieve and
mayntain Orphans, poor wydowes, poor Scolers, and other, gather much, but
put all into their own purses, or bestow little, and that after their own
Fantasy, and not indifferently to every one as his neade requires, and
Gods word prescribes, And so by all these means, and many other, good
men's charities be utterlie abused: I thought it uery necessary, to setforthe
in English the mind and opinion of the Reverend Father, and Excellent clerk
Master Martyne Bucer, touching the right geuinge and distribution of Almose,
and provision for the poor, declared in his book entitled De regno Christi,
made for the Most Blissed King Edward which, if good people will follow, no
doubt but all these kind off subtle theaues shall be forced to give over
their occupation, And Hypochrisie it self will schortlie lose one of the
principal feathers of her winge. And if they will not, let them take heed,
that whilst they goo about with their painted Charity to get A little uayn
glory, they purchase them selfs at length, by maynteninge the Lewd,
everlasting damnation. But I have A good hope, that many err by ignorance,
who being rightly instructed, will show them selfs conformable to Gods
will, and do as he co^maundethe: wherbye they may find at length his merciful
favor.

Fare well.
THE ORDER OFF THE provision for the poor.
ALMYGTIE God that sets up the Humble, and pulls down the Proud, that
gives richesse, and takes it away, plainly commands his people, that they
should not suffer any to lack emonge them. Which commandment the primatyue
Church of Christ at Jerusalem kept with all reverence and devotion: wherbie
there was such abundance of Almese given by Good men, as relieved eueryemans
necessity, and so emonge them there was not one, that was not provided for.
Afterward, that this provision and gatheringe for the poor might be the
better looked unto, and contynew, the Apostelles inspired with the hollie ghost,
by consent of the hole congregation, appointed to that Ministry seven Men of
honest report and fame, full of the hollie ghost, and wisdom, on whom they
laid their hands, for a sign of their admission. And so this ordenaunce and
provision for the poor was uery devoutly observed, till Antichrist with his
fluddes of wyckednes, ouerflowed the Church of Christ. Those that were called
to that hollie ministry, were named the Deacons of the Church: who albeit
they ought to be assistaunt to the Elders of the Congregation, in the
conservation and execution of the Discipline of Christ, and the Administration
of the Sacraments: yet their chief Office and duty was, to keep the names of
the poor in the Congregation of the Christians, to know every man's lif, and
behavior, And of the commen Almose of the faithful, to distribute to every
one, as much as was sufficient for his necessary relieffe. For those that may
get their lyuinge by their labor and trauayl, and will not, ought to be put
out of the Church: He that do the not labor, let him not eat, says the
Apostell. Since then it is the commandment of god, to relieve the poor and
neadie, and to see that none lack: all such as mind fully to receive the
Kingdom of Christ, ought to labor earnestly, that this ordenaunce be
restored in to Christ's Church. For those that have the goods of the world
and see their Brethern lack, and have not compassion on them: the love of
good does not dwell in them, and so also neither the Kingdom of Christ is in
them.

And all those that hear Christ, and the hollie ghost, will endeavor and
labor to ordain and do all good things in such order and manner, as they
know the lord, and the hollie ghost has appointed.

And since it is manifest, that god earnestly forbadde, that his people should
suffer any to beg emo^ge them, and that his goodness also ordained, that the
poor should be looked unto by certain chosen men in the Church, and that good
men's devotions should be distributed to every nedie person, as his
necessity requires: it is with out all doubt, that all those pray with out
devotion, Let thy Kingdom come, which to their power, do not bestow all their
endouour, that this manner of prouidinge for the poor, be restored in to the
Church, which the lord him self commanded, and the hollie ghost in the
prymytiue church ordained.

By the which means it shall be prevented, that these wicked Begginge houses,
and subtlety off Hypocrites, shall not take from thee nedie menbres of Christ,
the Almose that is due to them: nor Ambition of man's praise, and thanckes, nor
uayne glory, shall defile the right office of Almose, which evil how much
it ought to be eschued, Christ uery playnlie taught, when he commanded, so to
give Almose, as the left hand may not know, what the right hand does. This
may best be done, if every man put into the Comen Chest, or Box of the
Church, to the use of the poor, as much as he may spare of that God gives
him. For when every man him self will distribute his own Almose, frist the
Institution of the hollie ghost, and the lawful Communion, Compainie, and
Fellowship of Saints is broken. Besides thalmose due to the little ones of
Christ, and so to Christ him self, is given oftener to the unworthie, then to
the worthy (for every man can not know and try such poor people as he
meets sodenlie) and also such as be not meet to have Almose, come better
instructed to beg, yea, as it were to wringe out the Almose of A man's Purse
with painted words, then those to whom it only ought to be given. Moreover
when A man gives Almose with his own hand, he does hardly put out of his
mind the desire of men's tha^ckes and uayne praises, which uaine reward when
he receaueth of men: he may not ^eke for the true and perfet reward of god.
And finally, when it is most certain, that such as give them selfs
wilfully to the trade of Begginge, be given and bent to all myschieff: what
other thing do they that nourishe them, then maynteyne and encreace the
greatest Pestilences and destructions off A commen welthe? Wherefore all such
as have wisely written how commen welthes should be well governed, have
thought that such persons were not to be suffered in A comen welthe. And
certaynlie men ought to be ashamed and lament when this right manner of
provision for the pore is restored in many contrays, which yet be under
Antichrist: such as uaunte they have received the Gospel of Christ, and
profess to be off his Kingdom, be slack to restore it, yea be hynderers off
it, saying it is an ordenaunce of Christ's Religion so necessary, and so
holsom.

To conclude, who so ever does not carefully endeavor, as much as he may, to
restore this hollie ordenaunce off the Provision for the poor, as the lord
has commanded, and the hollie ghost ordained: He does playnlie bear witness
off himself, that he does not in dead know, nor perfetlie desire Christ,
and his Kingdom, how much so ever in words he boast of Christ, and his
Kingdom.

THE MEAN TO RESTOre in to the Church the right kind of geuinge, and
distribution of Almose, and Provision for the poor.
IT is most requysite, that all Magistrates, and Governors, that desire the
promotion of the Kingdom off Christ, and the welthe of those they govern, do
procure that this godly provision for the Poor and needy be restored, even
as the Hollie Ghost has set forth unto us in the Second, Fourth, Fyfth, and
Sixth off the Acts off the Apostells. For with out it, there can be no true
fellowship or Communion off Saints. This may be don after this sort, First
that every Church have his Deacons, for the provision, and oversight of the
Poor, (as before is said,) Men off good report, and full off the Hollie
Ghost, and wisdom, and so many of them as the multitude off the People, and
off the Poor shall require.

Their Office is contained in these poynies. First they ought to make diligent
search, how many poor in dead be in every Congregation, that ought to be
provided for by the Congregation. For it belongs to all Congregations off
Christ, not only not to maintain lewd persons in their wicked Idleness:
but also to bannysh them their company, who, when they may by their own
honest labor mayntaine them self, will not labor, but live inordinatlie
consuminge the sustenaunce, that is due to the neadie and Poor off Christ.
And against such persons this Rule is to be kept, He that laboreth not, let
him not eat: That com, maundement also off the Hollie Ghost towchinge Wydowes,
ought to be expounded also off all neady. If there be any faithful man or
woman, says the Hollie Ghost, that has wydowes, let him provide, and
minister unto them: and let not the Congregation be burdened, that they,
which are right wydowes may have enough. So likewise those, that have any
neadie under them, whether they be their kynsfolkes, servants, or otherwise
joined to them by any special cause, ought to mynyster to such persons
necessaries for their lyuinges, if they be able to do it, and to spare the
Congregation, as it may be the better able to maintain and keep those, that
have no kynsfolkes, masters, or friends, that will, or can provide for them.

All men's minds ought to be moved with this fearful Judgment off the Hollie
Ghost: If there be any man, that does not provide for his own, and specially
for them off his howsholde: The same has denied the faith, and is worse then
an Infidel. For unto those, that God has by any special means joined
together, this the second principal commaundemaunt, wherein all the law is
contained and fulfilled, does chiefly belong: Thou shall love thy neighbor
as thy selffe. For those, whom God coupleth and joins to gither by the Band
off kyndred, affinity, howsolde, or any other particular means: he makes
them therbie, above all other, neighbors.

A nedde, or with Idleness and Riot, make themselfes neadie: And finalie, who
have such neighbors, that can, or do take the care to provide for them.

Such as the Deacons shall find, that neither can get their own lyuinge,
nor have off their neighbors, that do relieve them: their Names, with the
manner off their neade and behavior, they ought to write in A particular book,
And certain times to uisite them, and to call them unto them, that they may
the more certanlie know, how well and uertuouslie they use thalmose of Good
People, and what things from time to time, they neade. For as nothing will
suffice the wicked and lewd, nether have they any measure or truth in
begginge: so the Good and shamefast do cover and dissemble their neade, and
think every thing to much, that is given unto them by the Congregation.
But the Hollie Ghost has appointed and ordened the manner and end off
Distribution of Alms, that none should lack, and every one shoude have
asmoche as is sufficient for his honest relieff. And who cannot see even by
this one thing, How necessary it is for Congregations to have such Deacons
for the poor: that not rashly, but most diligently search out, and
certaynlie know the state off every one that asks the help off the
Congregation: whether, and what thing he lacks, and how much is to be given
to every one for his necessary relieff. Besides, whether they have any
Friends, that be able and ought to relieve them. For such ought by the
Congregation to be forced to relieve their own: and theru^to, as in
thexecutio^ off the rest off the discipline, the Deacons ought to be assistence
to the ministers off the word, and Elders.

The Other point off thoffice off Decons is, to keep what so ever comes to the
Church, for the use off the poor, and thereof to distribute to every one that
neadeth, asmoche as shall suffice to live A godly liff in the lord: And to
keep A perfect accoumpt off their doing, Which they must yield to the
ministers off the word, and the Elders: Procuringe, after the example off the
Apostell. Honest things not only before God, but also in the sight off all
men. Wherefore the Hollie Ghost requyrith that such Deacons should be off Good
report emonge the people off Christ. For as Men be desirous off Money: so
upon the least occasion, they suspecte evil off such as have the distribution
off commen money. Besides, the poor that have not learned, by the sprite off
Christ, to be contented, whether they have plenty, or do suffer neade, be
uery suspicious, and full off complayntes. And therefore that such Deacons
should be of the greater authority emonge the people of God, and the better
credit given unto them: the ancient Churches appointed unto them, the next
degree after the Elders. And admitted them to be Aiders in the hollie
mynysterie of thadministration, both of the word, and also of the
Sacraments. Antichrist made this office, as he did all other Mynysteries,
nothing at all, but to serve for a uaine pomp: as at this present day there
be uery few that think the Deacons office to be any other thing, then to
serve the Busshops, and Priests at Mass, and to read the gospel which
things were appointed to this office only at the first, that whilst they
provided for the poor, and did help to execute the discipline, they should be
of the greater Authority, and have the more credit emonge the people off God.
For the oversight of the possessions belonginge to Churches, and to gather the
fruytes, revenues, and rentes of those things that were given for the relief
of the poor: certain were appointed, who were called Subdeacons and Bailiffes,
that the Deacons might first give theimselfes to the right distributio^ of
such things, as were gathered for the relief of the poor, so as every one
might have that was convenient in deed to live to the lord: then to see that
those that were relieved by the Congregation, did live to serve God: And
finally, to further this Discipline emo^ge other Christians, whose life and
behauour they ought the better know and try, by the reason of gatheringe
relief for the poor. This ki^de and manner of gatheringe and distributio^ by
the Deacons, and Subdeaco^s, was observed till and in the time of Gregory the
Busshop of Rome, as appears in many his Epistells. And albeit the Deaco^s of
the Church be never so honest, and wise: yet can they not provide for the
Poor, onles they have wherewith to distribute to the poor, and therefore it
belongs to Magistrates to see, that Churches have sufficient to relieve the
poor. In time long past, the Fourth part of all Revenues, that either
belo^ged to the Spirituality, by their Possessions, or came to hit by good men's
gysts, and oblations, was taken for the relief of the poor. Besides, many
uertuous Princes, and good Men made Hospitals, and howses for the Relief off
the poor: Some for such as were Hole of body, and some for such as were
sick: So^ to keep Infantes, and some to comfort Strangers, and Banisshed
me^. But all these in co^tynuaunce of time, through the wicked Monks, and
Pryestes, were converted from those godly uses, and turned to the mayntenaunce
of their own bellies, Pleasures, and pride. They passed neither of the
Fownders good minds, nor the laws of Magistrates: but blinded poor men,
making them believe, that more profiet should comme both to quycke and
dedde, if those godly Almose were bestowed on Masses, and such like ungodlie
Trisshe trasshe: then if Christ therewith should be fed, in the Hu^grie:
refresshed in the Thyrstie: comforted with lodginge in Strangers, and the
Harbourlesse: clothed in the Naked: and uisited in the Sick, and Enprisoned.
Wherefore, it is the part off good Magistrates, to provide, that such things
be brought to their right uses. And besides, it is convenient, that some Taxes
be set on rich spiritual Promotions, for the relieff off the Pore: in steed
off the Fourth part off their Revenues, which by so many Canons was lymeted
to the use of the Poor.

Morouer lest those, that be not worthy to have the Almose of the Church, and
of good men, should take it from those that be worthy, and in dead neadie:
Good Magistrates ought to renew, and put in execution, that law off God, and
off the Emperor Valentynyan, which forbids, that any man be suffered to
beg: and commands that those that be able to labor, should be forced to
labor: and that such as be not able to labor, should be kept as our
Brethern, and menbres, every one in the Congregation where he dwells. And
that this may be the better done, commandment ought to be given, that every
man maintain such as be of his one howsolde, or other wise properly joined
to him, if he be able: And that every City, Town, and uillage, do mayntain
such poor people, as their friends be not able to keep, and not suffer
them to wander abroad. And because it may be, that some Town, or uilage is so
poor, that it is not able to relieve all the Poor thereof: that such also be
not left unprouided, it is uery requysite, that in every Shire, certain
godly, and spirituallie wise men, be appointed: who may send such poor
people from the places where they cannot be relieved, to such Congregations,
where they may be sufficiently relieved. For all we Christians be together
members, by the which name, the Congregations off the Gentiles in the time off
Saint Paul, and at his exhortation, did confess, that it was their duty, to
relieve the Congregations in Jury, that suffered great hunger and famine.
Furdermore, because through our corrupt, and always disobedient nature to God,
we contynuallie loathe the ordinances, and commandments off God, and after
our own lust, and fond judgment, we desire to follow other means, and
ways, then God has appointed: there will be some, that, not withstandyng this
most holy prouysion for the poor, will not put their Almose in to the comen
cheste, or box off the lord, but will rather give their Almose with there own
hands, if they be minded to give any at all. Such men's pride must be met
with, not only by a law off the Magistrate, but also by the discipline off the
Church. By a law, to make them give double to the lords Cheste, if they be
found to give any thing pryuatlie to the neadie: And by the discipline of the
Church, that if any give nothing in to the lords cheste, he be warned off his
duty by the mynysters off the Church, according to the word off God. Whose
admonytion if they stubbournlie conte^ne, that they be taken for Ethnykes, and
Publicans. For albeit, it be left to every man's will, to offer to Christ his
lord, to thuse off his little ones, asmoche off his goods as he will: yet no
man may be suffered, contrary to the express commandment of God, to come
always with an Emtie hand into the presence off the lord, and utterlie to
despise the ordenaunce off the holy Ghost, for the provision for the poor, yea,
asmoche as in him lies, to subvert it, by his pryuat distribution off Almose.

And here will man's wisedo^ (which always uaunteth it self above Gods)
obiecte, that it is unnatural, that men's hands should be shut to the faithful,
that they may not give, at their pleasure, to such, as they perceive in dead
to lack. For a man shall find among the poverty, uery good men, who be
asshamed to ask the Almose off the Church, have they never so great neade.
Herunto this ^s to be answered, first, that no man's hand is so shut by this
law, but that he may open it to whatsoever pore he will, and is able: but by
this law, according to Gods commandment, and the ordenaunce off the holy
ghost, this is prevented, that the children off God may not gives the Enemies
of Christ, these that either lack not, or else be wilfully in neade, those
things, that they owe to the little ones off Christ, which lack in dead. For
it is not possible, as I said before, that any pryuat man, should so
certeynlie search out the disposition off the poor, as those, that be
appointed to that office by the Church, and daily be exercised with all
diligence therein.

And God does not keep his gifts, and encreace off his holy sprite, from
such, as he has chosen, and called, to so great mynysteries of his church.
Besides, admit, that every man know certeynlie his neadie neighbors: yet is
it far better, that every man send such poor people, that ask his relief, be
they never so holy and uertuous, to the Deacons off the Church, to receive off
them: For otherwise, others shall take example by him, to distribute also their
own Almose, and so oftentimes to such as they know not, and be not worthy
off Christ's Almose, who can beg more boldly and craftelie, then the Poor in
dead. We ought to take wonderful head, lest the least hole in the world be
opened to our natural pride, to be wise against God, and to swerve a hear
breadeth from his commandments and ordenaunces, either to the right hand or
to the left. If any be asshamed to go gladlye to the hole company and
mynysterie off the Deacons, let him declare his poverty to one of the Deacons:
or if he be loathe to do this, then let such as know his neade, and godlynes,
show it to the Deacons, and get necessary relief for him.

Not with standing, no Christen man, be he fallen from never so great richesse
to poverty, from never so high degree to the lowest, ought to be asshamed of
the Cross off Christ, and the holsom remedy, that God has provided: much
less ought Christen men be loathe, to receive relief off their neade, at the
Lords hand, by the mynysterie off his Church, by whose most just, and no
less holsom Judgment for them, they be come to such poverty, and base
degree of life. Howbeit, it pertains to the Deacons office, not only to
have respect to every man's poverty, but also off the weakness off their
minds, and with such wisdom, and liberality, to help every man's necessite,
that they lay on no man troubled with poverty, the trouble also off shame:
nor that they bring any, that have in time past been well and liberalie
maynteyned, to such scarcity and skantnes off meat and clothyng, as they be
not able to suffer, albeit such relief were sufficient, to an other that has been so used.

The commandment off the Holy Ghost ought in this point to be considered, that
there be somoche given to every one, as is necessary to lead a good, and
godly life. And it is manifest, that as all men be not off like strength off
body, nor have not ben brought up after one kind off living so some ought to
have more, some less: some fyner, some courser, meat, apparel, and other
necessaries. Which thing Saint Gregory considering, when the noble men, and
women were spoiled by the Lombardes, he gave unto them uery liberal Pe^sions
for their relief, of the goods of the church. And therefore Christian
Magistrates ought to make this law, First, that no man be suffered to beg: but
that every man do maynteyne, and keep his own householde, kynred, and allies,
if he be able to do it: the judgment whereof, ought to perteigne to the
ordynarie Magistrate. And that such as be destitute off such help, be m^yt^^^^
by the City, town, uil^ge, or Congregation where they dwell. If any city,
town uilage, or congregation, be not able to, maintain the poverty thereof,
that then, by the discretion of the chief Governor of the co^treye, such poor
people be sent to so^ richer Congregation, where they may be relieved.

Another point of this law ought to be, for the election, and appoyntyng off
Deacons, as is before seid, and that they be, by their oath, enioined,
diligently to search out, what things every man neadeth, and that they
faithfully, to their power, give it to them: and to make an account of their
receiptes, and paymentes, to the mynysters of the word, and Elders.

The third point, that it be forbodden to give Almose priuatlie, and that all
men be exhorted, that they will rather, according to Gods commandment, and
the ordenaunce of the holy gohost, commit their Almose to the Churches, and to
the mynysters appointed for that purpose: then after their own natural pride,
distribute it them selfs, contrary to gods word, and the institution of
the Hollie Ghost.

The fourth point, that they cause to be restored, for the relief of the poor,
such gifts as were offered, by our Elders to Christ, if any yet remain.

And the fewer off those gifts shall be found remaynyng: the greater pensions
to be set on rich benefices, for the relief of the poor, in recompense off
the fourth part off the Revenues off all Churches, that is due by so many
Canons.

The fyfte point, that great pains be set on them, that shall blaspheme this
most holy Institution off the Holy Ghost, or that shall go about to pull any
man from it. And if any man shall think any thing to be corrected in the
Deacons, and the provision for the poor, that he first warn the Deacons
thereof: and if they will not follow his reasonable warnyng, that he declare the
matier to the mynyster of the word, and the Elders: that in all things, the
Authorite of Gods word may be of force, and the wicked pride of men, who
can allow nothing that is ordained of God, may be resisted in every place,
and in time: and so it may be the easlier obtained off the people off Christ,
whereby the little ones off Christ may so liberally be provided for, as we may
at length ioifullie hear: Come ye blissed of my father, and receive the
Kingdom, that is prepared for you, from the beginning of the world. I was
hungry, and ye gave me to eat etc.

And it is not enough for the liberality of Christians, to give only meat,
harbor, and clothing to such as be in extreme necessite: but also they ought
liberally to give of the gifts, God has given them, wherewith godly maidens
mariable, who for lack of dowry remain long unmaried, may be in time married,
and coupled with honest men, and also that witty Children, that lack friends,
may be brought up to study, to serve in Christ's Church. Besides, good
Christians, that lack wherewith to exercise their crafts, may be therewith
helped, partly by gift, parlie by loan, as there may come profet of their
Arts, and they may be the better able to nourysh, and bring up their children
for the lord, and to make them profetable members of the comen welthe. For it
is not enough for the Congregations off Christ to provide, that men may only
live, but that they may live to the Lord, for a certain and mutual profet
between them selfs, and of the Church, and commen welthe. And therefore all
Congregations ought to provide, that all those that be baptized in Christ, be
uertuouslie brought up from their childehod, and taught good Arts, that every
one, according to his portion, may bring forth somewhat, to profet the comen
welthe, and to declare himself to others a true, and profetable membre off
Christ.

An addition.
There be, that deny not the office off the Deaconrie in the Church of Christ,
to be ordained by God: but say, such office is not of necessity. For there be
some Congregations, where al men be welthie, and there is no Poverty, and so no
neade of the Deaconrie. That it pleases them so genttely to grant, thoffice
of the Deaconrie to be the ordenaunce of God, they deserve no thanks. For if
they should deny it, they must other confess, Saint Paul erreth, or saint
Paul would say, they err. For, besides he teaches what men ought to be
called to be Deaco^s in the Church of Christ, he says playnelye, that God
ordained and constituted in his Church: first Apostels, seco^darilie
Prophets, thirdly Teachers, then those that do miracles: after that, those
that have the gifts of healing, helpers, governors, and diversity of
tongues. Under which name of Helpers, as a general word for all men that may do
good in the Church of Christ, thoffice of the Deacons (according as the
interpretours on that place agreablye do testify) as it is in the Acts
mentioned, is contained. Now where they say, there may be a Church without
poor, and so no neade of Deacons: so may it be said, there may be a
Congregation, wherein all may be learned in Gods word, and therefore no neade
of preachers and teachers. But what a fond kind of argument is it, to reason
of things, that may be, as though they were? to allege things that be
only in Vtopia, as if they were commen in every Country: to magnify their
own uncerteyn Sophistry, and to neglect the certain doctrine of God? who
forseyng all things, as well to come as present, said, ye shall have alweis
poor among you, and therefore ordained this mynysterie in his Church of
necessity, not for a time, but for ever to continue: to have the oversight,
and care off the poor, because there shall be poor for ever. And albeit God, in
some particular congregation, does so bestow his benefits, as many be ritche,
and few poor: yet will he not, that they shall have their respect, only to
the poor in the same Congregation, but also to such as be in other
Congregations, as appears by those of Macedonia, Achaia, and Corinthus. Who,
according to the doctrine off saint Paul, and their duty, sent their
charity to Jerusalem, for the relief of the saints, and poor Brethern
there. Some again say, why may not every man appoint his own Al mener, or
Chamberer, to distribute his Almose, so the poor be provided for, it forces
not, how, or by whom it be don?

Albeit this objection be before sufficiently confounded, by Master. D. Bucer:
yet it may be added, that such objections proceed off affection and pryuat
gaigne (which may do much with worldly men) and not of a zeal to advance
Gods glory.

For Christian men, that seek to serve god their lord and Master, and not
their own commodity, and affections, when they know his will, pleasure, and
ordenaunce, search no further: but as good subjects, and servants, by all
means labor to do, and fulfill the same.

They dispute not, why God has ordained, or commanded this, or that: nor
think this might be other wise don, then God has devised: or that he has
don, is not off necessity.

They know his will, and pleasure, declared by his word, is an unchaungeable
law, whereunto nothing may be added, or dymynysshed, but ought to be obeyed
off all his servants: that he has made nothing in uayne, but as he is the
uery wisdom it self, and forseeth what is best for his: so has he most
wisely, and most necessarily ordained this mynysterie off the Deaconrie in
his Church. Yea, they be most certain, that as there be in man's body diverse
members, not all of one sort, but some more profetable, then some, and yet al
requysite, and necessary to make a parfet body: so in the Church of Christ,
there be diverse members, mynysteries, and uocations, preachours, teachours,
elders, deacons etc. Who, albeit they be not off like Authorite, and degree:
yet be they all requysite, and necessary to the edifiyng off a godly, and
parfet Church off Christ.

Neither will any of Christ's servants, thrust himself, not being lefully
called, into any mynysterie, or seake to come into it by the wyndowe, as Thieves
and murderers do, but will tarry til he may enter by the door, til he be
ordinarily called by the Church off Christ, as Stephen, and the rest off the
Deacons in the prymytiue Church were. For all good men will fear, lest when
they either do any thing contrary to Gods ordenaunce, or meddle with that,
whereunto they be not ordynarilie called, the plage off God will fall on them, as
it did uppo^ the like, by just judgment, in time past. Nadah, and Abiu the
children of Aaron, took their Censers, put a strange fire therein, and offered
to God: but because they did it contrary to the ordinance of god, the fire
came from the lord and destroid them. Vsa, because he set his hand to stay up
tharke of the lord, that it should not fall, albeit the deed symplie
considered was good, yet because he meddled with that office, whereunto he was
not ordynarilie called, and appointed, God plaged him with death. King Ozias,
because he would be busy in other men's uocation, offryng incense to the Lords
which perteined to the ministry of the Children off Aaron, and not to his,
was stricken with the Leprie. The wiseman says in the proverbs, There is a way
that seameth to a man just and right, but the end brings to death. When men
leave the ways of God, and occupy their busy brains about things besides,
or contrary to Gods word, they fall at length clean from God, and become
Godless. Therefore Men ought to take head, and to leave their uncerteyn
fantasies, and cleave unto the certain word of God, wheru^to whosoever
leans, can not stumble, whosoever follows it, cannot err: and he that
walks therein, shall at length come to the eternal Kingdom, which is prepared
for all such as love and follow God.

Remember the poor, and God will remember you:
Forget the poor, and God will not forget you.

