PRAXIS MEDICINAE, OR, The Physicians Practice Wherein are contained inward
Disease^ from the Head to the Foot: Explayning the nature of each disease,
with the part affected: and also the Signs, Causes, and Prognostiques, and
likewise what temperature of the air is most requisite for the Patients abode,
with direction for the diet he ought to observe, together with Experimental
cures for every Disease.

Practiced and approved of: and now published for the good, not only of
Physicians, Chirurgions, and Apothecaries, but very meet and profitable for
all such which are solicitous of their health and welfare.

Written by that famous and worthy Physici^^ WALTER BRVEL.

Principijs obsta, sero medicinae paratur,
Cum mala per longas conualuere moras.
LONDON, Printed by JOHN NORTON, for WILLIAM ^^EA and are to be sold at his
shop, at the great South door of Paul's: and in Chancery Lane, near
Serieants-Inne, 16^^

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader, this little Bark^ which is set to sail in the vast Ocean of
this world, is likely to undergo many sharp storms and violent tempests:
nevertheless if it have but Sea-roome, although the Seas ^oare and rage, and
the billows arise, yet (...) is no danger of shipwreck, because the Pi^t
steeres her, is Walter Bruell, a man very ^ractised, and experienced in these
affairs: because you should not think that it is lanched ^he deep, only
with ballasting, or else with ^ading as is of small value; be pleased thereto
go under the deck, and take a survey of ^e commodities, wherewith she is
fraught. If (...) be an Apothecary, there you may be provided with all manner
of Drugges. If a Chirurgian, there also you may be furnished with powders,
ointments, and emplaisters, without which a man cannot excel in the art of
Surgery; lastly, there are medicines for inward dis^ases, of what age, sex,
or complexion soever the patient be: neither are you brought hith^r only to
take a survey of these traffiques, but e^ch medicine does offer it self unto
thee with ^: embrace their kind proffers, and be not crupulous in receiving
them; for you may adventure on them with security, because they have been
often experienced without danger. God grant they may hereafter have the like
success.

J. A

THE PHYSICIANS Practice.
A method serving for the knowledge of the HEADACHE; called in Latin
Cephalagia.
THe Headache is a painful grief of the head, by reason of some dangerous
and sad change thereof. This name is given to it, either in regard of the
effect it works, as also in regard of the part affected. And it so happens,
that the head is more tormented with pain then any other part of the body:
which is partly caused by the location of the head; for sharp vapors, and
swelling humors ascending from the lower Parts, do assault the head, partly
because the brain is of a cold and moist temperature, superfluity of
excrements are therein generated, which if they increase, and be not avoided by
the expulsive faculty in their due season, are wont to disturb the head with
aches. This pain is sometime outward, and then the hairs of the head feel a
kind of smarting pain, which is not usual if the pains be inward. If this
pain has been of long time, and often come upon the patient, and continues
long, and runs over the whole head, or the greater part of the head; it is
called in Latin Cephalea, if only one side of the head be affected, it is
called by the Latins Hemicranea; and this has his beginning from the lower
parts, but Cephalea is caused by the heads peculiar and principal affect: and
as these two kinds, so likewise the Headache occasioned by an ague, or by
quaffing, or by some other external cause, is called generally by the Latins
Cephalagia.

The part affected.
The filmes of the brain are very much troubled with this pain, which by
reason of their tenderness, even the least pains are sharp and irksome to
them. But the substance of the brain is somewhat grosser, so that the pain
that does seize thereon, is far duller, and more loading. This pain when it
does trouble the brain, has a double cause, the first from it self, and then
the pain is of longer continuance, the second proceeds from the lower parts,
from which light humors do ascend, and are easily entertained by the brain.
Most commonly the cause proceeds from the stomach, by reason of the six
couple of sinews near adjoining thereto, and then the pain is not so durable,
but does rather go away and return again, having given over for a time: and
even as the stomach does abound with ill humors, so the brain does likewise
abound therewith. This pain is somewhat mitigated after the patient has
eaten, and exasperated by too much fasting: for the stomach being empty, raw
and sharp humors are therein resident, which come from the neighboring parts,
and the brain does partake of these vapors: oftentimes the fault is in the
womb, and then the pain is chiefly in the hinder part of the head, for then
the pain is conveyed thither through the marrow of the backe-bone. Sometimes it
spreads it self over the whole head, which is caused by the corruption of the
seed, and suppression of the monthly terms. If the pain do proceed from
any other cause, it may be discerned by his proper signs. Usually the brain
being corrupted by other parts, at the length the cause of its pain may be
said to come from the essence of the brain; and it so happens, that the brain
being weakened by the long continuance of pain, that it will with ease admit
of the superfluities of the other parts; hence is it that the spirits are
dissolved, the digestive faculty, weakened, and the temperature of the whole
body changed, which is the cause that so many excrements are generated in the
brain. (The Signs.) This disease is known by the patients complaints and
answers.

The Causes.
Sometime it is caused by a cold and phlegmy matter, and then the pain is
duller and more vehement if it surprise them suddenly; withal there is
palenesse in the face, moist and cold meats was his former diet, whereby his
temperature is become moist and cold: usually this matter by reason of his
grossness and slyminesse, does stop the narrow passages of the head, thereby
causing pain: another while it is caused by the plenty of blood, and fullness
of the whole body, which are manifested by the patients diet, temperature, age,
state and condition of the Heavens, and many other things which do increase
blood. Again, it is caused by the stopping of the monthly terms, or
hemeroyds, as also of the blood at the nose, which usually does gush out at its
proper seasons, and then the pain is in the forehead for the most part. The
urine is of an high color, and redness sits upon the face and about the
eyes. Another while it is caused by thin and choleric blood, whereof a
small quantity does breed great pain, not so dull as the former, but sharp
and piercing, vehemently beating, and gnawing, chiefly on the right side of the
head; bitterness in the mouth; want of sleep, and extreme heat of the head
do accompany the former symptoms: another while it is caused by the
superfluity of spirits, or by too much windy matter, which will pierce through
the narrowest passages, and will wind it self by degrees, through the veins,
the fylmes, arteries, and sinews, and sometimes within the fylmes and bones,
that so by dispercing it self through all parts, it may make a separation
between those that are most united, and then the pain does run over the
whole head without any dullness, but with a certain ringing in the ears,
which at certain hours of the day, returns into its cauernes. This may be
said to come by the consent of the other parts. Otherwise this pain of the
head is caused by some great distemper, either hot or cold, and yet they are
not so durable that only come by a distemper; only plenty of humors are
thereby gathered; and this does happen, if the pain last long, and the body
be full, or ill iuyced. The pain that comes by a hot distemper, is more
vehement then that which comes by a cold distemper: A great burning in the
head, and redness about the eyes, accompany this pain, which is eased by the
applying of moist things. On the contrary, the pain that is caused by a cold
distemper, is strong and does last longer then the former. Pains caused by too
much dryness that distemper the body, are not so strong, because they come not
suddenly, but as it is slow in coming, so it is very slow in leaving them;
here heat does not much trouble the head, but the skin of the head is
somewhat dry. Moist medicines ease this pain; and dry, very much increase it:
moystnesse cannot properly be said to be the cause of pain in the head,
because it cannot make a violent and sudden change in the similar parts, nor
break the closeness of these parts, unless plenty of humors do concur.

The Prognostiquis.
An old pain, caused by a cold matter, is hardly to be cured; especially in
old men: but a Headache continually vexing, and depriving the patient of rest,
is not without danger; for it is the forerunner of madness, especially if his
vomit appear somewhat rusty. Likewise a headache, if it pinch sore, and by
curing does not mend, but rather is augmented, does presage Deafness,
Frenzy, Impostumes, Conuulsion; if the head be greatly pained, and withal
the sinews stretched, great danger is at hand: if a headache do suddenly
surprise a man, and he become mute therewith, and snort in his sleep, he
cannot outliue seven days, except a fever in the mean space take hold of
him. When the headakes in any part, or the whole head be paind, if snot,
water, or blood, come out of the nose, mouth, or ear of the patient, the
danger is then past: the headache also that was not from the beginning, is a
sure token of a future Crisis either by vomiting, or bleeding at the nose, and
no cure must be attempted for that pain, lest we stop the bleeding which is by
natures forecast intended, and it will either quite free them from the disease,
or at the least ease them.

A method serving for the cure of the cold Headache.
IT is effected by these kinds of remedies following. Let the air be hot and
dry, either by art or nature, let his meat be of Hens, Capons, Birds of
mountains, rear eggs, roast flesh better then boyld; with his meat boil
Betony, Maioram, Serpillum, amongst fruits, sweet Almonds, Pistacium, Raisins
are good: after meat let him take a little Diacidonites, with the spices. Let
his drink be weak Wine, and a little quantity of strong Wine may be
tolerated. Sometimes he may drink a draught of Muskadell, with a little
Nutmeg and Pepper. Let not his motion and exercise be too violent. Let his
sleep be moderate: let him lie with his head raised up, and somewhat covered.
He must avoid vomiting, unless the head do ache by the consent of the
stomach. Let evil affections of the mind be avoided; but slight thoughts are
not here so hurtful as in the choleric Cephalea. Preparers.
Sirupe of Isope, of Acorus, of Betony, of Mel rosatum, of Staechas, the sirupe
of Acetosus Simplex, Oxymel Simplex, Squilliticum* and Compositum, the Water of
Hysop, Betony, Maioram, Sage, Parsely, the decoction of Wood Guaiacum with
capital things, the decoction of Betony, Sage, Hysope, Fenill, Smallage,
Maiorame, Parsely, Pennyroyall, the decoction of the flowers of Staechas with
honey. The cause of the disease will be many days digested, before it be clean
rooted out; for gross, viscous and slymy humors do nourish a more grievous and
rebeliious disease. Yet if the patient be unreasonably afflicted, then shall
euacuation be attempted, not expecting a perfect concoction. Emptiers.
A vein shall be opened, if the body be full, but in gross, viscous and cold
humors, a vein shall not be opened: for it is to be feared, that the disease
being of its own nature cold, should by that means increase. But if any vein
be opened, that of the right arm shall be opened; and if the disease continue
after that, we will open a vein in the forehead, especially if the pain be
in the hinder part of the head: and because the humors are gross, a large
wound shall be made. Electnarium Indum, Diactholium, Diaphaenicum, the powder
of prepared Seen is of great force, Hierae Simplex, Diacolocynthidos, Logodali
of Agaricke made into a trochiske, Pills of Agaricke, Alephanginae, Cocciae,
Arabicae, Faetidae Mastichine, Assageret, Agoricus, Turbith, A potion of
Acoruse oots, Betony, Hysop, Rosemary, Staechas Anyseed, Fennyll seeds,
Raisius, Liquorice, the flowers of Violets, of Buglosse, Polipody, Seen,
Nutmegge, Cynamon, Diaphaenicum, a decoction of Guaiacum Wood with capital
things, Seen, Polipody, a clyster of the decoction of Betony, Maioram,
Siaechas, leaves of Mellilote* Mallows, Colewort: to these add some Mel
rosatum, Diaphenium, Oil of Roses, Salt, Hiera, Diacolocynthidos: it is
requisite for such that are sick of this disease, to purge not once, but twice
or thrice: for by such purging, the humors by degrees are mastered by the
medicines; for gross and tough humors will not be expelled by a sudden
purgation. Pills are more preualent then electuaries in this disease, because
they have a more attractiue power, and can draw ill humors, even from the most
remote parts of the body.

Auerters.
We will use that which was prescribed in the former clyster, in stead of a
purging medicine, for therewith shall we draw back the matter downward, and
shall assuage the pain which is stirred up by the vapors carried to the head,
by reason of costiuenes. Let a vein be opened, the legs washed in hot water,
Horseleeches shall be applied to those veins which swell about the part
affected: or to the end of the nose, strong suppositors, painful ligatures of
the opposite parts, as also strong frictions of those parts, fomentations
likewise, with the decoction of Sage, Hysope, Maioram, and other capital
herbs: a sneeze of bastard Pellitory, Pepper, Oil of Beuers stones, of
Pepper-wort, Ling-wort, the juice of Maioram, Betony, Hogs-bread a nasa^or
errhine of Staues-acre, Pepper-wort, Hiera-piera, the juice of Flower-deluce,
Pepper, aureae Alexandrina, Lingwort, Euforbij, Bastard-Pellitory, Oil of
Beauer stones, Hoggs-bread, Mustard Seed, water of Maioram. An Apophlegmatisme,
by chewing of Hysope, of conserved Pellitory, Pepper, Staues-acre, Licorice,
Mastique, Raisins, Maioram, with a little Honey, a Gargarisme of red Wine,
wherein boil the roots of Pellitory, of Liquorice, leaves of Hysope, of
Betony, mustard, and a little Mel rosatum: all turnings aside are very
convenient by what cause soever the malady is cherished. Gargarismes and
apophlegmatismes are to be used, not without great care and circumspection: for
if the patient be subject to the disease of the lungs, or be very rheumatick,
they may prove hurtful. But we will begin with the nearer parts, and by
degrees proceed to those that are remote. Diacuminum, Aurea Alexandrina,
Streng^heners.
Diacastoreum, Triacle, Mithridate, with Betony-water, Conserve of Roses,
Diacorum, Pleresarconticum, Diamhrae, Diamuscum, both sweet and bitter. A bag
of Maioram, Betony, Rosemary, Conserve of Rosemary Flowers, Aorus conserved;
the decoction of the Wood Guaiacum with the Flowers of ^arduus Benedictus, are
medicinable as well for the Cephalea, as Hemicranea; Cubebs, Musk, Maioram,
Ambre, Nutmegge, Cinnamon, An epitheme for the forehead of the liquor of Wine
distilled, washing the head with lie wherein Betony and Maioram leaves, Flowers
of Mellilote and Cammomill for some few hours have been infused. Irrhigations
of the head with the decoction of Bay-leaues, Betony, Maioram, Mellilote
Flowers; Pepper-Baths do very much comfort headaches. An odoriferous ball of
Cynamon, Cloves, Staechas, Bay-leaues, Maioram, Mastik, Nutmeg, an ointment of
the Oil of Flower-de-luce, Oil of Rue, of Lillies, of Annis seed, of
Camomill, wherewith anoint the forehead and nosethrill holes; emplaysters made
of the Root of wild Cucumber with Wormwood; a cerate of Euphorbium: this is an
approved medicine by the ancient Physician, for an old headache. These
medicines do very much strengthen the brain, by taking away cold distempers,
and then are they of greatest force, when the stomach is empty. This is
likewise the fittest time to apply outward remedies, otherwise they do draw
vapors from the lower parts: but when the disease does begin to decline,
digestive and strengthening remedies may be applied.

The cure of the cold HEADACHE more particularly.
Take of the leaves of Betony, Sage, Rue, Maioram, ana, 1 handful of the
flowers of Stachas, of Feauerwort, ana, P. 1. of garden Mallows, Mellilote, of
wild Mallows, ana, 1 handful and half, Anni-seeds, Fennel-seede, ana, ss, of
Nutmeg, Cinnamon, ana, ij. Colocynthi. ss. Let them be boiled in water as much
as suffices to lb i. ss, add to the strayning, of the Electuary of Elescopi
ss. Sp. Benedictae Laxatiuae, i. Diaturbith cum Rhabarbaro, iij. Mellis
rosaticolati i. oil of Rue and Bays, i. ss, of white Salt, i. of this make a
clyster, which must be administered before dinner.

Oxymellis compositi iij. sir. of Staechas, A potion.
i. of the decoction of Staechas, Betony* Rosemary, ana, x. for certain days.
Let him take iii. hereof.

of the roots of the herb dogstooth, of Sperage, A Potion.
of Parsley ana, i. of Sage leaves, of Betony leaves, of Hysope leaves, Veruin
leaves, ana M i. of Endive M i. ss, of Licorice scraped, i. ss, the seed of
Parsley, Anni-seedes, ana, vi. the flowers of Rosemary, of Staechas, ana, p.i.
of Nutmegs, no. ii. boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss. add to the
strayning Oxymellis squillitici, ii. of the sirrupe of Staechas 1.

of the roots of Acorus i. of Sperage, Parsley, ana, A potion.
i. ss, of Betony, of Maioram, ana, M i. of Raisons the stones being taken out,
i. the seeds of Smallage, and Fennel, ana, iiij. of Buglosse flowers. M i. of
Rosemary, M ss, Se^ae Alexandriae, i. of the whitest and lightest part of the
mushrome vi. turbith albi et gummosi i. of white Ginger ii. ss, boil these in
a sufficient quantity of water to lb i, to the straining add Mellis rosati
sirrup Byzantins, ana, i. of fine white Sugar, q. s. drink of this morning
fasting iii.

Pillul. de agarico cochiar. ana ss, Diagridij gr. iij the sirrupe of Stoechas
q. s. make 7. or 8. Pills of this. Pills.


A garici Trochiscati, Hier^, Diacol. ana, i. ss of Nutmeg gr. 8. of the
sirrupe of Stachas, of Worme-wood, Pills.
ana q. s. make 8. pills of this.

Diacatholic. Electuarij Indi, ana iij ss, A draught.
drink this with the water of Betony.

A draught.
Diaturbith cum rhabarb: Electuarij eles copi Diacatholic. ana ii. ss syrrupe
Staechados, Oxymel, Simp. ana, ss of the decoction of Betony, and Sage, q. s.
drink this in the morning.

Lozenges.
Diamusci dulcis 1. Diamargiriti calidi, ss, Diambrae ii. of Betony-water, and
white Sugar, q. s. make this into Lozenges; whereof, let the patient eat one,
after the sirrupe is taken.

An Opiate.
Sp. Pleresarcontici Diagalanga, Diamusci dulcis, ana, ii. ss, of the roots of
Elecampany, i. ss, conserve of Rosemary flowers i. sirrupe Staechados, q. s.
make an Electuary in form of an Opiate.

A mixture.
the conserve of Rosemary-flowers 1 ss Acori ss aureae Alexandrinae,
Aromaticirosati, of Mithridate, ana, 1 sir. Staechados q. s. mix these
together, and give the patient 1 thereof with Betony-water.

Lozenges.
Sp. Dia musci dulcis, diambrae ana, 1. Dianthos, Cynamon of the best, ana, ss
Nutmeg, Mace, Fennell-seede, i. of the finest Sugar dissolved in Betony water,
and water of Rosemary, ana, q. s. make an Electuary in Lozenges, whereof eat
one 3. hours before dinner.

Sp. Diambrae, Diamusci dulcis, ana, 1. conserve of Rosemary, the flowers of
Sage, of Acorus, ana, ss of Masticke, An Electuary.
Cinnamon, Orange rinds, ana, ss sir. Stechados q. s. make a soft Electuary of
this.

of Nutmegs ii. of Lingwort, of bastard Pellitory, ana, A powder to cause
sneezing.
ss of Pepper-wort, Maioram, ana, ^. ss oil of Beauers stone, 1. of Musk, gr.
1. make a sneezing powder hereof, and blow some of it into the patients
nostrils with a quill.

of Hysope, Maioram, Betony, ana, M 1. of Staues-acre, vi. of Mustard seed, A
Gargarisme.
long Pepper, bastard Pellitory, ana, 1. ss; boil these in a sufficient
quantity of water: unto lib. 1. of the decoction, add Oxymellis simp. M^llis
rosati, ana, 1. make a Gargarisme hereof, and use it in the morning before the
patient eat any thing.

of the powder of the seeds of Staues-acre, Pepper-wort, ana, 2. Nutmegs,
Pepper, 1. herb of Scammony ^, the juice of Maioram, of clarified Honey, ana, A
Liniment.
q s. make a Liniment therewith, and anoint the inward part of the nostrils.

of Rosemary, M 2. Betony, Maioram, M 1. Cammomile, Mellilot, Origan, ana, M 1.
ss, boil these in water, An Embroch.
until the third part be consumed, and in conclusion add a little distilled
wine.

the oil of Camomile, of Lillies, ana, 1. de Euphorbio, 1. of Nutmegs, of the
flowers of Staechas, ana, An Ointment.
2. ss with a little Wax; make hereof an Ointment: whenever occasion shall
serve for the use of this Ointment, all the aforesaid ingredients must be
dissolved in Aqua Vitae, wherewith the head likewise should sometimes be
moystned.

the oil of white Lillies, 1. of Annis, An Ointment.
1. Nutmegs, ss dip Cotton in them, and apply to the ears nigh the chinne.

the oil of white Lillies, Bays, Rue, An Ointment.
vi. Vitrioli Romani, somewhat burnt iiii. of Wax and Saffron a little, make
an Ointment of these, it is of great force, when as the disease is stubborn
and rebellions.

the flowers of Staechas, of Rosemary, Sage, Betony, Maioram, Origan, dried
Worme-wood, ana, A Quilt.
M ss of Nutmegs, Mace, 1. Let them be beaten together and sewed into a red
cloth, where of make a bag in the form of a cap, let the patient wear it
for the space of 2 or 3 months, which must sometime be sprinkled withdistilled
Wine.

An appendix or addition serving for the cure of cold HEADACHE.
FIrst of all the belly must be purged with a clyster, if the matter of the
disease be tough, and viscous; it may be made subject to nature by sharp
medicines, afterward the other humors may be expelled, when their course is
turned from the head. Which being done, the head may be strengthened, and the
relics destroyed, which is easily brought to pass by the former medicines,
if universals be in right manner sorted with particulars: and here is to be
noted, that the former medicines may serve either for the Cephalea or
Hemicranea. Sometime they may be made stronger, but specially such medicines
as are local, because then the mischief is most rebellious. Amongst the other
diseases of the headache, either an actual or potentiall caution may do some
good. The headache which is caused by the French pox, we will handle in his
peculiar place. If the pain happen by a fever, that shall first be cured; if
by staying too long in the sun, mix oil of Roses, and Vinegar, as also
Rosewater, wherein dippe a linnea cloth, and apply it to the head. Let the
patient sleep without disturbance.

A method serving for the knowledge of the PALSY or PARALISIS.
A Palsy is a depriving of sense and motion, not of the whole body, as in an
Apoplexy, but when one side or all parts of the body under the head, or any
other limb is deprived of sense and motion, as Iaw, Tongue, Eye, Foot, Hand,
Arm, Lip. It also falls out that some part is deprived of the sensitive
faculty, the motive faculty not being hurt; and contrariwise the motion dies,
when as the sensitive faculty remains sound. Sometimes it happens, that
neither sense nor motion is quite taken away, but only waxes dull, and is
numbd. Physicians call this an imperfect Palsy, and the harbenger of a Palsy.
And seeing that motion and sense is divided but by one sinew, it does so
chance, that the motion is taken away, when as the sense remains: because hard
sinews are grafted in the limbs, which if they suffer but a small pain,
presently feel it; because to the perfection of sense, a small portion of the
sensitive faculty is sufficient; for the sense of feeling does rather seem to
suffer, then to be an agent. But to the perfection of motion, great store of
animal faculty is required, whereby small hurt will sooner destroy the motion,
then the sense. But why the sense does sometime perish, and motion abids, this
happens, because some parts do participate of a twofold kind of sinews. This
mischief has great affinity with the Apoplexy, and sometime is caused by a
weak Apoplexy; and then it is called Paraplexia; and herein they differ; the
Apoplexy seizes upon all parts of the body, depriving them both of sense and
motion; the Palsy seldom or never leaves the head without motion and sense,
but the other parts of the body loose both motion and sense, and after a
different manner: for if the beginning of the marrow of the backe-bone be
affected, all parts under the face do simpathize with it: if but one half of
the backe-bone be affected, all parts having relation to that side, suffer in
like manner. But if the before mentioned parts are not hurt, but some
particular sinew of some part of the body is loosed, that part whereof this
nerve is joined, shall likewise loose sense and motion.

The part affected.
The beginning of the marrow of the backe-bone, which is the original of all
other sinews, is more grievously annoyd then the brain; and then the face
being unhurt, all parts under the head are hurt: sometime it does take hold on
the left, or right side of the marrow of the backe-bone, whereby the right or
left side of the body is destitute of motion and sense, because the marrow of
the backe-bone, even as the brain, is divided into two parts throughout the
whole length of the backe-bone, whereby the sinews on the right side, are
separated from those of the left by a certain filme, though very obscure, and
so thereafter as the stopping of the sinews is in the right side or left, or
both, the Palsy in like manner will seize on the right, or left side, or the
whole body. Sometime the brain is affected, but not the whole substance of the
brain, for then an apoplexy would be caused, but the right or left side of the
brain, and then that part of the face as also that side of the body, whether
right or left, does suffer with the brain, and when as any part of the face is
bereft of sense and motion, the rising of the sinews, from the third
conjugation of the brain, are affected. Sometime one part of the body is void
of sense and motion; which is caused by the resolution of a sinew coming from
the brain, or from some part of the marrow of the backe-bone, from which, the
part affected does take sense and motion. Wherefore we ought to take pains in
the Anatomy, that we may know where this mischief keeps its first residence,
as also the distributions of the sinews, and from what part of the marrow of
the backe-bone, every part has its sinews. For this is an affect, belonging to
the offended action of the animal faculties, sensitive, and motive.

The Signs.
The palsied part, if it be lifted up, falls back again; it is soon
cool, and in time withers; their urine for the most part is white, and
sometimes inclining to redness, by reason of the great pain in the Kidneys,
or because they cannot separate blood from the whayish moisture, by reason of
their weakness; if one side be affected, that is cold, the other hot, and the
eye of the affected side is abated; if the iaw, or any other part of the face
be seized on by the Palsy, it is wrested toward the contrary sound part. In
this mischief, sense perishes, the motion being perfect: sometime motion is
taken away, and sense does remain: oftentimes both are gone, and then this
mischief is at his full height, the pulse is faint, slow, little, and soft.

The causes.
It is caused by a cold and moist distemper, sometime by an impostume, or some
other tumor crushing the sinews, or marrow; also it is caused by a wound, a
fall, a fracture, too straight a ligature, luxation of bones in the back by a
stroke; but it is caused for the most part by thin and waterish humors, derived
from the brain, which do insinuate into the pores and substance of the
sinews, and so the sinews being made too soft, are loosned and slackned, and
do suck in so much moisture, that they stop the head of the sinews, whereby
the passage of the animal Faculty is hindered: which has his original from
the brain, as from its first original, and like a sunne-beame, does thence
break forth, and is spread abroad in the lower parts, and distributes both
sense and motion to those parts; when a part is bereft of the animal Spirits,
it falls down as though it were withered, and is immovable: hereof this
shall be a sign, that it comes suddenly. But if any part, by reason of great
abundance of thin humors do swell very much, then will follow a conuulsion
in that part. It is also as often caused by gross humors, which being driven
upon the sinews, do cause obstructions, and oftentimes such, that the passage
of the animal Spirits is stopped: which is the reason of the sinews withering
and falling. It is sometime caused by gross Spirits, because they have some
evil quality, either hid, or apparent.

Prognostiques.
A Palsy which is caused by the cutting of a sinew overthwart, is incurable. A
Palsy is oftener caused in the winter; and in old men is never, or hardly
cured; because native heat is deficient in them, whereby, cold, and gross
humors are generated in them: the Palsy which is only in some part, is never
sharp, but of a long continuance. A Palsy is occasioned by a weak Apoplexy
and is to be feared, lest it should return to that again. There is better
hopes for the cure of it in the spring, and summer seasons, then in the
Autumnall and winter; if an ague, and a shaking come upon the party affected,
it does presage health.

General directions serving for the cure of the PALSY.
Let the Air be hot and dry, procured by a fire, if the season of the year
require it, or by a perfume of Cloves, and Rosemary. His meat must likewise be
such as heat, and dry, let him eat roasted Chickens, Capons, Hens, small Birds,
reere Eggs. He must abstain from swines flesh, fish and broaths; or at the
least let them be amended by art. Let his diet be slender until the 14th.
day. For it is very good for the patient to be abstemious; let his drink be
small, and he may drink Water sweetened with Honey, or Cynamon-water, or
hyppocras. It is very expedient that he moderatly exercise the part affected.
Sleep in the day time must be avoided, his meat must be such as is
answerable to his belly, and he should not any way be troubled in mind.

Preparers.
Hydromel, Oxymel, the decoction of the Roots of Flowers-de-luce, of Sage,
Staechas, Nutmegs, Cinnamon. Sir: Staechados, Hysop, Acetosus Simplex,
Byzantinus, Mel rosatum, Oxymel Squilliticum. The water of Sage, of Rosemary,
Betony, Maioram, Baulme, Primrose, a potion of the decoction of Sage, Betony,
Hysope, Nutmegges, Cloves, Cynamon, Staechas Flowers, and Rosemary Flowers,
with the roots of Acorus; to which add some of the former sirrupe. For the
space of 5 or 6 days the humors must be extenuated, and preparation made for
expulsion first of all by gentle medicines; then we will euacuate and use
stronger; but such as are compounded with Vinegar, are obnoxious; for Vinegar
is an enemy to the sinews: wherefore if we do use Vinegar, we will mingle
with it such simples as do strengthen the sinews.

The Cephalica vein shall be opened on that side that is sound, if the Palsy
be caused by blood, Emptiers.
and the body be full, a small quantity of blood shall be taken away, lest the
natural heat in a cold body, and by a cold disease, should be extinguished. A
potion of the roots of Acorus. Flower-de-luce, Sage, Rosemary, Betony, Flowers
of Staechas, Senae, Agaricke, Turbith, Ginger, Nutmeg, Cynamon, Honey, Sugar.
Pills of Coccia, Assaiaret, Agaricke, Alephanginae Fetidae, Mastichinae, de
Sagapeno, de Opopanace, de Euphorbio, Hyera-Diacolocynth. Hiera, Picra Galeni,
Hiera Logodali, Diacatholicum, Agaricke made into Trochiskes: Vomits and
clysters once in every week are permitted. In this disease we will rather use
pills then Electuaries; because they draw the corrupt matter from the parts of
farthest distance, we must begin the cure with gentle purging medicines,
especially in a dull palsy, and the foureteenth day after, we will use
stronger, fearing that the gentler medicines should not prevail.

Clysters of Sage, Betony, Staechas, Origan, Mallows, Auerters.
Cammomile, Maioram, Centory the less, Hollihock, Rue, Mercury, the Electuary
of Elescopi, Hiera-picra, Benedicta Laxatiua, Diacatholicon, oil of Cammomile,
Lillies, by little and little we will use stronger. Let cupping-glasses without
scarification be fastened to the root of the sinews, and so leisurely be
removed to the part affected, that the natural spirit and heat may be drawn
to it, and the drowsy faculty be awaked; but lest the strength be dissolved,
let the cupping-glasses remain thereon but a short time.

An Apophlegmatisme of Nutmeg; Gargarismes; Errhnes; Sneezes; dry frictions;
either with the hands or a warm cloth, are excellent; let a plaster of
mustard-seede be laid to the nape of the neck; we will not use these
drawing medicines before the patient be 3. or 4. times purged. Such as do
strengthen the brain, and that do digest the relics, and amend the
distemper, must now be used. It is apparent, that Triacle and Mithridate do
much good in his case, Aurca Alexandrina, and Triacle water, Diarrhodon
Abbatis, Pliris arconticum, Diamuscum dulce, Diambra, new Conserve of Roses,
Confectio Anacardina, Preserved Acorus, Preserved Ginger, and Bastard Pellitory
preserved. Diacastoreum, Aqua m^^salis of our description, is herein of great
force. Conserve of Sage, Betony, Rosemary-flowers, Flowers of Staechas,
Elecampana, Galingal. Let pills be made of the oil of Beauerstone Assa Faetida,
Nutmeg, and the air of a Douehouse is good by a secret property; let him hold
a Nutmeg in his mouth and chew it, a Hares brain roasted is good; the decoction
of the wood Guaiacum, Sarsaparilla, Cyna with Honey, if the disease be
stubborn: A decoction with the roots of Acorus, Flower-de-luce, Worme-seede,
Ginger, Staechas, Sage, dried Hysop, Maioram, Rosemary, Ground pine, Nutmeg,
Cloves, Roots of Cyna, Guaiacum wood, Honey: make a Fomentation for the part
affected, with the decoction of Milke-thistle; let the whole decoction be
applied to it: make also a bath for the part affected of the decoction of a
Fox, and cover the place affected with the warm skin. But first of all
anoint the place with the Oil of a Fox, and let that be done after the bath
has been used, or in the stead of this bath, let him use a bath of Brimstone
or Nitre, and that which does settle in the bottom, shall be taken out, and
applied to the part first affected: make likewise a hote-house with a meet
vessel therein, wherein let the patient enter morning and evening: it is not
amiss, if stones were heat red hot, and a little hot Wine sprinkled upon
them, which must then be so near laid to the patient, that the smoke may
ascend to his nostrils. As soon as the patient is come out of the stew, or
hot-house, he must go to bed, and therein sweat; which that he may the better
do, let him drink of old triacle, i. and anoint the roots of his sinews with
some ointment. Likewise a dry bath may be made with a convenient decoction,
which must be put into a vessel, and under this make a fire, and a pipe must
be so fastened to this vessel, that the vapor may be conveyed to the
patient. An ointment of Agrippa, Martiatum, Bdellium. An ointment of the oil
of Foxes, of the oil of Beuer stones, Nutmeg, oil of Spiknard, oil of
Pepper, Camomile, Lillies, powder of Worms, Galingale, Pepper, Honey, oil of
Rue, of Philosophers, of St-Iohns wort, of Bays, of Turpentine, Costini,
Aquaevita, oyl^ of brimstone. Too much use of hot medicines does bring a
resolution: wherefore Oils that too much heat and dry, may not safely be
permitted: such medicines as are resolving may not be used, until the patient
be purged at the least 4. times, amongst which medicines frictions may be
very well reckoned. Also an especial care ought to be had in applying outward
remedies, and seeking out the part primarily affected, whereunto we must
minister help, and not unto those that are secundarily affected.

The cure of the Palsy more particularly.
of Sage, Maioram, Hyssop, Calaminth, of Centory the lesser ana, M i. ss, of
white, and light Agaricke ss, A Clyster.
flowers of Camomile, Staechas, Mellilot, ana, M i. Boil these in a sufficient
quantity of water, unto lb i. add to that which is strained forth Benedictae
laxatiuae, Electuarij Elescopi, ana, vi. of oil of Lillies, iij. of Malmesey
iij. ss, of Salt, ss. Mix these together, whereof make a Clyster; the which
he may use twice in a week, until he be recovered.

sir. Staechados ii. Mellis rosati, sir. of Hysope, ana, Iulep.
i. the decoction of Sage, the water of Hysope, and Rosemary, ana, iii. hereof
make a Iulep.

A pleasant water for the palate, and no less wholesome.
of Hysope M iii. ss, of Sage, Rosemary* ana, M i. boil them in water as much
as does suffice, until the third part be consumed. Add to the straining of
Honey, as much as is sufficient, whereof make a pleasing water to drink, for
the space of a month and half.

of the roots of Angelica, ss, Aristolochia rot. iii. Ac^ri i. of Sage, A
Potion.
Maioram, Betony, ana, M i. ss, the flowers of Staechas M ss, S^nae
Alexandrin^, i. ss, white and light Agaricke, i. ss, of Cynamon, Ginger, ana,
i. boil these in a sufficient quantity of water, add to the straining the
syrrupe of Staechas iii. make a potion hereof.

Pills.
of the pills de Euphorbio, Fetidarum, ana ss, Cochiarum, of the best Turbith,
ana i. of the oil of Beauers stones, ss, the juice of the herb Scammony, gr.
iii; of these make pills, which he must take when he goes to bed.

of Agarick, made into a T^ochisk, i. Hierae diacolocynthidos i. ss, A morsel.
of Nutmeg, ss* conserve of Rosemary flowers q. s. make hereof a morsel.

Pills.
the pills de Opopanace ii. Fetidarum, of the oil of Beauers stones, ana gr.
xii. hereof make pills, the which he may use twice or thrice in a week.

of Mustardseed, of Staues-acre, ana i. of bastard-Pellitory, A Gargarisme.
i. ss, of Turbith iiii. of Rue, of Sage, of Hysope ana M ii. ss, make a
decoction with a sufficient quantity of water; unto lb i, ss, add Oxymellis
simplicis, Squillitiei, Mellis rosati, ana i. hereof make a Gargarisme.

A Sternutation.
of Pepper-wort, i. Cyclaminis ss, of white Pepper, of the oil of Beauers
stone, ana i. mix these with Honey, and anoint the Nostrils, that sneezing may
be provoked.

A Masticatory.
of Nutmeg, bastard Pellitory, of the seed of Staues-acres, ana i. ss, of
Hysope, ii. white Pepper, Raisins, ana i. as much Honey as is sufficient, make
hereof little lumps to be chewed.

A Vomit.
Oxymellis squillitici ii. of the decoction of Radish-roots, sweet Maioram,
vi. oil of Spikenard, i. ss mingle these, and make a vomit thereof, if
necessity require, you may help the patient with a feather dipped in oil.

of the conserve of Acorus, Rosemary, A mixture.
ana i. Diacastorei ii. of old Triacle ii. ss, Confectionis anacardinae,
Diamusci dulcis, ana iiii. mix these together, and let the patient take every
morning and every other night the quantity of a Chestnut.

of Triacle i. Aquae vitae, the juice of Betony, A Potion.
ana i. Let him take it twice in a week.

conserve of the flowers of Sage, Rosemary flowers, A Compound.
ana i. of the roots of Elecampany preserved, Ginger preserved, ana s^, of the
Triacle of Andromachus, Mithridate; ana i. ss, Nutmeg i. sirrupe of Stoechas,
q. s. make a compound hereof and let him take ss when he goes to bed.

of the conserved Sage flowers, i. of Rosemary, Another.
the roots of Acorus ana ss, of Nutmeg, Pepper, Cloves, ana ii. sir. of
Staechas, q. s. make a mixture, and after dinner let the patient take thereof i.

of Mithridate i. of Triacle i. of Sage water iiii. hereof make a draught. A
draught.


of the oil of Turpentine, petrolei, oil of Brick, An Ointment.
of Foxes ana ss, oil of Beauers stones, of Worms ana iii. Mastichini i. ss,
of bastard Pell^itory, i. of Sage, Nutmeg, ana i. ss, Gummi ammoniaci i. ss
Castorei ss, dissolve these in Wine, and add to these a sufficient quantity of
Wax, so that the Ointment be soft: with this anoint the parts affected, and
the ends of the sinews; and the parts of the back, and neck shall be well
chafed with a rough cloth, but before all other, the following Ointment may be
used.

of the oil of Cammomile, of Spikenard, An Ointment.
ana vi. Lillies, Turpentine, the grease of Foxes, oil of worms, ana ss, Aqua
vitae vi. of wax, q. s. make an ointment of this and anoint those parts
therewith that have lost all sense, as also those parts which do impart to
them the sense of feeling, and they must all be kept very warm with clothes.

An Ointment.
the oil of Cammomile, iij. of Lillies i. and with that alone anoint the top,
or beginning of the sinews, the body being purged. It is likewise good to wash
the parts affected with hot water, if it be done with great strength.

of Pepper, Juniper, Mustard seed, ana, ii. of the fruit of Anacardium, A
soft ointment.
ss, of the roots of wild Pellitory, Salis ammoniaci ana* i. ss: boil them
in iiii. of white Wine, of Malmsey viii, oil of Turpentine, of Bays,
Petrolei, ana, ii: boil them until the Wine be consumed: add then thereto
the oil of Beauers stone, Euphorbij, Galba^i, Myrrh, bdellij, ana, i. ss, of
Wax q. s. make hereof a soft ointment, and after the part affected is anointed
therewith cover it with a Fox skin, so that the ointment be well rubbed in
with a hot cloth.

Let a bath likewise be made of a Fox, or the whelps, but first flay them, A
Bath.
and take out their guts; in this bath, the resolved parts, as also the marrow
of the back bone must be bathed; add thereto Sage, Hysope, Bay leaves,
Staechas; Rosemary, Rue, the roots of Pellitory, of Acorus, of Flower-de-luce,
Elecampane, flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot.

A Fomentation.
the oil of St. Iohns-wort, of Lillies, Cammomile, ana, ii. oil of brickes,
of Turpentine, of Foxes, i. ss, dippe toosed Wool herein, and first wash the
part affected, then lay it thereon. This Fomentation must be done by the fire.

of Bay leaves, Sage, Hysope, ana. M ii. boil these in Wine, A dry Bath.
then take some stones, and heat them as hot as may be, being hot, cast them
into some convenient vessel, and besprinckle them with the decoction; the
vessel must be so placed, that the patient may receive all the fume, and air
that ascends: the fittest place for this purpose is in some hot-house, as was
showed before; and this must be done morning, and evening as long as he can
well endure it; and when he does come out of this hot-house, let him take of
Triacle, i. and so go into his warm bed, and sweat after it. After 3. hours
the beginning of the marrow of the back bone must be anointed with the
aforesaid ointment.

of Rue leaves, Bay leaves, Hysope, St. Iohns-wort, A Quilt.
Sage, ana, M i, ss, of the flower of Staechas, Spica, ana, M ss, of
Beauers-stone i. Nutmeg, Cloves, Mace, ana, s^; beat these into a powder, and
put them into a Quilt.

An appendix or addition serving for the cure of the PALSY.
FIrst, the belly must be purged by a clyster: and after 5. or 6. days, he
may take such things, as will prepare the matter; and then again, gentler
purges must be prescribed, before the humors be carried another way; for
some few days he must abstain from preparing and purging medicines, and in
the interim, let the humors that run to the part affected, be dissolved by
Clysters, Gargarismes, Sneesings, and medicines that provoke vomiting. Then
again there may be used such medicines as will make the humors more pliable,
and expel them being well concocted, by which means stronger medicines may
with more safety be used; after that, shall the palsied part be strengthened,
and the relics consumed: and then again, let him for a while forbear taking
medicines, only once every week, or at the most, twice, let him have a
clyster, and then we may use such as do prepare, and purge the body; and in
the mean space, cupping-glasses must be fastened to the root of the marrow of
the backebone; for by these means we shall bring back the sense to the
affected part. For the cure of the particular palsied part, an especial care
must be had, that the local medicines be applied to that part, from whence
the palsied sinew does arise, not upon the whole backe-bone, or brain.
Likewise care ought to be had, that those things that will draw spirits, and
blood to the part affected, may be applied. Playsters of Pitch, Salt, and
Mustardseede are excellent for this purpose, and after the aforesaid manner we
will cure the dullness, if it so oppress any part of the body, that it may
seem to be as it were a broken, or diminished palsy: if the palsy be
caused by a cold and ill constitution, we will not use purging medicines, but
only such as are hot, and have an alteratiue power.

A method serving for the knowledge of MELANCHOLY, or BLACK CHOLER.
MElancholy is a kind of doting without a fever, arising from a melancholy
humor, which so disturbes the seat of the mind, that they speak, and do
things repugnant to reason, and that with fear and sadness; this name is
given to this disease from the matter, and cause thereof.

3. kinds of melancholy.
There be three kinds of Melancholies. The first comes of gross Melancholy
blood, being full of dregs, gathered together in the brain: for Melancholy
juice is more

The second happens, when as all the veins of the body



The part affected.
The part affected is the brain, which is hereby known: because some
principal faculty of the brain is hurt; for from the brain, all the souls
principal faculties do spring: and it so chances, that the brain in this
disease is tainted, because it is a similar part; for the whole temper of the
brain is changed into cold and dry by the melancholy humor; and herein it
appears, because it neither suddenly comes, neither is the party suddenly
rid of it. The whole essence of the brain is sometime hurt, and then it
cannot appear that the sides under the short ribs, or the stomach, or any
other part is annoyed. But sometimes the symptoms of melancholic men are more
apparent, because they be more increased, and then a leaden hiew does appear
in the face: sometime it is hurt by consent of the stomach and Mirach.
Sometime through the corruption of the whole body; and then the face is of a
blackish color. Lastly, there is a suppression of monthly terms, or of
pyles, or of some usual excrement, viz. the superfluities of the liver, and
spleen. The habit of the body is lean, hairy, and inclining to blackness,
and the veins are larger then they should be. By this that is said, we may
understand this effect to be nothing else, then a deprauing of the function of
the principal faculty; and therefore we may rather call it a symptom, then a
disease. The imaginary faculty is offended, but the memory and thoughts are
free. In conclusion, we will say that melancholy is a symptom seeking the
ruin of the principal faculties action, viz. imaginatiue.

The Signs.
The signs of melancholy are fear and sadness, evil thoughts without any
manifest cause, for vapors arising from black choler, do darken the mind;
and the brain is as it were clowded all over, inioying small light of reason,
which may appear by their actions. They are touched with a weariness of life,
and with ill and deep thoughts of mind. At length they talk very idly.
Oftentimes you shall find them crying; and now they delight in solitarynes,
within short time, they will as much condemn it; they are ever musing, and
thinking that they are beguiled, or that some plots are working against them;
their sleep is short, and oftentimes they are therein disquieted with
troublesome dreams: besides these affects, which are always common to
melancholy men, some are ever laughing, others ever weeping; some imagine
themselves to be prophets, foretelling much of things to come; some have such
an imagination, that they are mighty men; others suppose themselves to be
transformed into some strange shape, whereby they counterfeit the voices and
actions of Cuckoes, some of Cocks, or of some other beasts; some think they
are earthen vessels, and by that reason go aside, lest they should be hurt or
broken by them that meet them; some, though they dread death, yet do they
wish it, and sometime kill themselves; some think they be without heads,
others without legs; some, armelesse; some refuse meat, supposing the term of
their lives to be at an end: some do imagine thieves are come, and that
officers wait for them to carry them to prison, some fear that the earth will
swallow the^ up; some are disquieted with other imaginations, even as his
former course of life was: some are busied with warlike affairs, strifes,
studies, prayers, or other courses whereunto they were addicted: in a word,
these dream waking.

The Causes.
The cause of this, is the cold and dry distemper of the brain, whether it
does happen by nature, or accidentally by a melancholy humor, and ill vapors
generated in the other parts, or of old time left there: from hence it is, that
black and dreggish vapors do creep into the seat of the mind, whereby the
brain is darkened. It is also caused by too much heat in the head, so that the
blood is burnt up, and from thence come melancholy vapors, which sometime is
observed in feauers. A continuation of sadness, superfluous watchings,
solitarynes, and the staying of monthly terms and piles, brings this disease;
for malign vapor carried up by the corrupt blood, does vitiate the mind.
Again, the use of such things that do not nourish well, especially if they
be not well digested, oftentimes cause this disease; to widows, and such as
are deeply in love, this does commonly happen; because the mind is spent with
care and grief; sometime the liver is in fault, when by reason of some great
distemper, it does beget store of black blood. Sometime it is caused by the
spleen, when as it does draw great store of that blood, and does not expel
it; for hereby in time the whole body is bedewed with melancholy blood.

Prognostiques.
Melancholy, which does seize upon the essence of the brain, and continues
long, making the affect as it were natural, is altogether incurable: yet if it
were taken at the beginning, the cure would be easier. Too much sadness, and
immoderate fear is a sign of melancholy: but if they that are troubled with
this affect, are troubled with the pyles, there is hope of cure. And it is to
be feared, that it should grow to an Apoplexy, or conuulsion, or madness, or
falling sickness, and therefore this mischief must presently be cured.
Melancholy is troublesome to men, but especially old men, but to women it is
dangerous. Melancholy caused by the corruption of the whole body, as also that
which is caused by the default of the brain, is hardly cured.

A method serving for the cure of MELANCHOLY.
IT is wrought by these remedies following. Let the air be clear, of a
wholesome smell, moist, and in the rest temperate; his diet must be such as
do moysten in a mean, and such as is of good juice, and easy digestion, not
breeding wind: reere eggs, flesh of Hens, Capons, Chickens, Partriges: Fish of
tender substance. Parsely, Raysins, Endive, Borage, Buglosse, Lettuce,
Mallows, Spinach, may be used in broths: let him drink white Wine, and
exercise himself moderately, and walk in pleasant places; he may sleep
somewhat longer then ordinary; if nature cannot expel the excrements, art must
be used: perturbations of the mind must chiefly be avoided, especially fear
and sadness, and in stead thereof the mind must be cherished with mirth,
steadfastness and good hopes.

Preparers.
The sirrupe of the juice of Borage, Buglosse, or Violets, of Epithymon, of
Apples, Quinces, Fumitory, Hops, Oxymel simplex; waters of Buglosse, Hops,
Fumitory, Endive, Succory, and Baulme. A decoction of Fennill-roots, roots of
Parsely, Capers, Licorice, the rindes of Tamariscus, Epithymi: Thyme, Fumitory,
Scolopendria; flowers of Borage, Buglosse, and Violets, Raysins: the sirrupe of
Epithymum, Licorice, Fumitory, Buglosse, Violets; those that do moysten, and
moderately heat, especially are to be made choice of; for the faulty humor is
made cold and dry by reason of adustion.

Emptiers.
The former decoction, whereto add damask Pruines, Polipody, Seen, Mirabaloni
Indi, Emipelitici, Diasena, Cassia; the infusion of Seen leaves, and Epithymon
are very good. Confectio Ham^ch, Hierae Diacolocynthidos, Logodali. Diasenae,
N. Pillulae Indae, de lapide Lazuli, lapis armenus, Cyaneus, Polipody,
Epithymon, Seen, Mirabolani kebuli, nigri, Beares-foote; the Helleborisme of
Mathiolus. Let the median vein be opened; if the whole body abound with
melancholy blood, if the median appear not, we may open a vein in the
anckle, especially in women, whose monthly terms a^e suppressed, or in men,
who formerly had the piles; but if the brain be in fault, it is not so
requisite, unless it cannot be cured by other means, and then the C^phalica
vein shall be cut; if this will not prevail, we must cut a vein in the
forehead. We must begin with milder medicines, and seldom use purgers,
because they will dry more then is required; and also the matter must be
emptied by distances of time, that nature may be relieved. Always moystners
shall be mingled with laxatiue medicines, and such as may comfort the spirits,
and principal parts.

Auerters.
Clysters of the decoction of Anni-seeds, Fennell-seedes, wild saffron, Hops,
Thyme, Epithymon, Mallows, Mercury, Fumitory, Buglosse, Polipody, Seen,
Diasena, confectio Hamech* D^acatholicon, Hiera Logodali, cassia; oil of
Violets, of sweet Almonds. Suppositers; Frictions of the extreme parts;
Ligatures also of those parts, and bathing with hot water; sternutatories; and
masticatories. We must endeavor to bring down the monthly terms, and pyles,
if this disease did take the original from them. Cupping-glasses without
scarification, may be laid to his rib-gristles. Horse-leeches may be set to
his forehead, and other parts. Let Cauteries be made in the coronall seame, and
the thickness of the skull may be diminished by a Trepan, that a conueyance
may be made for smoaky and sutty vapors.

Strengtheners.
Electuarium laetificans Galeni de gemmis, Diamargaritum frigidum, Dianthos,
plere sarcotium confectio de granis tinctorijs* Diagalanga, Diacuminum,
diabuglossatum, diaboraginatum. Diambra, Electuarium conciliatoris, diamuscum
sweet and bitter; sir. of Quinces, of Apples; the great conserve of our
description; Borage, Buglosse, Violets, Roses, Fumitory, Orange-rinds, co^serue
of Elecampane, Satyrion, the decoction of Saccharum violatum, rosatum, manus
Christi; an odor of Rosewater, violets an irrhigation of the head being
shaued, with the decoction of the flowers of Nymphaea, Lettuce, Mallows,
Staechas, Violets, Camomile, Holyho^kes, and Weathers-head, which he shall use
many days in the morning. An epitheme for the heart; of the water of Buglosse,
Borage, Water Lillies, Violets, odoriferous Wine, Bawlme leaves, Nutmeg, both
Behens Cloves, Sorell-seede, a fomentation of the belly, made with oil,
wherein Cummine, Rue, Carrot, and Dill seed have been boyld. An ointment for
the backe-bone, of the oil of Violets, of sweet Almonds, Dill, Camomile, and
Water Lillies: often bathing in sweet water, is very wholesome, especially if
the leaves of Mallows, Violets, Roses, Water Lillies, Weathers-heads Linseede,
Fenegreeke Buglosse, Cammomile, Me^lilote flowers have been boiled.

Correctors of accidents.
Sirrupe of Poppy, of Violets, with Lettuce water, Philonium Romanum, Triphera
magna, pills of Hounds-tongue; a lotion for the head, of the decoction of the
flowers of Water Lillies and Violet-flowers, and roots of Mandrake, Henbane,
white Poppy; an ointment of the oil of Dill, Water Lillies, Popler, Violets,
Opium, and Saffron. We must use such as will procure sleep, for this is great
ease to the patient; whereas watchings are hurtful, but Opiates must not be
administered, unless necessity requires.

A more particular method for the curing of the MELANCHOLY.
of the leaves of Beete, Mallows, Violets, Mercury, Hops, A Clyster.
ana M i. ss, Borage, M ij. Epithymi, ss, of the flowers of Elder, M i. ss, of
Anni-seed, Lini, ana i. of the seed of Bastard Saffron beaten, Polipodij
que^cini, ana i. ss, Senae Alexandrinoe, i. the rind of Beares-foote, i. Boil
these in Whey, q. s, unto lb i. ss, add to that which is strained forth, Sp.
Hierae logodali, ss, oil of violets, Lillies, ana i. ss, of Salt i. hereof
make a Clyster which may be used twice every week.

Sir. de Epithymo, the sir. of Apples, of Violets, A Sirrupe.
ana i. Buglosse* Fumitary, ana ss, of the water of Borage, Fumitary, Violets,
ana iiij. hereof make a sirrupe.

of Anni-seeds, iij. of the leaves of Seen i. ss, A draught.
Epithymi ss Damask Pruines, no* x. Let them be grossly beaten, and infused
one day in the whey of Goats milk, q. s. hereof make a Potion.

of the roots of Fennel, of grass, ana i. ss, A potion.
Borage-flowers, of Violets, Epithymi, ana M i, ss, of Hops, Fumitary, M i.
Anni-seede, ss, Raisins, the stones being taken out, of pure Barley, ana i. of
scraped Licorice, iii. of Tammariscus rinds, ss, Senae Alexandrinae, i. ss,
Rhabarb. Indorum Myrobalonarum, ana ii, Polipodij quercini, x. Boil these in a
sufficient quantity of water, unto lb i. ss, add to the straining, sir. de
Epithymo, of Fumitary, ana i. ss, hereof make a potion.

Confectionae hamech. v. Pulueris sancti i. sir. Epithymi, i. the water of
Fumitary, of Borage, ana i. ss, A draught.
make a draught hereof.

Confect. hamech, Diaptuni compositi, Another.
ana iiii. sir. of Succory with Rhabarb. i. of the common decoction q. s.
hereof make a draught.

Pillularum Indarum, ii. Pull. Hierae logod: Pills.
i. trochisci alhandal. gr. iii. sir. de Epithymo q. s. make pills hereof.

Massae pillul. de Hiera composita, ss Cochiarum, Pills.
i. trochi scorum alhandal. gr. iiii. sir. of Staechas, of Violets, ana q. s.
make it into Pills.

Pillularum de lapide lazuli, aggregatiuarum, Indarum, Pills.
ana i. diagr. gr. iii. sir. de Epithymo q. s.

Hierae logodali, i. Hierae diacolo. i. Sena Alex. i. ss sirrupe of Violets, i.
ss, A purging potion.
Violet-water iii. make a draught hereof.

A vomiting Potion.
of the roots of Radishes of an equal bigness, bore holes through the^, fasten
small pieces of Lingwort to them: and on the third day, when as the Radish
root shall have drawn the strength from the Lingwort, boil it in Oxym^l
Squillit. the Lingwort being quite taken away: hereof give the patient ii with
iiij of warm water.

Another.
of the roots of Lingwort iiij. infuse them in lb ss, of the water of Buglosse
over hot embers; strain it, and make a syrup thereof with clarified Honey:
give to the patient one spoonful hereof in broth that is somewhat fat;
whereunto add Hierae Logod. ii.

A conserve.
the Conserve of Violets, of Buglosse ana i ss Sp. Laetificantis Galeni, ii.
Dianthos, Diamusci dulcis, Electi. de Gemmis, ana ii Diamargariti. Frigid.
Diatragacanthi frigidi, ana i ss, sir. of violets, of apples ana q. s. 2.
hours before dinner or supper the patient may take i.

A soft electuary.
Elect. Laetificantis Gal. ss, Corticum Conditorum Citri, iij Sacchari
Violarum, Rosarum, ana ss sir. of the juice of Borage q. s.

Plerisarcont. Laetificantis Galeni, ana ii Sacchari, Violace, A comforting
Potion
et Rosacei, ana i: let iiij be given with strong Wine.

An Opiate.
the Conserve of Buglosse i ss Sp. Laetificantis Galeni i Sp: Diarrh abbatis
Sine Mosco, ss. the seed of Citrines, of the best Cinnamon, ss. sir of Violets,
Buglosse, ana, q. s.

Lozenges.
Sp. Electuarij de gemmis, i ss Dianthos, Dambrae, ana ii: of the purest Sugar
dissolved in Violet water, and Buglosse water q. s. let this electuary be made
into Lozenges.

A bath.
of the Flowers of water Lillies, Borage, Buglosse, Violets, ana M ii: of
Camomill, Melilote, ana M iij. of the leaves of Mallows, Altheae, ana M ii of
the seeds of Linus, Fengreeke, of barley ana iij, of Cowcumber, Gourd ana ii. 2
or 3 heads of Wethers. Boil them in water q. s. make a bath of it, wherein put
new Cows milk, of fresh butter lb iij. bathe the body herewith 6 hours before
meals.

of the flowers of Cammomile M ii. ss, of Staechas, An Embroch.
of water Lillies, ana M i. of Lettuce, Mallows, Violets, wild Mallows, ana M
i, ss, 2 heads of weathers, boil them in water, q. s. to the third part,
hereof make an irrhigation, wherewith besprinckle the patients head, being
newly shaued, and then apply the lights of a Ram as hot as they come out of the
belly, unto the head.

the oil of Violets, i. of sweet Almonds, An Unguent.
of Cammomile, ana ss, of Annis, oil of Mace, ana ii. make an unguent, with
which the head after lotion shall be anointed.

the oil of Violets, of Lillies, Another.
ana i. of sweet Almonds, of Capons grease, of man's fat ss, wherewith the
back must be anointed after the patient does come out of the bath.

sir. de Papauere i. ss, of Violets, A sirrupe to cause sleep.
ss, the water of Violets, of Lettuce, ana i. ss, make a sir. to procure sleep.

Oil of Violet, of mandrake, of water Lillies ana ss, An Ointment.
of Nutmeg, ss. saffron gr. v. of Opium, gr. iii. of wax q. s. make an
Ointment to cause sleep, wherewith anoint the temples, wrists, and soles of
the feet.

of Vine leaves, of Violets* of Lettuce, ana M ii, of willow, A bath.
flowers of Violet, Buglosse, water Lillies, ana M i. the heads of white Poppy,
no* iiij. boil these in a sufficient quantity of water. It is approved to be
excellent for the causing of sleep, if the hands and feet be bathed therein.

An Appendix, serving for the cure of the MELANCHOLY.
FIrst the belly must be loosned by a softning Clyster, such as discuss
windines, and concoct the humors; then a vein shall be cut, and the humors
made pliable to nature; at the length the body shall be purged of them; mildly at
the first, lest we do ouerheate and dry the body; afterward we may use
stronger. Purging potions are better then pills, because pills dry more then
liquid things; afterward turn the humors from the brain, with Ligatures,
Frictions, strong clysters, suppositers, and cupping-glasses; then we will
strengthen the principal parts of the body, chiefly the brain, and heart,
and resolve the relics; then administer such medicines as will procure
sleep; all which we will effect by the former medicines, so that universals in
due sort, be applied to particulars; and above all, we will add such things
as do moysten, because that the disease is caused by a dry distemper. Some
there be that are very serious, and are verily persuaded that they have frogs,
serpents, or such like in their bowels, whereof some have been healed, because
some such things, unknown to the patients, were cast into their excrements,
when purging medicines were ministered: for seeing them, they laid aside their
false imagination.

A method serving for the knowledge of the Hypocondriall MELANCHOLY.
THe Hypocondriall, or windy melancholy is often caused by the ouerboyling of
dreggish blood, which was settled near unto the stomach, or gristles of the
short ribs, by a distemper of the liver, stomach, or miseraicall veins; hence
it is, that gross and burnt humors, are carried up to the principal seat of
the brain* and so do disquiet it, and stir up Melancholy. By the self same
cause, as in a suffusion, the symptoms of that mischief are stirred up by
sharp, and smoky vapors, proceeding from the lower parts: for it so happens,
that the temperature of the brain is altered by dark and foggy vapors arising
from the stomach, liver, mesentary, or from some other adjacent part near
unto them; whereby the imagination is hurt, memory and cogitation remaining
perfect. The matter of this disease, viz. a melancholy humor, partly is
derived from the liver, partly from the spleen, but most commonly from the
liver; and when the spleen does not draw this humor unto it by reason of some
fault in that bowell, then this humor does stay in the miseraicall veins.

The part affected.
The part affected is the brain, and that either by consent of the stomach;
or the gristles of the short ribs; for in these places, as it were in an
inflamed part, the melancholy blood is gathered together: sometime it is sent
from other parts near unto the stomach being ouerheated, for hereby the
neyghbouring blood waxes hot, and is turned into melancholy; at length it so
happens, that the brain does sympathize with these parts.

Signs.
Besides the ordinary signs of melancholyans, by the excessive heat of the
humors, the parts about the heart are inflamed, and seem to be somewhat
mitigated by cold meats: oftentimes the patient does feel pain in his
stomach, and short ribs, after he has eaten such meats that are not easy of
digestion, for from hence much crudity is caused, whereof the more plenty there
is, by so much the more does this mischief rage. They do eat much, but in
the mean while they have their bellies bound: they break wind often, and
belch very much, which is caused by raw and melancholy humors contained in the
aforesaid places. In those places are very frequent rumblings, and murmurs
heard; and this is an especial sign of this disease. Sometimes they have
pains in their shoulder, the Midrife is drawn upwards, the arteries beat
strongly, and disorderly; Ringing in the ears, and inflammations of veins and
eyes, are caused by vapors which are carried up thither. Their sleep is short
and troublesome. They are troubled with a dizzines, and palpitation. Vomit of
crude phlegm is caused, wherewith choler is sometime mixed. They are eased of
their pain, after they have digested that which they have eaten, after
stools, vomits, and belchings.

The Causes.
It is caused by the default of the spleen, when it does not draw away the
melancholy blood made by the livers distemper. Sometimes it does happen, that
the blood, which is in the veins of the stomach, mesentery, spleen, bowels,
guts, and adjacent parts, is burnt up by too much heat, caused by some
obstruction, or some other cause; and then the blood does degenerate into
black juice which runs over the mesentery, spleen, and other parts thereto
adjoining, whereof follows a great heat of the bowels, and from thence
vapors are conveyed to the brain, from whence these Symptoms break out.

Prognostiques.
This affect is not so violent as the former, yet in time it will degenerate
into the former kinds. And as the patient is eased by due concoction of his
meat, so the disease is much exasperated by crudities. If this disease take
deep root, sometime madness, sometime a fever not unlike the hecticke will
follow. But at the first it is soon cured: if it wax old, it is hardly to be
cured.

A method serving for the cure of the Hypocondriall MELANCHOLY.
IT is wrought by these kinds of remedies following, a hot and moist air is
good.

Let his diet be such as are moist, as Hens, Chickens, Capons, Veale,
Partriges, a small quantity of broth is good, whereas if they be given in
great abundance, they cause a fluctuation, and crudity in the stomach.
Raysins, sweet cherries, Pruines, roast Apples, wherewith mix a little Sugar,
let them be coold, and they will be both medicine and nourishment. His drink
must be the Cream of huld Barley, with a little Cynamon and seed of Annis,
white Wine mixed with water, Whey, but that of Goats milk is best. Let
violent motion be avoided; riding, sailing, walking, swimming in an artificial
bath is good. If the patient do not sleep well, such means as are laid up in
arts storehouse for the procuring of sleep must be administered, all
disquietnesse of mind must be banished, and they must be recreated with
music, and delightful songs:

Sirrupe of the juice of Fumitory, Violets, Mayden-haires, of odoriferous
Apples, the juice of Bourage, Preparers.
Endive, Epithymon, Orange pills, Wormwood, sirrupe Byzantini without Vinegar,
water of Hops, Buglosse, Fumitory, Bawlme, Borage, Violets, Endive, Scabious: a
decoction of the roots of Asarum, Fennill, Parsley, Asparagi knee-houlme,
grass, Valeriana, cyperi, Succory* a decoction of Penny-royall. Centory the
less, and Wormwood, are taken by many with good success: those which take
away stopping and comfort the stomach, ought to be mingled with preparing
medicines.

Confect. Hamech, Diacatholicon, Diaphenicum, Emptiers.
Diafena, puluis sanctus, Eleborismus, Matthioli, Hiera logodals, Diacolocynth.
Pills lazuls lapidis, Fumitory, I^dae. sirrupe of many infusions, of Roses,
Seen, Polipody, black Hellebore, Epithymon, Manna. Vomit does much good, if
the affect be of long continuance: if he vomit with much ease, it is best,
especially if the stomach be ouercharged with raw undigested humors. After
meat with warm water simple Oxymel, or with the infusion of Radish roots, of
black or white Hellebor, the residue shall be stirred up and avoided. With a
clyster of the decoction of Camomile, Betony, Mugwort, Centory the less, Beet,
with wind, Hops, Fumitory, wild Saffron, Epithymon, Polipody, Seen leaves,
whereto add Honey, Hiera picra, Logodal. oil of Lillies and Violets. The liver
vein of the left arm must be opened, if there be great fullness, or the
Saluatella, if months or piles be staid, and if the disease be stubborn, a
vein in the forehead shall be opened; and as it is expedient that preparing
medicines be renewed, so is it likewise fitting to renew purging medicines,
bebecause humors causing this disease, are for the most part ea^thy: and from
hence rebellious diseases for the most part arise.

Auerters.
Lotions, Frictions, Ligatures of the legs are auayleable: Clysters,
provocation of pyles, and monthly terms, cupping-glasses with scarification,
must be applied to the gristles of the short ribs, if there be no pain, for
they fetch out winds. Such medicines as turn away the humors that load the
head are of great force.

Strengthners, and such as do amend the distemper.
Triacle, Diacuminum, Aromaticum Rosatum, Diamargaritum frigidum, Electuarium
de Gemmis, Diamuscum dulce, Diagalanga. Conserve of the flowers, and roots of
Buglosse, of Violets, the great conserve. a decoction of the less Centory,
Penny-royall, Worme-wood, Ground Pine, Germander, Anni-seeds, Fennill and
Parsely* sir. of Asarum roots, with Borage, Buglosse, Succory, Roses, Centory
the less, Camomile, the leaves of Fumitory, Wormwood, Germander, Ground Pine,
Hart's-tongue, Borage, Hops, Hysop, Betony, Anni-seeds, Fennel and Caret seed,
Raysins, sir. of Pomegranat, of sweet and sour Apples. An ointment for the
sides and belly, of the oil of Capers, Lillies, Camomile, Rue, sweet Almonds,
Broom flowers, seeds of Nigella Romana, Cynamon, Ammoniacum, Vinegar. An
odor: Make a fomentation of water and Wine, wherein boil Sotherne-wood,
Mellilot, Danewort, Camomile, Epithymon, Thyme, Mugwort, Seen, Polipody,
whereto likewise add some Vinegar. A bath of sweet water is very good, being
made of Mallows, Violets, Beet, Roses, Cammomile, Fennel, Butter, and Milk.
Medicines that heat and dry too much, are forbidden, such as are Aurea
Alexandrina, and many more* and we will use the assigned cordial powders very
moderately, because they dry the humors, and body, and by that means increase
the malady.

Correctors of accidents.
These following do correct accidents: Cupping-glasses without scarification
do resolve winds; a fomentation of the sides with the decoction of
Penny-royall, Dill, Rue, Wormwood, Bay leaves, Serpillum; or else let it be
made of Vinegar, wherein the seeds of Cummin, Annise, and Penny-royall were
boiled. A bag of Cammomile flowers, Roses, Anni-seeds, Cummin, Fennel,
Fengreeke, Bay leaves, Serpillum, Rue, Wormwood, Penny-royall. Moysten it with
Vinegar, and let it be hot when it is applied unto the stomach. An ointment
ex oleo nardino, Wormwood and Rue; a cataplasme of Cyperus roots, flowers of
Camomile, seeds of Fennel, Annis, Cummin, Fengreeke, Mugwort, Danewort,
Rosemary, and Wormewood-leaues. Make an irrhigation for the head with sweet
water, described in the bath: it is very good to procure sleep; some of these
that are prescribed, do assuage pain, others scatter the winds that are
offensive to the body, others do procure sleep.

A more particular manner of curing the Hypocondriall MELANCHOLY.
Mercury leaves, Mallows, Pennyroyall, A Clyster.
flowers of Elder, Cammomile, Mellilot, Centory the less, ana M i. of broom,
M i. ss, Beet leaves, Coleworts, Hops, ana M ss, of Dodder M i. Anni-seede, of
Fennel, of bastard Saffron, ana vi. Polypodij quercini ^. ss, Senae
Alexandrnae, i. Epithymi v. boil these in a sufficient quantity of water unto
lb i. ss, add to the straining, Hierae logodali, pulueris sancti. i. ss,
Confectionis hamech. iij oil of Lillies, of Violets, of Dill, ana i. Mellis
violacei, i* ss, of Salt i, hereof make a Clyster, which he may use once every
week, and the remainder of the Clyster, will serve to make a cataplasme for
the spleen. A cataplasme.


A Potion to expel poison.
When the Clyster is come down, the next day the patient must drink of the
best Mithridate, of the great Triacle, ana ii, of Hyppocra^ iiij.

of the sir. of Epithymon, of Violets ana i. of the juice of Borage, A Iulep.
Byzantini without Vinegar ana i ss, water of Violets, of Borage, of Hops, ana
iiij.

A potion.
of Fennel Roots, of Grass, ana i, of Borage ii of Betony leaves,
Penny-royall, Hyssop, the less Centory, ana M ss, Anniseeds, of Fennel, of
Caroots ana iii-Fumitary, of the tendrels of Hops ana M. i. Epithymi, ss,
Nutmeg iii, Orange Pills. v. of Raysins the stones being taken out i, of
scraped Liquorice v. of Cowcumber seeds vi. of the Flowers of Woodrowell, ana
M i. boil them in water q. s. until the third part be consumed* add to the
strayning of the sir. of Pomegranats, sweet and sour apples, juice of Borage
ana. i.

A potion.
the Roots of Borage, i. ss. of Centory the less, Penny-royall ana M i. ss. of
Annise and Fennel seeds ana iii of Raysins i. ss. of seen leaves, Polypodij
quercini, ana i. Epithymi,. ss. Flowers of Woodrowell M ss. boil them in water
q. s. unto lb i. ss. add to the strayning Diacatholiconis, i. Sp: hierae
Logodali, i. Sir. Byzantini, de Epithymo, ana i. ss. make a potion hereof,
which the Patient may use frequently.

A bole.
Confect. Hamech, iii, Pulueris Sancti, i Diacatholiconis ii: a bit or morsel
must be made hereof.

Pills.
Pulueris hierae logod; i. ss. Sp: hierae Picr^ Gal: ii. sir: of Wormwood q. s.
make Pills hereof: about an hour after he has eaten the pills, let the
Patient drink the decoction of huld Barley with a little Sugar. After that, he
must vomit, which must be caused by vi, of warm water, A vomit.
wherein ii. of Oxymel were dissolved, or with the juice of a Radish that has
received the strength of white hellebore, which may this way be effected take
of white hellebore i, which must be thrust into the Radish, and there remain
for the space of three days, and then the juice of the Radish being pressed
forth, is for the purpose.

the conserve of Buglosse roots, i. ss, of Violets, ss, An Electuary.
Diamusci dulcis, Rosatae nouelloe, ana ii. Laetificantis Galeni, ii. ss, sir.
of the juice of Borage, of Orange-pills, ana q. s. a soft Electuary of this.

Sp. Darrhod. abbatis ij, Rosatae nouellae, A cordial opiate.
Aromatici rosati Gabr. ana i. of Buglosse flowers i. ss, of Orange-pills, i.
of Anni-seed, iij. Sacchari violac^i, rosacci, conserve of Buglosse roots, ana,
i. sir. of the juice of Borage, q. s. an Electuary in form of an Opiate.

of Borage roots, ii. of Polypody, ss, the barks of the roots of Capers, ii.
of Annis and Carraway-seeds, Cordial Hypocras.
ana iii, flowers of Violets and Buglosse, ana M i. ss, boil them in two pints
of water until half be consumed. Then add Vini odorati lb i. let them simper
a while together; add to the strayning of Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Rosatae nouellae,
ana ss, of fine sugar q. s. make hereof Hyppocras.

of Penny-royall of Sowthern-wood, ana M i. ss, A Fomentation.
flowers of Camomile, Mellilot, ana M i. Cummin, and Anni-seeds, ana i.
Epithymi, polipodij quercini vi. of Centory the less, Rue, ana M ss, boil
them in equal portions of Wine and Water, until the third part be consumed,
then add A ceti squillitici q. s. make a fomentation for the belly.

oil of Capers, of Lillies, sweet Almonds, ana ss, An Ointment.
of the seeds of Nigella, anethi, of the best Cinnamon, ana ss of Saffron, gr.
xii. amm^niaci ii. of Wax, q. s. make a soft oynment of this, wherewith anoint
the parts under the stomach morning and evening.

oil of Rue, wherein the seeds of Annise, Cummin, and Centory the less have
been boiled, i. of ship pitch, iii. mix these, and apply them to the belly if
he be troubled with wind, but let the stomach be anointed with the oil of
Masticke, and Mace.

of red Roses, of Camomile flowers, A Quilt.
ana M i. of the less Centory leaves, Pennyroyall, Wormwood, ana iiii. of the
seeds of Rue, Annis, Fennel, Cummin, Fengreeke, ana i. ss, bruise these
grossly, make a quilt hereof for the stomach, and besprinkle it sometime with
Vinegar and Wine, and apply it warm to the stomach.

A Fomentation.
of the roots of Danewoort, i. of leaves of Rue, of Elder, Anethi, ana M ss, of
the seeds of Annis, Cummin, and Caroots, ana i, of Cynamon, ss, boil these in
an equal quantity of water and wine, being first grossly bruised: make a
fomentation hereof for the belly where the wind did usually rumble.

A Bath.
of Danewort ii. of the leaves of Beat, Violets, Mallows, Mercury, Coleworts,
ana M ii. of Hops, Fumitary, Centory the less, ana M i. ss, flowers of
Camomile, Mellilot, ana M ii. ss, Seminum lini, of Fengreeke, ana iiij. boil
them in water q. s. until the third part be consumed, wherein power some
milk, and of fresh Butter, lb iij. Let a bath be made. With Figs, Leaven,
Mustard-seede, Cantharides, and Vinegar, let a strong Cautery or blistering
medicine be made hereof, which must be applied under the left side.

An appendix or addition serving for the cure of the Hypocondriall MELANCHOLY.
THe belly must be euacuated by a clyster, then a vein shall be opened, and the
humors made pliable to nature, at the last all such humors as do offend the
body, shall be expelled, and presently after such things must be prescribed as
will comfort the brain, Liver, and spleen, and will also disperse the
relics.

Then again, because of the stubbornes of the disease, we will concoct and
purge humors, and will strengthen the aforesaid parts: and then again drive
out the matter offending. All which we may effect with success by the former
medicines.

Such as heat and dry much, are to be avoided, whether they be medicines or
nutriments: whereupon some using such medicines and nutriments to allay
windynes, and rumbling, do very much increase the disease* yet the medicines
must not altogether be hot or cold, but as the circumstances, namely the
matters and accidents shall require; those medicines likewise that may breed
winds or detayne them in the body, must not be permitted.

A method serving for the knowledge of the VERTIGO or GIDDINES.
Giddiness is a disease, whereby the head, and all other parts of the body
seem to be turned about, so disturbing the brain and senses, that the
patient often falls down, unless he be held up by some stay near at hand.
And it does so happen, that they that are sick of this disease, now and then
fall down on the earth, with a turning, even as those that run in a ring,
and if rhey do attempt to turn round, presently are they brought to the
ground, whereas they that are sound, will endure many turns. Sometime they
will fall down, if they see another man turn round, or any thing else that
does move with a circular motion. In this disease the sight, common sense, and
imaginations are hurt. This disease is of nearest kin unto the falling
sickness, only herein they differ, that the giddy party is not deprived of
his senses, neither is he hurried this way and that way, as conuulsions deal
with their patients.

The part affected.
The part that is affected, is the brain, which does appear by the functions
that are hurt, for the animal faculty is grieved. But chiefly the brain is
affected, and then a headache was the forerunner, as also heaviness and
dullness thereof, annoyance of smell and taste, a ringing in the ears, and yet
never was it observed that the lower parts were endangered. But one while the
brain is affected, because it is agreeable to the stomach, heart, and other
inferior parts, for therein vicious humors are gathered together, or else
corrupt nourishment is therein contained, and hurtful crudeties generated; and
then queisinesse and gnawing of the stomach does very much trouble him; the
appetite is quite taken away, and the heart is very much fret^ed. If it be
caused by some other part of the body, or by staying of months, it shall
appear by his proper signs; but giddynesse is an accident appertayning both
to the sight and imagination, for both faculties are thereby hurt.

The Signs.
They will not endure the sight of those things which turn swiftly about.
Their sight is likewise depraved: or to their sight all things seem to turn
round, and darkness is often spread before their eyes, and they are very apt to
fall, and if they turn but a little, they presently fall to the ground: for
the action of the animal and sensitive soul is hurt, the imagination likewise
goes not scot-free, and the head is dull; these accidents will be of longer
continuance, if the brain be chiefly in fault, and if no affect of any other
part is known to be resident there.

The Causes.
It is caused by the abundance of boiling blood, and plenty of spirits, if it
be not avoided at the nose, when it is ready to run out. This we do commonly
observe in sharp diseases, and it is often caused by crude and raw humors, as
also venomous, which are either generated in the head, or in some one of the
inferior parts, especially in the stomach; because many crudities are therein
generated. Also it does take its beginning from the womb, by reason of the
communion these parts have with the brain. Moreover usual and accustomed
excrements are suppressed, (and that I may speak in general) all humors, from
whence vapors and windy spirits, gross and hot, turbulent and malign are
generated, and lifted up, for these by their motion do move the animal
spirits (which is the souls wagon, chiefly that which is in the foremost
ventricle of the brain) in a round by some inordinate motion, and so
earnestly, that a man does imagine that to be done outwardly, which is done
inwardly; and so the judgment of the imaginatiue faculty is perverted; and
oftentimes he does imagine that he turns round, and falls forward. And no
wonder: for those vapors turn round like a flame, and as the smoke turns
round in an oven, while they have no way out, the passage of the brain being
stopped* It is likewise caused by a hot distemper of the brain, which strongly
draws in many vapors, and does extenuate the humors, and puts them in rage:
again, all that may disquiet the brain, all that does stir up and heat
humors, as immoderate exercise, heat of the sun, and other like, which may
recall the fit, do cause this disease.

Prognostiques.
If giddiness do last long, it is next to an apoplexy, and falling sickness:
the former age did term it a little falling sickness. It must not therefore
be neglected, seeing it may soon be changed into the most pernicious affect.

A method serving for the cure of the GIDDINES.
LEt his air be temperate, bright and clear: that meat is good that breeds
good juice, and that which is easily digested, and is not windy but pleasing to
the stomach. Hunger must be avoided as well as glutting: let his drink be
waterish Wine; temperate motion and exercise is meet, yet rest is better for
the head: moderate sleep is wholesome; excrements must daily be furthered, if
they will not be avoided of their own accord: no perturbations of the mind
must be permitted, as wrath, grief, sadness, etc.

Emptiers.
Sir. of many infusions of Roses, of Diaprunum Solutiuum, Diacatholicon,
Electuarium de Psyllio, Hiera Logod. Hiera picra, Diacolocinth: Pillulae
Cocciae, Aureae, Arabicae, Mastichinae, Aggregatiuae, of the v. kinds of
Myrabolani, Tamarindi, Rhabarb: Manna, Seen, Polypody, Epithymon, Mirabolani
Citrini, Agaricu^ trochiscatu^. Vomit is good; if it does take his beginning
from the stomach. we must choose fit medicines for the offending humor, and yet
it is not one only humor that does offend: for choler is often joined with
other bad humors, and therefore such as purge choler, must be mingled with
them.

Auerters.
Let the Cephalica vein be opened, and that often, if the disease be caused by
blood or other hot humors. sharp Clysters in this case are good, especially
if we cannot let blood; frictions of the fartherest parts with a hot cloth
are commended, and we may descend by degrees from the neck and arms, to the
feet: we must not touch the head, lest we should offend it with rubbing,
unless the whole body be well purged before: for it does rather fill the head
with vapors. Let cups with scarifications be first applied to the foremost part,
then to the hinder part of the head, and let the hemroid veins be opened and
months provoked. sneezings, gargarismes, apophlegmatismes, a cautery of
leaven, Cantarides, and Vinegar, shall be applied behind his ears, or in stead
thereof, let an actual cautery be made in the crown of his head: for by this
means vapors are best resolved. Errhines of the juice of Cyclaminis,
A^agallis, which shall be drawn up at his nostrills: or let Nigella with old
Oil and Niter mixed together, Allayers of troublesome motions.
be drawn up into his nostrilles, after the manner and form before; for that
does purge the head best by the nostrills sir: of Quinces, Pomegranates, Roses,
Saccharum Rosaceum, juice of Berberies, Gooseberries, Diacydonium, sine
Speci^bus. waters of Lettuce, Roses, Violets, Plantane, Baulme; make an odor
of Camphire, Roses, and Vinegar, Oil of Roses* an irrhigation of his head with
Oil of Roses and Vinegar, after the patient has fed, let these be given him
to that end that vapors be not carried up to the head.

Strengthners.
Syrrupe of Apples, Staechas, Buglosse, Conserve of Buglosse, Borage, Saccharum
Rosatum, Diarrhodon Abbatis: Aromaticum Rosatum, Diatragacanthum frigidum,
Diatrium Sandalorum, Diamuscum Dulce. a decoction of Betony, Rosemary,
Eybright, Mints, Sage, Staechas, Centory the less, Galingale, Cynamon, Annise,
and Fennill seeds, Licorice, an Odor, of Nigellae, Maioram Castoreum, an
irrhigation of the head with digesting matters. A bath of the same, as also the
aforesaid cautery.

A more particular method for the Cure of the GIDDINES.
of the Roots of Acorus, of Galingale, Angelica, A Clyster*
ana iiij, of Sage, Origan, Mint, ana M.i. ss, of Betony flowers, Staechas, the
less Centory, ana M.i. Annise and Fennill seed, Carawais, ana i of white and
light Agaricke ii, of the seed of Bastard Saffron, ss, of Polypody, Senae
Alexandrinae, ana vi. boil these in water q. s. unto lb. i ss, add to the
straining Pulueris Diasenae, ii, Hierae Diacolocynth. i, Diacatho. i, hereof
make a Clyster.

of Succory cum Rhabarbaro, ii, sir: A Iulep.
of the juice of Endive i ss, of the waters of Wormwood, Cychory, Endive ana
iij.

of the Roots of Grass i ss, Endive and Succory leaves, ana M i ss, Fennel
and Anniseeds, ana iij, A potion.
scraped Liquorice, ss. Polypodij Quercini, i, Rhabarb. Electi, iij, boil them
in water q. s. to lb i ss, add to the strayning sir. Rosarum sol^tiui, iij.

Pills.
Hierae picrae Galeni, aggregatiuaru^, ana i ss, sir. of mints. q. s. make
hereof Pills: when vapors arising from the stomach do trouble the brains
Spirits, then shall these be administered.

Pills.
Pills Arabicarum, Sp: Hiera Simp. Gal. ana ss. Rhabarb. optimi, Agarici
Trochiscati, ana ss, Diagridij, gr: iiij. sir. of Mint and Staechas. q. s.
hereof make Pills. let him take ss, one hour before Supper once in a week.

A vomit.
of Betony-roots, Asari, ana i, of hulld-barley ss. of the seed of Radish, ii,
boil them in water q. s. to the consumption of the third part, take of the
strayning hereof v. unto the which add Oxymellis Squillitici, ii. take it in
the morning, afterward let him take a good quantity of the broth of a Hen, and
after that let him prepare to vomit, and then take some more broth.

A Iulep.
the sir* of Pomegranates, Acetosi. simp. ana i ss, of the decoction of Barley,
vi, of Endive, Plantane and Lettuce-water ana ii ss, make hereof a Iulep. It
does hinder the vapors rising up, and does stay the moving of the Spirits.

A mixture.
the pulpe of a Quince ii, Conserve of Roses, i, of Rosemary flowers, ss.
Aromatici rosati Gabr. i ss, sirupe of Roses, i ss, make a mixture of these,
and let the patient take i, after supper and dinner.

A potion.
of Sage-leaues, M iij, of the seeds of piony i. of Anniseeds ss, of scraped
liquorice vi; of the Oil of Beuers stones i, boil these in a sufficient
quantity of Wine, unto lb i.

An electuary
of the Roots of Galingale, zed^ariae, ana iiij, of Sage ii ss, of preserved
Ginger, i, Nutmeg, Cinnamon ana i, Piony-seeds, i ss, of Juniper, i, of Mint i
ss, sir. of Roses q. s. make hereof a soft electuary.

Lozenges.
Aromatici rosati, Diarrhod. abbatis without Musk ana i, of the finest Sugar
and Wormwood-water, q. s. make an Electuary in Lozenges.

of the seeds of Nigella Romana ii. Nitri i. old oil q. s. make hereof a
head-purger. A purger for the head


the juice of Bet^, Maioram, ana, i. ss, the juice of the leaves of Cowcumbers,
iiii, Nigella Romana i. A Sternutatory.
Let them be mingled, and some portion thereof be drawn to the nose.

of Raysins the stones being taken out, ana ii. of Hysope, Origan, ana i.
Acoriconditi, Mustard Seed, ana i. ss, A Masticatory.
Pepper, Masticke, ana i. of Honey q. s. let a masticatory be made.

of the roots of As^rm, ana ss, of Betony, A Gargarisme.
Sage-leaues, ana M i. Pyrethri, Mustard Seed, ana ^, boil these in water q.
s. until the third part be consumed, to the strayning add Oxymel.
squiliticum, ana ii. make a Gargarisme.

oil of Lillies, ana i. ss, oil of Beauer stones, ss, An Ointment.
Wine of a good savor, ana iij. boil these until the Wine be consumed, then
add a little Wax and Vinegar, and make hereof an ointment.

of Betony leaves, flowers of Camomile, Roses, A bag.
ana M i. of the seeds of Nigella, ana ss, of prepared Coriander, ana iij.
being dried, let them be beaten a little, and let them be sewed in a linen
cloth like a pillow.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the GIDDINES.
FIrst, we will euacuate with a sharp clyster, then will we open a vein, if
nothing hinder us; then with a purging medicine, we will more fully empty
humors offending, and breeding store of vapors: afterward by frictions,
ventoses, scarifications, clysters, we will drive back the force of vapors
into the opposite parts. Binders and such as do stay the vapors from ascending
shall be applied, to wit, Rosewater ii, of Vinegar* iii. last of all, we will
strengthen the stomach and head, and will disperse the relics with
masticatories, clensers of the nose, and such like; all which we will effect
with the abouenamed medicines, so that universals be rightly applied to
particulars. If this disease has his beginning from the stomach, as commonly
it has, then we will use a vomit: if it be caused by the womb or other
members, let it be cured as in those places is showed, and then let the brain
be strengthened. If it be caused by things swiftly turned about, let him be
conveyed from the sight of them. If it be caused by long ^asting, let him take
a crust soaked in strong Wine. If it do arise from the staying of humors that
were wont to run, we will stir up their wanted excretion.

A method serving for the knowledge of the INCVBVS or NIGHTMARE.
INcubus is a passion wherein a man does think himself stifled with a great
weight lying on him in his sleep; likewise difficulty of speech and breathing
do accomp^ny it, his senses are amazed, not taken a way. It does differ from
the falling sickness herein, the matter causing the falling sickness is
venomous, so is it not in the Hag or Mare, here is no conuulsion, as is in the
falling sickness.

The part affected.
The part affected is the heart-walls, or part of the midriffe. The man does
imagine himself stifled with somewhat that does lie upon him, and he can
scarce draw his breath: the brain also in this disease is annoyed by the
consent of the lower parts. The sensitive faculty is disturbed by vapors that
do ascend. All the senses are dull, motion is difficult, and the imagination
evil.

Signs.
The signs are these: he moves with much difficulty, and does imagine that he
is assaulted and oppressed by some things for he thinks that somewhat does sit
upon his breast; his sense in his sleep is stupefied, and he supposes himself
to be stifled, in so much that he cannot speak a word, although he endeavor to
his utmost power; and if he do utter any voice, it is uncertain and not very
distinct. Sometime he groans, as they do that weep, and his fancy is so
offended, that he does think seriously that a Spirit is there; whereupon
anguish of mind comes withal, and he has a desire to cry out withal. From
hence is caused the heating of his blood, and as it were, boiling, and so the
Spirits being attenuated, and the pores opened, the man suddenly starteth up.

The causes.
It is caused by a gross and cold Phlegm, as also from gross and melancholy
blood settled about the heart and veins of the breast, from whence gross
vapors are belched out, wherewith, as often as raw vapors caused by gluttony
are mingled, then in the aforesaid places, the parts of the midriffe are
oppressed, as also the lungs, whereby difficulty of breathing is caused, and the
imagination stifled; and when it comes from hence into the throat, the voice
seems to be stopped. If it be conveyed to the brain, it does molest the mind
and sense with ugly sights. If the months or hemeroids be stayed in any, they
do send out such vapors. It is not, as some suppose, caused by an old Hagge
riding us.

Prognostiques.
He that uses a slender diet, is seldom troubled with the Mare, but it does
frequent such as have many crudities. It does seldom seize on them that lie on
their sides. If this affect chance to be of long continuance, it does threaten
an apoplexy, or falling sickness, as also madness, very often the hypocondriall
melancholy, giddines, Palsy, conuulsion, a stretching of sinews, or sudden
death: for it is not unusual with many to have died suddenly in their beds in
the depth of night; children, fat men, and such whose digestion is stopped, are
very much troubled with this disease. If after the patient awake, panting of
the heart, and cold sweat do happen, it is an ill sign.

A method serving for the cure of the NIGHTMARE.
LEt the air be temperately hot, and bright, cold, winds and sunshine must be
avoided. His meat must be such that may be easily digested, and of good juice,
not windy; let him eat sparingly, especially at supper. He may drink white
wine mingled with water; sleeping in the daytime, especially presently after
meat, is unwholesome. the excrements must be avoided by art or nature, at last
the quietness of mind must be procured. Preparers.
To prepare the body, use sir. of Staechas, Mints, Wormwood. Oximel Simplex,
Melicratum, Wormwood-water, Maioram, Buglosse, Betony, Fumitary* a decoction of
Fennell-roots, and Parsely, of Rosemary, Hyssop, Endive, Borage, Buglosse,
Fumitary, with wind Ceterach, Succory, of the heads of hops, Maden-haires,
Violet-flowers, the bark of the Roots of Capers, Liquorice, Raysins, Honey, and
Sugar added sir. of Fumitary, Hops, Apples. When there is great store of
phlegm, we may use the former; if abundance of melancholy, we may use the
latter: let the same be observed in purgers.

Emptiers.
A vein shall be opened if the body be full, or if months, or hemroids be
stopped against custom. first the Saphena, next day the shoulder vein may be
opened, and the grosser the blood is, the more must be drawn out: at the
length, if the disease be not driven away by using the remedies prescribed,
let a vein in the for^head be opened, or else that under the tongue. Pillulae
Cocciae, de Agarico, Mastichinae, Stomaticae, Hiera picra Galeni, Hiera
Diacolocynthidos, Logodij, Ruffi, Cassia Fistula, Pill. de Lapide
lazuli-Diacatholicon, Diaphaenicum, Diasena, Sena.

Auerters*
By such medicines as draw, and convey it to another part of the body, this
disease is to be cured. Such Clysters as are not very gentle* Cupping-glasses,
fastened to the calves of the leg, frictions of the head, especially the hinder
part, frequent combings of the head. sight errhines. gargarismes. such as
provoke sneezng. light apophlegmatismes. The disease is likewise helped by such
as stop the vapors from ascending to the head: As Diarrhodon Abbatis, Caro
Cydoniorum sine Speciebus, Diamangaritum frigidum, Saccharum Rosatum,
Corrall-Srenghnors. Triacle, Diambra, Diamuscum dulce, Aromaticum rosatum,
Dianthos, Conserve of Rosemary-flowers, of Buglosse, Acorus, the blacke-seed
and roots of Piony, Nutmeg. Anointing of the head and breast and belly with the
Oil of Camomill, the Ointment of Anniseeds, hot wine: A fomentation of the
head with the Oil of Anniseeds, being somewhat hot; a Dropax must be applied
to the head and sides: unto five portions of Pitch, but one of the Oil of
Spike must be added; or if that be wanting, as much of Masticke; It must be
reasonably heated when it is laid to the head, it must likewise be wrapped in a
Linen cloth, lest it should stick too close unto the skin. A bag, with the
flowers of Roses, Buglosse, Violets, leaves of Baulme, which have been moystned
in white wine and baulme-water, apply it unto the heart somewhat hot. A Cucufa
must be made of Betony, sweet Maioram, Rosemary-flowers. Staechas, red Roses,
Orange-pilles, Cloves, Nutmeg, the Root of wild Galingale, Coriander, Oil of
Anniseeds.

More particular medicnies for the cure of the NIGHTMARE.
of the decoction mentioned herafter lb. i therein dissolve Sp. Hierae Logodali
i ss, Pulueris Sancti, ii ss, A Clyster.
Oil of Camomill, Anniseeds, Rue ana i, of Malmsey, iij.

of the Roots of Acorus ss, Angelica, vi, A Cliyster.
of the leaves of Betony, Perwinckle, Violets, M. i. of red Roses, Camomill,
Mellilote, ana M ss. boil them in fleshbroth q. s. unto lb i. ss, add to the
strayning Pulueris Diaesenae ii. Hierae logodali, i. Diacatho. ss, oil of Rue,
of Camomile, ana i. ss, of Salt, i.

A Iulep.
of the sir. of Staechas, Wormwood, ana i. ss, Oxymellis simplicis, sir. of
Mints, ana ss, the water of Wormwood, of Buglosse, Hop^, ana iiij. Let the
patient take hereof iiij.

A potion.
Diasenae i. ss, Diaturbith cum rhabarb. vi. Oxymellis simplicis. i. water of
Hops, of Fumitary, ana i. ss.

Pills.
Pillul. de agarico cochiarum, ana i. ss, Pulueris hierae logodali ss, sir. of
Staechas, q. s. of this make eight pills, let it be taken after midnight.

Bolus.
of the Triacle of Andromachus, i. of Mithridate, Angelica root, ana i. water
of Angelica, of Carduus benedictus, ana i. ss, make a bolus hereof which must
be given the next morning.

A vomit.
Oxymellis squillitici, ii. of the decoction of Radish vi. of sweet oil i. ss,
of this make a vomiting medicine, wherewith you shall expel the crudities of
the stomach caused by surfeit.

A potion.
of the Roots of Acorus, Angelica, Piony ana ss, of Fennel, grass, ana i. of
Fumitary, Betony, Dodder, Hearts-tongue, of chafe, ana M i, of Hyssop,
Horehound, Endive, Borage, ana M ss, of Cummin and Anniseeds, ana ss, of
Raysins, i, eight damask pruines, of the flower of Woodrowell M ss, Senae
Alexandrina, Polypodij quercini, ana i, of white and light Agaricke, of Ginger,
ana i ss. of Nutmeg, ii. Boil these in water q. s. unto lb.i. ss, add to the
strayning of clarified Honey, of the finest Sugar, ana i. hereof make a potion,
which may be used when you have observed by the urine that the humors are
perfectly concoted: for the space of 4 or 5 days the patient must take hereof
iiij.

of the Conserues of Acorus, iij, let the patient after every purging medicine
take hereof i. An Electuary.


Aromaitci Rosati Gabrielis iij, of old Triacle, i ss. Pleresarcotici, iiij,
Diamusci dulcis, ii ss, Conserve of Rosemary, of Rosemary-flowers, of Acorus,
ana iiij, of Piony seeds iiij, of Coriander ii, Syri Staechados q. s. hereof
make an electuary, and after meat let him take i.

Diacimini, ii, of Anniseeds. the Roots of Elicampanie, of Angelica ana i ss,
Another.
Aromatici rosati Gab. ii ss, of Nutmeg, Cinnamon, ana i, of Orange-pilles
preserved i ss. sir. de Epithymo, q. s. make hereof an electuary in the form
of an opiate.

of the Oil of Anethus, of sweet Almonds, An unguent.
ana i, of Camomill, ss, of Piony-seeds ss, a little strong Wine and Wax, q.
s. make hereof an unguent for the breast and stomach.

of dried Betony, i, the flowers of Staechas, red Roses, A Cucufa.
of Rosemary flowers, ana ss, Nutmeg, Cloves, ana ii, of the Root of wild
Galingale, of the rindes of Lemmons, iiij, hereof make a Cucufa.

Orange-pilles dried, ss, of wild Galingale, A Powder.
of Cloves, ana ii. Cocci infect. ana iiii. of Coriander, ana ii. ss, of dried
sweet Maioram, dried Betony, ana ss, Staechados Arab. of red Roses, ana ii,
make hereof a powder grossly beaten, put it into a bag, and lay it to the
head, it does very much comfort and refresh the brain.

of the seeds and pills of Oranges, the roots of Galingale, ana iii. of Baulme
leaves M i. Buglosse, Borage, A Quilt.
Staechas, and Rosemary flowers, ana M i. Electuarij de gemmi^, i, ss, make a
little bag and put these therein, and apply it to the heart, sometime you may
sprinkle some Malmsey thereon.

An Appendix, serving for the cure of the MARE or HAG.
FIrst let the common matter be extracted by a gentle clyster, then cause a
vein to be opened, if blood do abound; then let the humors which do molest
the body, be made subject to nature, afterward expel them forth the body
with fitting medicines; the brain likewise shall be emptyed by a Gargarisme,
or Apophlegmatisme, or with a sneezing powder, or by some other means before
mentioned. Afterward such things may be prescribed, which may hinder the
ascending of vapors to the brain, and at the length the parts that were
affected, shall be corroborated with strengthneres, and the relics shall be
consumed: and all this may be effected with most happy success by these and
the former medicines, if that universals be well sorted with particulars.

A method serving for the knowledge of the FALLING-SICKNES.
THe Falling Sickness is a conuulsion of all the parts of the body, not
continual, but that which comes by distances of time, the mind and senses
being thereby hurt. It does take its name from the great affect which does
oppress the patient. There be three differences of Falling-sicknes. For it
does either happen, when the brain has the cause of the disease in it self,
which is usual, when the disease has its beginning from thence. Sometime it
is caused by the evil affect of the mouth of the stomach, or some other part
underneath, from whence venomous infection creeps into the brain through
secret passages. For some say that they shall be sick before the fit does
come upon them; because they feel the cause of the disease, like a vapor of
cold wind, to be carried to the brain by the continuity of the other parts,
from that part of the body wherein the disease is chiefly seated: and the
cause of this mischief is for the most part a venomous vapor, carried up from
some lower part of the body into the brain, and then the patient does suddenly
fall with a Conuulsion. When the brain is first affected, the eyes are
darkened, the head does ache, and withal is heavy; their mind and senses are
dull, their dreams are troublesome, and their fit sudden. If the mischiefs
cause takes its beginning from the mouth of the stomach, the patients, for
the most part, are worse; a sharp assault of the fit will sooner come upon
the patient, if he be fasting; and before this fit comes, they feel a
quey^inesse, gnawing, and disturbance of the stomach, as also a panting of the
heart, and a floating of ill humors about the stomach; at the length they fall
into a swound, and then they do vomit phlegm or choler when the fit is at
an end. It does differ from all sorts of conuulsions, because herein the
conuulsion is not perpetual. In conclusion the sensitive and principal
operations are hurt in the falling sickness: in conuulsions, the principal
functions are not hurt at all. There is likewise a gentler kind of falling
sickness, which does not much differ from Giddiness.

The part affected.
The part affected is the brain, which does appear by those functions which
are hurt; for all the faculties suffer alike, and are alike hurt. The brain is
affected either by it self, or by consent of the stomach or some other parts:
the signs of the affected part appear by that which was said before. When the
fit comes suddenly, the brain as an isntrumental part, even as the
ventricle, but chiefly the middle ventricle is affected. For it is not affected
as a similar part, because that cannot be without distemper: but the Falling
sickness is a disease which hinders the action of the animal faculties: for
sense, motion, and all the principal faculties are as yet after a different
manner, the motive faculty is depraved, and they are deprived of the other
faculties.

The Signs.
The fit oftentimes comes suddenly with much foam, and foam is a peculiar and
especial note of this disease, which, because it is slimy, may be drawn out
at length, yet in a gentler falling sickness this does not appear; and then,
when he is deprived of senses, he falls to the ground with a violent shaking
of his body, his face is wrested, his eyes turned upwards, his chinne is
sometime driven to his shoulders, and oftentimes he voydeth seed, ordure, urine
against his will, his muskles are loosned: all these are signs of a strong
fit. Moreover, they do often short, and cry out in their sleep, and their
voices are faint, like unto the voices of such as are almost strangled. They
oftentimes thrust out their toungs, and it is to be feared, that sometime they
bite them with their teeth. Sometime their teeth are so fast closed together,
that they are in danger of stifling: this fit in some lasts not long, and
then they come to themselves again, and rise of their own accord. Very often,
before the coming of this fit, they breathe with difficulty: some feel a
cold vapor ascend from the nape of the neck, unto the crown of the head; in
some, windines does trouble the belly and heart. Palenes of the face,
inordinate motion of the tongue, pain and heaviness of the head, forgetfulness,
sadness, ficklenes of mind, troublesome dreams are vshers to this disease, then
are they taken with a giddines: sometime darkness, and diverse dim glisterings
appear before their eyes.

The cause.
It is most commonly caused by the abundance of phlegmy humors, from whence
corrupt, venomous, and stinking vapors break out, whereby obstructions are
caused in the passage of the brain, and the passages of the spirits are hereby
hindered; by this means the brain, and the roots of the sinews shrink, and as
it were tremble in the expelling of that which is obnoxious, whether it be
vapor or humor.

Prognostiques.
This disease for the most part does frequent children, because they are of a
moyster brain then young men; next unto these, men of full growth, and old men
least of all. This disease is more incident to men then women, and usually it
does stick close to the patient, unless it be taken away by medicines in its
minority, or at the least ripening age, or the first coming down of monthly
terms. For seeing there is an alteration in childrens bodies, when the hairs
begin to grow; if it be not then cured, it will not one a sudden depart from
the patient. An old falling sickness is incurable, even as that which we bring
into the world, with us. And even as in the spring time it commonly does
frequent the patient, so is it at that time most dangerous. Again, when the
whole body is affected, and it does so suddenly creep upon the patient, that
he does not perceive any sense of it in some part of the body separated from
the head: this is likewise incurable: if this disease be vehement, and the fits
come often upon the patient, and the symptoms be dangerous, he will in short
time be freed of the disease by death: but if a quartane ague, or any other
longer fever surprise him, it portends health.

A method serving for the cure of the FALLING-SICKNES.
LEt his air be hot and dry, and his meat birds of Mountains, Hens* Fish,
Pulse, Swines flesh, Garlic, Mustard, Onions, Caroots, Nuts, and Dates must
be avoided; but Capers are very good. Let his meat be mixed with such things
as do dissolve and extenuate the humors. Of this sort are wild Bettony.
Hyssop, Penny-royall. His drink must be small waterish wine, not old Mulsa.
Exercise of the body and frication of the head are preualent; and even as the
moderate use of Venery is helpful, so on the contrary, the immoderate use
thereof is hurtful: sleep in the day time must be avoided, and sleep in the
night season be moderately taken. Let the excrements be avoided in due time,
and if nature is deficient herein, Art must be used; cares, fears, and
perturbations of the mind must be avoided.

Preparers.
Oxymel Squillit. Simplex, sir. of Hyssop, Staechas, Wormwood, and Apples, sir.
Acetosus, Simplex et compositus. A decoction of Betony, Hyssop, Stachas, Roots,
and seeds of Piony, Maioram, Rosemary, Wormwood, Fennel and the seeds of
Annise, Cinnamon, Licorice, and a little of Oxymel simp.

Emp^iers.
Let a vein in the ancle be opened; then the Cephalica, at the entrance of the
spring: if the disease be grown old, and if the cause proceed from the other
parts, Diaphoenicum Electuarium Indum. Agaricke made into trochisks in this
disease is medicinable. Hiera Gal. Simplex, Logod. Hiera Diacolocynth. are very
good. Pillulae aureae, Alephanginoe, Assaiaret, of Hermodactyls; Pillulae
Cocciae, F^tidae, Mastichinae de Euphorbio. Bears-foot. A decoction of the
Roots of Piony, Sage-leaues, Hyssop, Betony, Primrose, Baulme, Staechas,
Buglosse, Annise, and Piony seeds, Licorice, Cynamon, Nutmeg: whereunto add
Electuarium Indum. Agaricke made into Trochiskes.

Auerters.
Clysters of the decoction of Aristolochia, Mercury, Camomill, Piony-roots,
Betony, Thyme, Penny-royall, Centory the less, Agaricke, Calaminth; whereunto
add Hierapicra, Melrosatum, Hiera Diacolocynth. Oil of Rue* Suppositors,
Apophlegmatismes, of the seeds of Piony, Bastard Pellitory, Masticke,
Masticatories, of Hyssop, Nutmeg, Beauers-stones, Roots of Piony, Bastard
Pellitory, Ginger, Masticke, Staues-acre, Raisins. Nasals of the juice of the
Roots of Piony, Rue, Mummy and Honey. Gargarismes, of wine and Vinegar, wherein
boil the flowers of Staechas, the leaves of Origan, Hyssop, Betony, Maioram,
Calamint, Mustard Seed, Bastard Pellitory, Nigella Romana: to this add Oxymel
squill. A sneezing of pepper, Hellebore, Beauers-stone, the Roots of Piony,
Nutmeg, Cupping-glasses with Scarification, must be applied to the sides and
shoulder blade bone, as also to the hammes and ancles, if the cause do proceed
from the other parts: And then again unto the hinder parts of the head. But
especially they shall be laid to the extreme parts: if the part cannot be
bound, emplaysters must be applied, which are made of Mithridate, or Triacle,
with rubifiers. Such extreme parts as are capable of ligatures, shall be
bound, that the vapors may be hindered in their progress. Frictions shall be
used from the upper parts unto the nethermost. Hem^cides shall be opened with
Horse-leeches; which must be applied to the head, or some other convenient part
of the head. But Cauteries must be made in the hinder part of the head, if the
brain be of it self ill affected. But by no means must a cautery be used,
when as the venomous vapors shall be communicated to the head by some other
part, unless by long continuance of this communication the brains sessence
should be corrupted. Rubifyng medicines shall in like sort be applied to the
neck, and to that part from which the venomous vapor is sent, which may be
made of mustardseed, Euphorbium, Pepper, Cantharides, strong Vinegar and leaven.

Triacle and Mithridate must be very much used. Strengthners.
The conserve of our description, and they are al of wonderful effect.
Plerisarcoticum, Diarrhodon abbatis, Diacorum, Diamuscum, sweet and bitter.
Conserve of Rosemary, Stachas, Galingale, Sage. Orange rinds preserved, and
preserved Pellitory. The water of the flowers of the tree T^lia, the scrapings
of Iuory, Mistle-to. Harts-horne, the hoose of an ass, mans-bones burnt. Assa
Faetida, Bastard, Pellitory, Hysop, Cow-slips, Elicampany, the roots and seeds
of Piony, Rue, the Emerauld-stone, the seed of Palma Christi, Agarick, the
skull of a man, (if it be to be used about women, and a woman's skull, if for a
man) burnt until it be whit. By daily use of this, some have bin recovered of
the disease; i* at one time hereof is sufficient. The bladder of a Bore taken
very hot out with the stale must be put into a hot oven, and dried until it
may be beaten to powder, is very good. A medicine of squilla. a decoction of
the wood Guaiacum, sarsaeparillae, cynae oil of Philosophers; an ointment of
the oil of Rue, Euphorbij, Titles, Foxes. A cataplasme of tosted bread, and
wheat, with Mithridate, Piony-roots, wild Betony, Honyed-water. A bath, a
cautery must be made in the hinder part of the head, or in the fleshy part of
the arm, if no good can be done with the former medicines; or else in the
seame of the forepart of the head.

The cure of the FALLING-SICKNES more particularly.
A Clyster.
of the roots of Pyony, i: of Acorus, Aristolochiae, ana ss, of Rue, Centory
the less, Wormwood, Sage, Hysop, Betony, ana M ss, of Anni-seeds, i. Pulpae
colocynth. i. boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss, add to the strayning
Sp. hierae logod. i. oil of Cammomile iij. Diacatholi^. i. ss, of Honey, ii. of
Salt, i. Give this before dinner as well in the fit, if it do last long, as
also when the fit has left him.

A Iulep.
of the sir. of Staechas, Hysop, Oxymel, squillit. ana i. ss, of the decoction
of Staechas, Hysop, Calaminth, Sage, Betony, Rosemary, x. for the space of
four or five days the patient may take iiij.

Pills.
Oxymellis squillit. lb ss, give to the patient i. ss hereof, with the
decoction of Sage, Piony, Hysop.

Pills.
the pills of Faetida Eliphangina, Coccia, ana i, of black Hellibore, gr, xi.
sir. of Staechas q. s. give these about the middle of the night.

of the Roots of Acor^s, Angelica iij, A Potion.
the rinds of the Roots of the Elder tree ss. seeds of Rue ss. Piony Roots, ss,
leaves of Betony, Rosemary, sweet Maioram, Hyssop, Wormwood, Time, Sage,
Parsely, M. i. Staechados Arab. ana, M ss, flowers of Buglosse, Borage, ana M,
i. ss, the seeds of annise and fennill iij, of Licorice scraped v. of Raysins,
the stones being taken out, i. of white and light Agaricke vi. seeds of Bastard
Saffron, bruised ss, Polipodij quercini i ss, Visci quercini, iij. Senae
Alexand. vi. of black Hellebore i. of Ginger, i. boil these in water q. s. to
lb.i. ss, add to the straining, of Nutmeg, Cynamon i ss, the sir. of Hyssop,
Oxymellis simplicis, ana i. ss.

Hierae Diacolocynth. of the pills of Faetida, Pills.
Agaricke made into a trochiske, ana i. of Beauerstone, gr. vi. sir, of
Staechas q. s.

of Agaricke made into a trochiske, ii. of black Hellebore, Nutmeg, Pepper,
ana ss, of Beuer-stone, Pills.
gr. viij. of Staechas.

of Mithridate i, of Triacle ss, of Beauer-stone, gr. iiii. give this to the
patient in the day of his fit, with the decoction of Hysop, as before.

of the roots of Betony, Raddish, A vomit.
ana i. the seeds of Cresses, Raddish, Orache, ana, ii. boil these in water q.
s. until the third part be consumed. Give to the patient ii. add to the
strayning oil of Spikenard, i.

of Nutmeg, roots of Piony, A powder to provoke sneezing.
ana i. of black Hellebore ii. of Bastard Pellitory, white Pepper, ana i. mix
these together.

of Nutmeg, roots of Acorus, Piony, preserved Ginger, ana iiij. Mustard Seed,
Bastard Pellitory, ana i. ss, A Masticatory.
of Raysins, Masticke, ana i.

of the rinds of Elder-roots i. bastard Pellitory, A Gargarisme.
Gallingale, ana ss, the leaves of Betony, Orange, Baulme, ana M i. of scraped
Licorice iiij. of Anni-seed, iii. of Cubebs, i. ss, of Raysins, the stones
being taken out, M i. boil these in water q. s* unto lb i. ss, add to the
strayning, Oxymel. sq^il. iiii.

A mixture.
the conserve of Rosemary, Buglosse, ana i. Diamusci dulcis, ii. of Triacle,
Mithridate, ana i. ss, seeds and roots of Piony, ii. of the herb Paralysis,
rhabarb. ana i. bastard Pellitory, the seed of Sanctonicus, ana ii. ss, of
Sage, ii, Visci quercini, i. of man or woman's skull, ii. preserved
Orange-rinds, ii. ss, sir. of Hysop, q. s. After the patient is purged, four
hours before dinner give the patient i. and after this, drink a little of the
decoction of Hysope.

Lozenges.
Sp. Diamusci dulcis ss, of Nutmeg, Myrrh, ana ss, of the grains of Piony, ii.
the powder of mans-skull, burnt, scraped Iuory, Harts-horne, ana i. of the
finest Sugar dissolved in Rosemary-water, and Hysop-water, q. s.

An Electuary.
of the powder of mans-skull burnt, of the powder of the seeds and roots of
Piony, ana i. ss, of Beauer stone, O^opauasis, of the best Mithridate, ana ii.
make an Electuary of the sir. made with the decoction of Sage, Piony, Rosemary,
Betony, Squinant.

Pills.
Assae foetidae, of Beauer-stone, ana ii. of the roots and seeds of Piony* ana
i. of Nutmeg, ii. Diagalangae, ii, with the aforesady sir. make pills hereof,
and give them at night ss.

of the roots of Flower-de-luce, Piony, Ciperus, ana ss, Cucufa.
seeds of Piony, the skull of a man, ii. of Mace, Nutmeg, ana i. of the flowers
of Cammomile M ss.

Pills.
Visci quercini, seeds and roots of Piony, ana i. ss, Nutmeg, i. ss, of
Anni-seeds, i. ss, Sacchari buglossati vii. in every pill, i.

An appendix serving for the cure of the FALLING-SICKNES.
THe patient must forbear taking such things as may breed vapors, and those
things which do stir up this disease by secret property, namely Parsely,
Goates-flesh, Lettuce, Purslane, and all Coolers: when the fit has lost him,
if he be stricken in years, it will be good to use a Clyster, to draw down
the matter offending; and then if the body be full, a vein shall be cut.
Offending humors must be expelled once every week. Afterward the humors that
fly up to the head, must be driven back by frictions, and stronger Clysters
then the former; the passages likewise of the venomous vapors shall be
hindered by ligatures, if they may be perceived to hasten to the brain, from
some other remote part. The ligatures shall be somewhat above that place, from
whence the vapors arise, and then such things must be prescribed, that nourish
and strengthen the head and body: all which may be effected by the grace of
God, if universals be in due sort applied to particulars: if the other above
mentioned do no whit prevail, an actual cautery must be used, or in stead of
that, a deep potentiall, of Cantharides, Leaven, and Vinegar, in the coronall
seame, if these venomous humors are in the brain. But in youths a cautery
shall be made in the hinder part, which may run for the space of 60 days.
Likewise the skull may be opened with a trepan, that black vapors may have
time to avoid, and the matter whereby they are caused, by such means may be
consumed. These cauteries shall in like manner be made in the lower parts,
from whence these vapors at the first did come in the time of his fit: if it
does last long, that it may the sooner be ended, he may be called on with a
loud voice, his nose pinched, his fingers nipped, sneezings provoked, painful
frictions and ligatures, his teeth must be parted with a st^ffe put between
them, his tongue and chops rubd, and a rag must be put to the tip of his
tongue, the rag being first dipped in Rue, wherein Triacle has been dissolved.
Rub the tongue likewise over with Rue, Beauer stone, also mix the seeds of
Piony with them, and put them into the nostrils, for this must need^ shorten
the fit: if these vapors do arise from the stomach, a vomit is good; and
then he may be purged with Hiera; then o^ ^ments, emplaisters, and other
medicines which may comfort the stomach, must be prescribed.

A method serving for the knowledge of SPASMVS or CONVVLSION.
SPasmus is a Conuulsion, or a shrinking of the sinews, and is an effect which
does force the sinews, and muskles unwillingly, to that same disposition of
body, which they did enjoy by the benefit of the animal faculty, when they
were in perfect health: this I say is an vnuoluntary motion in the part which
usually did move of its own accord. Sometime the whole body is taken with a
conuulsion, which sometime does happen to such as have the falling sickness; in
which accident, the Roots of the sinews are hurt, and the brain being shrunk
together, does join all its force together, for the expelling of that which is
hurtful. The mind is vitiated as well as the sense, because the brain is
diseased. This disease does trouble the patient by fitts, not afflicting them
continually, as it does happen in other diseases of like kind. Sometimes all
parts of the body except the head, are shrunk together; but for the most part,
this affect does happen unto some one part of the body, as the eye, the Root
of the tongue, the skin of the forehead, the Shoulders, Arms, Legs. But this
depraved motion, which does chance to molest the conuulsed part, does in this
sort differ from the natural motion of the same part. The muskles and sinews
are drawn toward the Roots from whence they come, as in a natural motion,
only this is done not without much reluctation and pain* for natural motion
is voluntary, not compelled, and has its seat by the Root of the sinews in
the brain, from whence the beginning of motion is bestowed on the chief
sinews, and by their means on the muscles, and so are the muscles both
stretched, and drawn back to their own Root, drawing likewise that part of
the body with them, wherein they are planted. There is a kind of conuulsion
much slighter then the former, which is caused by gross winds, winding
themselves into the substance of the sinews; and these cause a strong pain,
but somewhat shorter which of its own accord departs; howsoever by much
frication the patient is freed of it. This kind of conuulsion seldom lasts
longer then the space of an hour, and we may perceive this kind of crampe in
our Legs, Fingers ends, and Toes, and in some the Legs, Arms, and hands are so
shrunk together, that maugre the strength of many men, they cannot be
stretched out, until the fit be ended.

The part affected.
Sometime the brain is here affected first, and chiefly, and then the face
with the whole body is shrunk up together, no change of the body happening
before. But for the most part, a conuulsion does light upon the muscles in
determinate parts, whereby the part affected plainly shows that the muskles
are grieved. For the affection must ever be referred to that muskle or sinew,
which does move those parts that are hurt. For the muscle is the proper
instrument of motion, which if it be forcibly drawn up to its Root, may very
well be said to be hurt; even as in a conuulsion of the eye, which is called
squinting, the muscles which move the eye, are plucked together; and in like
manner is it with the other parts; for in all such diseases, always on muscle,
sometimes more are drawn backward, and they draw the part with them wherein
they are set, and depriues them of motion, insomuch that either they seem
crooked, or wrested. If the lips be drawn together, the broad muskle, from
whence the muskles of the lips do spring, are first affected: the same may be
said of the other parts of the body.

The Signs.
With all stretchings of the sinews, a vehement pain for the most part is
joined, which if it remain very long with the patient, does exceedingly waste
the strength. The part affected is so drawn toward his Root, by means of
sinews and muskles (and that against their will) that it cannot be reduced to
his former habit, and while all parts under the head are conuulsed, the body
can either by no means be bowed, or else it is so bowed forward, that the
chinne is fastened unto the breast, or else the head is so wrested backward, that
the head is, as it were fastened to the shoulder-blades. The face is ouerspred
with rednes, and is troubled with pain. Tears gush out of their eyes, which
are also wrested. The mouth can hardly be opened: the Back, Iaws, Hands, Arms,
and Legs are stiff. And when the disease is increased, the patient is
afflicted with such extremity of pain, that he starteth out of his bed, and
clasping his thumb in his fist, cries out aloud, and like unto a mad man
talks idly, and sometime casts out drink at his nostrils.

The Caus^s.
The efficient cause is either fulness, or emptines: fulness is either caused by
blood, and then a conuulsion happens suddenly, even unto such as are sound;
an idle life, gluttony, and drunkenness did go before; it is in like manner
caused by a phlegmy humor, which does wind it self even as the blood does,
into the sinews and muskles: for sometime they so swell in breadth and
thicknes, and necessarily shrink in length, and hereby cause a conuulsion; but
while the phlegmy ma^ter so pierces the solid substance, that the limbs swell
not, but are rather loosned by moisture, then as we said before, a palsy is
caused.

A phlegmy matter does cause a palsy and conuulsion after a different manner.
A conuulsion is likewise caused by an impostume, and the detaining of some
accustomed vacuation. It is sometime caused by gross humors, and then as it
does come suddenly, so it is as soon gone. Emptines or dryness of a sinew, is
often the cause of a Conuulsion, and then it does take more deliberation in
growing upon the patient. There went before it immoderate labor and watchings,
a burning ague, hunger, solitariness, violent sweatings, vomit and a
looseness of the belly; as also too much bleeding, excessive Venery,
inflammations and great burnings, heat of sinewy parts: for by these causes the
body and sinews are much dried, the radical moisture of the sinews is quite
wasted, and they dry and shrink like unto skins near the fire.

Prognostiques.
A conuulsion which is caused by a wound, and of Helleborus, is mortal; the
disease is also incurable, if it be caused by emptines: this conuulsion of all
other kinds is the worst; and we will endeavor to prevent it by taking away
the cause. If it be occasioned by a burning fever, it will likewise hardly be
cured; and it is better for an ague to come upon a conuulsion, then a
conuulsion to come upon a fever. For he that is taken with a conuulsion or
stretching of sinews, is thereof freed by an ague. Whosoever is taken with such
a conuulsion, that he cannot stir any away, within four days there is
danger of death, yet if he do outliue them, he will recover. Oftentimes the
patient is above measure tormented with pain, and is frantic like unto a mad
man; and if then he lose the use of his voice, and his strength fail, or
sweat very much, and does cast beer out of his nostrils, these are all
mortal.

A method serving for the cure of the CONVVLSION.
LEt his air be hot and dry, Furmety, rear Eggs, flesh of Hens, Capons, and
Chickens are good, but they should rather be roast then sod. Among pot-hearbs,
Maioram, Sage, wild Betony, Hysop: among fruits, Raysins and Almonds are good.
When the disease does first enter upon the patient, he must abstain from wine;
in stead whereof, he may be permitted to drink honyed water, wherein Sage and
cinnamon were boiled; motion must be avoided; let the neck and backe-bones of
the patient be rubbed. his sleep must be moderate, and his excrements
answerable to his belly; perturbations of the mind must be shunned.

Emptiers.
Diaturbith cum rhabarb, Hiera logodij, Diaphanicum. Agaricke made into a
Trochiske. The infusion of Agaricke. Pil. cocciae, faetidae, de Sagapen^, de
opopanaece, whereto we will add some Beauer-stone. The median vein shall be
opened, if the Conuulsion be caused by blood, whereof he may spare a
sufficient quantity, but it must be done at sundry times, because the strength
is very much weakened by this disease. But first of all, the belly must be
brought down by a mild clyster: we can scarce use preparing medicines, because
the disease is very sharp, yielding no truce, and the strength in a short time
is ouerthrown; wherefore at the first we will use gentle purging medicines,
though the matte^ be not concocted; but if the disease threaten no^ danger,
then we may use the preparing medicines recited before in the Tractate of the
palsy.

Auerters*
Clysters of the decoction of Annise, and Fennell-seeds, Piony-roots, Sage,
Betony, Maioram, Hysop, Penny-royall, Cammomile, Rosemary, whereunto add some
common oil. Sneezings, Errhines, Masticatories, Gargarismes, Frictions with
warm clothes are good; but chiefly if the disease be caused by windines.
Cupping-glasses with scarifications must be applied to the beginning, or
middle, not unto the end of the sinews. The body being purged, and the disease
continuing its course, at the length there is hope that it will be vanquished
with the corrupt matter. The whole body must be well purged, before we intend
to make use of these present medicines.

A bath of the decoction of the seeds of Linus, Fengreeke, Asswagers.
Mallows, Holihockes, Cammomile, Sage, Betony, Staechas, the head of a Fox, or
Weather, whereunto add a good quantity of the oil of a Fox; the patient must
not stay long in the bath, because it does resolve the stength too much; and
because at the returning of the fit, they must enter into the bath again. Or
if through weakness he cannot endure a bath; irrhigations of the affected
part must be made with this decoction. A bag stuffed with fried Salt, and laid
to the affected sinew, will assuage the pain. Make a Fomentation for the neck
and neyghbouring parts, with wool dipped in warm softning oil, or oil of
Cammomile, that the natural heat may be kept in those parts. A bladder half
full of warm oil shall be laid upon the part, for it nourishes natural
heat: and our native heat is glad of that heat that comes most near unto it
in likeness. Oil of Lilles, Foxes, Cyprinum. An Ointment of the oil of
Worms, of the wood Guaiacum, Turpentine, Lillies, Cammomile, the marrow of a
Cows leg, man's grease, with this the neck, and back bone of the patient shall
be anointed after he is come out of the ba^h: but if this disease be caused by
emptiness, as soon as he shall come forth of the sweet, and warm bath, the
aforesaid parts shall be anointed with oil of Roses, and Violets, that the
moisture of the bath might not suddenly be dried up. Make also a Cataplasme of
Worms, and oil of Foxes; and because excessive pain is common to this
disease, we must therefore use these medicines without any delay, because they
must make loose the vehement shrinking of the sinews. By no means we may use
such things as bind, whether liniments, or else foments; because by them the
disease is rather augmented then mitigated.

Strengthners.
Confect. anacardina, Triacle, once in every week Mithridate. The great
conserve of our description, is an especial medicine for all kinds of
conuulsion. Diacorum, Diamuscum dulce. Acoru^ preserved, Beauer stone with
honied water is a very good remedy against this disease. Opopanax, sir. of
Calaminth, the water of Carduus benedictus, given in drink is very good. An
ointment of the oil of a Fox, of Lillies, B^lellium, Hens fat, the fat
likewise of a man, a Goose, and whelpe, oil of Philosophers, de Euphorbio,
oil of Pepper. And a whelpe cut up aline in the midst, or the lungs of
beasts taken out when they are newly dead, if they be laid to the conuulsed
part, after the part is anointed, is likewise wholesome. The skins of Cats,
Foxes, Weathers, Wolves, wherein the conuulsed part must be wrapped after the
anointing, and being once cold, must be dipped in hot oil again, and laid on
the part conuulsed again. An ointment of the oil of Turpentine, sweet
Almonds, Lillies, Beauer-stones, of the wood Guaiacum. The juice of Crabs must
also be duly applied to the part affected. Make a perfume under a pauillion, of
the decoction of such matters that do serve for a clyster, and let hot stones
be cast into a cauldron couched under the pauillion for that purpose, so that
the vapor and heat get not any way out of the pauillion. A bath of natural
brimstone, of Salt and Allom: and if these be wanting, make this bath by art
of brimstone, Salt, and Allom: or else of Sage, Betony, Mallows, St.
Iohns-wort, Rue, Bay-leaues, Worme-wood, Sowthern-wood, Maioram, Penny-royall,
Mellilot, Cammomile, roots of Lillies, of Flower-de-luce, Linseed, Fengreeke;
these baths are very good after the due purging of the body, because they
resolve the relics from all parts alike; these baths the patient must use
twice or thrice every day. At the last, Cupping-glasses with scarification must
be appled to the neck, and hinder part of the head; but we must forbear
them, so long as the body is ill iuyced, or full: for it is to be feared, that
greater store of excrements will fall down upon the part conuulsed.

A more particular method serving for the cure of the CONVVLSION.
of the roots of white Lillies i. Aristolochiae rot. iij. leaves of Sage,
Betony, ana M i. ss, A Clyster.
flowers of Carduus benedictus, Cammomile, Mercury, Centory the less, ana M i.
of branne M ii. of white and light Agaricke, ss, boil these in water q. s.
unto lb i. ss, add to the strayning Sp. hierae picrae simp. i. ss, benedictae
laxatiua i. Mellis rosati, i. oil of white Lillies iii. a little Salt, hereof
make a clyster. But first of all make an Enema of the decocton of Barley,
Lillies, leaves of Mallows, Althea, Linseed, Fengreeke, oil of Lillies, and
common oil.

Syrrupe of Calaminth ii. Oxymel. squillit. sirupe of Hysope, Staechas, ana ss,
A Iulep.
the water of Carduus benedictus, vi. of the decoction of Cicer, Betony,
Carduus benedictus, lb ss.

the flowers of Rosemary, Staechas, leaves of Sage, A Sirupe.
Betony, Origan, ana M i. of Hysope, M i. ss, make a decoction of these in
water q. s, and boil them until the third part be consumed, boil that which
is strayned forth the second time with a sufficient quantity of Honey, unto the
consistence of a sir. hereof i. ss, must be given with the decoction of the
leaves of Sage, Betony, Carduus benedictus, ana iii.

of new Cassia i. Turpentine ss, of Nutmeg, A Bolus.
i.

A Potion.
of ancient triacle i. Oil of Beauer-stone i ss, Oil of sweet Almonds, of
whit Lillies, ana i. mix these, and give the patient hereof in the morning.

An Electuary.
of the conserve of Acorus, iij. the fruit of Juniper tree i ss, of
Beauer-stone, Assae Faetidae, ana i ss, sir. of Calaminth, Saetchas, ana q. s.

A mixture.
conserve of Rosemary-flowers, of Betony vio Confect. anacardinae, ii. Diamusci
dulcis iii. of the best Mithridate i. ss, of Beauer-stone, ii. sir* of Staecha^
q. s.

A Masticatory.
of Nutmeg, Mace, ana i* of the seed of bastard Pellitory, of Staues-acre, ana
i ss, of Masticke, ii, preserved Acorus, preserved Ginger, ana ii. ss, of the
juice of Beete q. s.

A vomit.
of Betony, i. of the seeds of Cresses, Rocket, ana ii. seeds of Radish i, ss,
boil these, until the third part be consumed. Of the strained decoction take
v. Oxymel. squil. oil of white Lillies, ana i. ss, give this potion after meat.

A Fomentation.
of the leaves of Sage, Rue, ana M iii. seeds of Fengreeke lb ss, of common
oil and water q s.

of the roots of Mallows, and Lillies, white Daffadill, ana vi. leaves of Sage
M iii. of Wormwood, A Bath.
Origan, ana M ii. flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, Staechas, ana M ii. ss,
Fengreeke, Linseed, ana lb i. boil these in water q. s. add to the decoction
of common oil, and oil of Lillies lb i. use this twice or thrice in a day,
likewise with the former a Fox may be boyld, and it would be very good.

An Unguent.
of the oil of Nutmeg, ii. Turpentine, Lillies, Nard, ana ss, of Beauer-stone,
Worms, St. Iohns-wort ana ii.

A Liniment.
the oil of white Lillies, Turpentine, ana i. ss, of the ointment made of
Flowerdeluce iii. of the grease of a Fox, of a man, Vnguenti Agrippae ana ss,
the hinder part of the head, namely, the nape of the neck, and the whole
backebone, and the conuulsed part must be gently fomented, and anointed
therewith, which being done, cover the patient with wool steeped therein.

of the flowers of Rosemary, Staechas, wild Betony, An Unguent.
wild Maioram, Hysop, ana M i. of Mace, Cinnamon, Nutmeg, Cloves, ana ss, of
Beauer stone i. boil these in oil of Lillies, and Flower-de-luce; use this
after he has done with the Bath, and let the parts anointed be wrapped in
moist wool.

of Salt parched and warm, fried branne, A Quilt.
the flowers of Cammomile, ana M i. Linseed, iii.

of Mugwort, Rue, Cammomile, ana M ss, A Cataplasme.
of Nutmeg, the fruits of Juniper, ana ii. boil these in common oil q. s.
unto this add some meal, of Fengreeke, Linseed, ana ii. of Barley, i.
Galbani, ii. of Honey, Turpentine, q. s.

If the Crampe or Conuulsion shall be caused by emptiness.
of the leaves of Mallows, A Bath.
M iiij. four or five Weathers heads, boil these a good while in water q. s.
add hereto of new Milk lb vii. of fresh butter lb ii.

of conserve of Buglosse, of Violets, ana i. manu^ Christi ss, Diamargariti
frigidi v. Pine-nuts ss, An Electuary.
sir. of Staechas q. s.

of the decoction of a Capon, leaves of Violets, An Unguent.
Mallows, Barley, the heads of Weathers, add likewise hereto the oil of
Violets iii.

of the oil of Violets, iij. of Lillies ij, Clyster^
of sweet Almonds, Mas^ichini rosacei ana i. anoint the backbone and the part
affected herewith: or the whole body may be anointed after the coming forth of
the bath; and then let him be clothed with a Fox skin.

An Appendix, serving for the cure of the CONVVLSION.
IF the Conuulsion be caused by fullness of cold humors, the belly shall first
be loosened with a clyster, then we may prepare the humors with gentle
medicines, (if the disease will afford so much time*) and then endeavor to
expel these humors. Likewise those remedies must be prescribed, which may
turn away, and expel the humors from the part affected. As Frictions,
Ligatures, Cupping-glasses, Gargarismes, Clysters, Apophlegmatismes; at the
length such as do dissolve the relics, and strengthen the sinews, whether
they be taken inwardly or outwardly, are very good, all which we may effect
with most happy success by these, and the former medicines, if universals be
in due sort applied to particulars. And this must be especially observed in
this disease, that the ointments, playsters, cataplasmes and other medicines
that be outwardly applied, be at the first moderately hot, and then by
degrees hotter shall be permitted, as Beauer-stone. They must likewise soften,
digest and resolve, if the disease be caused by wind. The part must gently be
rubd, if it be caused by the biting of venomous beasts; let Scabious be
stamped and some Triacle, with the yolke of an egg: lay this on the part
affected; if it be caused by the pricking of a sinew, because great pain for
the most part does accompany it, mix some Turpentine with oil of Roses, and
apply them unto that sinew that is hurt. For this does very much assuage the
pain: or else boil Worms in the oil of Turpentine, and in the oil of
Worms, whereof shall be made an effectual fomentation, as also a good
cataplasme.

A method serving for the knowledge of the APOPLEXY.
AN Apoplexy is a depriving of sense and motion in the whole body, as also the
principal animal functions; this name is given to this disease, by reason of
the great passion which is common to it; this disease does amaze both mind and
body, and is so dangerous, that very few recover, yet if any be cured hereof,
a Palsy will haunt them. Compare the danger of this disease with the loss of
breath, which is the very life of man. For in an apoplexy, and such like
diseases, although the patient be deprived of sense and motion, yet still
breath may remain in his body; for this cause we say that the Apoplexy is most
dangerous, and the fault is in the brain: if we cannot perceive the
apoplecticke to breathe, in this he is not much unlike a dead man; yet whether
he do live or die, we may try and prove after this manner: Fill some small
vessel with water, and set it upon the patients breast, and if the water move,
it is a sure sign of breath, and by consequence, of life. Likewise we may
prove the same by wool finely carded, or by a clear glass, or a wax candle.
Put this very near the mouth of the patient, and if he live, the flame will
stir, the wool will move, and the glass will be covered with a mist: but
if his breath dorh surcease for a while, or if he does breathe with great
difficulty, he is certainly sick of a strong, and sore apoplexy; but they
that breathe not so violently as the former, though it be done unequally, yet
are they not so sore sick, but the disease does deal more favorably with
them: and in this latter there is sometime sense, sometime motion though much
amazed, whereby a Palsy in some one part does remain. This disease does not
much differ from the strangling of the womb, as will appear by the patients
drawing of his breath; yet herein they differ, because in an apoplexy they
breathe with difficulty, but in the other disease their breathing is easy, and
free enough.

The Part affected.
It is perspicuous that the brain, which is the Root of the sinews, is
affected; because beside the motive, and sensible faculties of the mind, the
chief and principal faculties are offended: and these all are derived from
the brain; but the impediments are rather in the chief ventricle of the
brain, then in the substance of the brain; because the corruption thereof is
suddenly generated. But an apoplexy is such an affect, that does offend all the
faculties, when as sense, motion, and other principal faculties are not only
diminished, but quite taken away, and it is handmaid to this disease, viz. the
stuffing, binding, or stopping of the ventricles of the brain.

Signs.
In a weak Apoplexy, there is a sudden fall unto the earth with outcries; and
immediately does follow such difficulty of breathing, that a man cannot
discern any life in the patient, but he does lie still like unto one that is
stifled, the breast being in such sort as though it were tied with a bond, and
could not be raised up. The animal actions are taken away, and he is
deprived both of sense and motion; insomuch that the reasonable soul seems to
be quite extinct; their eyes are shut as though they were sleeping, and they
differ from dead men only in this, that they breathe, which is also done with
great difficulty. A headache comes suddenly, giddines, and coldness of the
extreme parts go before an apoplexy; yet a strong and violent apoplexy takes
one suddenly, and none of these signs go before.

The Causes.
An apoplexy for the most part is caused by slymy, gross, and cold phlegm;
for the ventricles of the brain, and the arteries, through which, Spirits are
conveyed from the heart into the brain, are filled, by which means, the Spirits
and animal faculties are hindered, from giving any relief to the instruments
of sense and motion, whereby man is robbed both of sense and motion. In like
manner this disease is stirred up by crudities, drunkenness, too much strong
wine, cold air, and cold diet. Again, a fall, a blow upon the head, does
hasten the Flux of the humors of the brain, which if they fill the principal
ventricles of the brain, they cause an Apoplexy: in some, the store of these
humors is too small to stir up a strong Apoplexy. And some, after the manner
of Apoplectickes, fall upon a slight obstruction, which is likewise caused by
gross vapors, or some few humors driven into the brains ventricles.

Prognostiques.
Such as are much addicted to surfettings, especially old men, are subject to
the apoplexy: also they, who are often taken with a heavy slumber, or with
great lazines of body, and such, whose eyes are dim, and who have a short and
narrow neck. This apoplexy, if it be great, is scarce to be cured: therefore
it is needless to attempt the cure thereof by medicines; because of its own
nature it is mortal. And a weak apoplexy is with great difficulty cured. For
although few escape death that have this disease about them, yet they that do
escape the danger of death, fall into a longer disease, viz. into a palsy of
some part, or of the whole body, or else lose their memory, and especially old
men, if they be phlegmy by temper, and have used such diet as are most apt to
cause this disease. And very few escape, because of the violence of this
disease, and the vnweildinesse of their age. While cold and nipping winds blow
in winter, and thick clouds beset the sky, this disease is most busy: the
patient must have a care of taking such medicines as may cause sneezing,
because it is mortal.

A method serving for the cure of the APOPLEXY.
THe Air must be hot. His meat, when the disease is somewhat eased, must be
but little, it must likewise be hot, and such as may easily be digested; as
Chickens, Hens, Capons; for sauce, he may use Sage, Thime, Hysop, Rosemary,
Maioram. He must abstain from wine, and drink honyed-water. In stead of
exercise, strong frictions, and ligatures of the extreme parts, and
cupping-glasses must be fastened to the shoulders; they must also be carried up
and down in a hanging bed, or running bed, and after two or three weeks a bath
is good.

Empliers.
Electuarium Indum the greater, Diaphaenicum, Trochis^^ de agarico, Alhandal.
Pillulae Faetidae, Cocciae, de fumo terra, Arabic^, de lapidelazuli, de
Euphorbio, Hiera Diacolocynth. Picra, Logodi Pacchij. Vomiting medicines are
fitter to be used when as the disease is grown stronger, rather then at the
beginning. Also Clysters are good. If the body be full, a vein shall be
opened when he does begin to breathe better, and when his belly is loosned
with a gentle Clyster, and then the head veins in both the arms shall be
opened, not all at once, but by degrees the blood must be taken away: open the
vein the second time, if enough was not euacuated at the first; if the patient
begin to recover, and speak, we may use purging medicines; but first we will
begin with gentle Clysters. Preparing medicines are not here to be used,
because the disease affords no truce, yet toward the declining they may be
prescribed.

Auerters.
A Clyster of Betony, Sage, Rosemary, St^chas, Hysop, Bay-leaues, Maioram, Rue,
Centory the less, Penny-royall Annise, and Fennel-seed, Colocynth. Hiera
Colocynth* Hicar pi^ra, Logodij, Polypody, Seen, Salt, Oil of Rue, of Bays,
of Camomill. A vein must be opened (...) the belly must be loosned by a
suppositor of Hiera Gal. (...), Agaricke, Hellebore: there must also be used
strong* and painful ligatures of the extreme parts, that the drowny faculty
may be awakened; and that nature being provoked by the vehemence of those
pains, may drive out those ill humors that stop up the passages of the brain.
Many, and hard frictions with a coorse cloth must be used, his body also must
be strongly stirred and shaken about the neck, in which place there is a row
of veins and arteries. The whole body shall in like manner be shaked, because
many fall after the manner of apoplecticks by slight obstructions. And then it
is to be hoped, that those slight obstructions will be discussed by the
shaking of the body, natural force awaked, the blood, and humors spread over
the body, and not be permitted to congeale. The baire of his beard, and
priuities shall be plucked; likewise cupping-glasses shall be applied to the
Loins, Shoulders, Buttooks, veins of the throat, and unto the lower parts,
excepting the Hypocondriall part, which is under the short ribs, lest we hinder
the muskles of the belly, which serve for breathing. Sometime gentle
cupping-glasses without scarification must be applied. If the strength of the
patient be such, that it cannot endure the opening of a vein, or if the vein
be so hid, that one cannot come at it, then cupping-glasses with scarification
must be applied: it would be better for the patient, if they were fastened to
the throat veins, because sticking there, they turn away with greater force,
then if they were applied to other places: a horsleech likewise shall be
applied to those places, and to the hemeroyd veins with scarification.
Errhines, Gargarisms, such as provoke sneezings, viz. Beauer-stone, Pepper,
Hellebore, and Euphorbium, for this does very much cause sneezing, and does
purge the brain, by the nostrills; yet this must not be used, until the body
be well purged. An Apophlegmatisme of Pepper, bastard Pellitory, Beauer-stone,
does draw out the slimy stopping matter by the palate, and we will rub the
palate, and the inner part of the mouth with our fingers with some of the
aforesaid powder. A s^apisme of Mustard seed, and figs, boyld in water to the
thickness of a plaster.

Awakers.
An odor of Galbanum, Beauerstone, Opopanax. An ointment of the same matter.
Heat a drying pan red hot and the head being sh^ued, hold the pan some
distance from the head, by this means heat is procured to the head, and
gross humors are abated, and turned into vapors. Mustard-seede ground small,
and mixed with Salt, must be cast into the patients mouth, and laid upon his
nose.

Strengthners.
Aurea Alex. Confect. anardina, Triacle, Mithridate, Diamuscum dulce. Diacorum,
Diambra, preserved Acorus. Conserve of Betony, Maioram, Acorus, Sage Aqua
vitae, wherein soke some of the former medicine, or else Nutmeg, Beauer-stone,
the roots of Acorus, Sage, Masticke; or else drink them with Aqua vitae.
Beauer-stone is a sovereign remedy against this disease. An irrhigation, and
washing of the head, (being first shaued) with oil and water, wherein were
boiled the flowers of Staechas, the leaves of Origan, Bay, Rosemary, Sage,
Cammomile, Mellilot, Penny-royall, Nutmeg, Rue, Sauory. A vesicatory emplayster
rubifying with the oil of Euphorbium, of Beauer-stone, with Aqua vitae. An
ointment of the oil of Lillies, Flower-de-luce, Rue, Nard, Spike, and Nutmeg,
Euphorbium, Beauer-stone, Pepper, Mustard, bastard Pellitory, Vinegar, and
Wax, the head must be shaued. After three weeks a bath is expedient.

A more particular method for the cure of the APOPLEXY.
of the roots of Angelica, vi. of Sage, Rue, A Clyster^
Mercury, Betony, Hysop, ana M i. flowers of Staechaes, the less Centory, ana
p. i. seeds of Annise, Nettles, Cummin, Fennel, Bays. ana iiij. white and
light Agaricke ss, Colocinth. ii ss, make a decoction hereof in water q. s.
add to the strayning, Hiera logodij, Diacolocinth. ana i. ss, Benedicta
laxatiuae, Diaturbith cum rhabarb. ana iiii. Oppopanacis, ii. Melli^ rosa^i ii.
oil of Beauer-stone, of B^ys, ana i ss, of Salt ii. ss, make hereof a clyster;
wherewith by distances of time we shall euacuate the humors out of the body;
until the patient shall be able to take some solutiue physic at the mouth,
we will use this clyster, if no danger appear; it will be good to leave out
Colocynth. and Hieram colocynth. in the first time of giving the clyster. But
at the third it may be used as is prescribed; for after that the first region
of the body is emptied, then we may use stronger, that thereby the upper parts
may be purged. Twice or thrice it will be good to use a gentle clyster, that
euacuation and turning away may be procured.

of Nutmeg, i. of white Hellebore, A sneezing powder.
bastard Pellitory, Beauer-stone, ana ss, Nigellae, of white Pepper, ana i.
blow a little quantity of this into the Nostrills, with a quill.

Oxym^ll^^ squillitici, of the decoction of Radish, A vomit.
ana iii. of the oil of Lillies, ii.

of the roots of Asarum, i, ss, of the roots of Radish i. boil them in water
q. s. until one half be consumed; A vomit.
unto vi. of this strayning, add Oxymel. squillitici ii. ss, oil of white
Lillies ii.

A Potion.
of Mithridate ii. of old Triacle, Confect. anacardinae, ana i, ss, of
Beauer-stone, ss, Aqua vitae, wherein i. of Nutmeg and Sage were infused,
Oxymel. squil. ii. or of Nutmeg boyld, Acorus, ii.

A Potion.
Hierae logodij, hierae diacolocynth ana i. of Beauer-stone, ss* of old Triacle
ii. of the decoction of Sage, Rosemary, Calendulae, Betony, Centory the less,
q. s. give this after the patient is eased by a clyster, and it may be put
down his throat with a squirt.

A Suppositor.
Hiera logodij i. Colocynth. ss, salis gemmae, of Beauer-stone, ana i. Mellis
cocti et concreti q. s. make hereof a suppositor, reliquum est supponendum.

Another.
of black Hellebore, Hiera diacolocynth. i. ss, of Salt, ss, Mellis cocti et
concreti, q. s.

A draught.
of Mithridate, Triacle, ana ii. Hier^ diacolec. ii. of Beauer-stone i, of the
best Wine iiij.

Another.
of the pills of the Agaricke, of Mes^a, de Euphorbio, ana i. Cochiarum, i. ss,
of Beauer-stone, i, Diagridij g^ iii. of the decoction of Sage, Betony, Nutmeg,
Angelica, iii. Aqua vitae i.

Pills.
Pillul. faetidarum, Cochiarum, Aurearum, ana i. Dia gridii gr. v. of Beauer
stone i, which may be given to the patient, if he can swallow, otherwise
dissolve them as was showed before.

A Potion.
of Hysop, Sage, ana M i. ss, of flowers of Rosemary, M iij. of Nutmeg, i ss,
steep these in Aqua vitae lb* ss, for the space of 24. hours, then strain
them forth, and put fresh simples into the liquor again, renew these very
often, and make a potion for the patient.

An Opiate.
of the conserve of Betony, Maioram, Acorus ana i. Confect. anacardi^ae vi.
Diamusci dulcis, Diambrae, ana ii. ss, of the best Mithridate, of old Triacle,
ana iii, ss, of Nutmeg, Ginger, i* sir. Staechad^ q. s. make a mixture in the
form of an Opiate: of which, when the patient has eaten, a draught of the
decoction of Hysop will do good; but it must be drunk an hour after.

of the leaves of Bays, Hysop, Sage, Betony, An Irrhigation.
^mary, ana M ii, the flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, (...) Betony, Calaminth,
Maioram, ana M i. boil these in a like quantity of water and wine, until the
third part be consumed. Make hereof an irrhigation for the head: dip a sponge
in the liquor, and let it drop down upon his head in diverse places.

of the roots of white Lillies, A Fomentation.
ii. of the flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M i. ss, the leaves of Maioram,
Penny-royall, Baulme, Rue, Origan, ana M i. of Anni-seeds, i. boil these in
water q. s. make hereof a Fomentation for the head. Add to these former, of
the oil of Rue, A Cataplasme.
i. of the oil of white Lillies* q. s. and a cataplasme may be made for the
head.

of the oil of Nard, Petrolei, ana i. of Beauer stone, An Ointment.
ii. Euphorbii, ss, first shave the head, and anoint it with this oil.

of the oil of Brickes, of Beauerstone, of Bays, Another.
Juniper, ana ss, in these dissolve Euphorbi^, ss, add thereto a little Wax
and Vinegar, make a soft ointment for the head and backebone, but especially
the beginning of the backebone: anoint also the inward parts of the nostrills
with the oil of Nard and Rue, wherein a little Nutmeg, and Beauerstone, have
been dissolved.

of the oil of whit Lillies, ii. of Beauer-stone ss, Another.
Euphorbii, ii. oil of Nard* iij make hereof anoyntment for the head, and
backebone, which may be used, if the other will not prevail.

of the oil of Nutmeg, Nard, ana ii. of Rue, A Liniment.
i. of Beauer-stone, vi. make hereof a soft Liniment with a little Wax, anoint
the whole backe-bone herewith, from the beginning unto the end, and then
besprinkle it with the powder of the root of bastard Pellitory, Mustardseed,
Staues-acre, Saffron. Open likewise the patients mouth, and rub the tongue and
palate with Mithridate, Confect. anaca^dina, old Triacle, or else confect
anacardina i. ss. may be put into the mouth of the patient.

of oil of Masticke, Nutmeg, Wormwood, ana vi. of Mint ss, of Mace, Nutmeg,
Cinnamon, ana i. make an ointment for the stomach. Apply a potentiall cautery
unto the coronall seame, and prick the blister with a needle, and put a little
round thing into the hole, to keep it open for the space of two or three
months. Or in the stead hereof, make an actual cautery with a hot iron, which
in like manner must be kept open, but first the scabbe must be taken away.
Likewise in the stead of these cauteries, heat a drying pan, or a skillet red
hot, and hold it so near unto the head, that the hairs in some sort may seem
to be scorched; and this must be done so often, until the patient be awaked.

Castorei vi. Euphorbij ss, of Mustard Seed, ii. the seeds of Nettles ss, of
the best Figs gently boyld, and of dried Figs, ana ^o xii. make hereof an
emplayster, which must be applied, the head being first shaued.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the APOPLEXY.
A Strong Apoplexy is incurable, because it is a sharp disease, and speedily
kills a man. Wherefore at the first we must make use of strong medicines.
First, strong clysters must be administered. Such medicines must be given also
that may heat the body, and take away obstructions. first of all the patient
must be stirred and shaken, and his mouth held open by force. The humors also
must be turned away from the head by painful ligatures and frictions of the
remote parts, as also by Cupping-glasses, Suppositors, Clysters, and by opening
a vein. Likewise we may empty the head of these humors by sneezings,
Apophlegmatismes, Gargarismes, and at the same time we will give such
medicines as shall purge the body; and then such as strengthen the whole body,
and discuss the relics. If the throat vein be opened, make a plaster of
boal^-a^ acke, aloe, the Hairs of a hare, and the white of an Egg^, and lay it
upon the orifice, lest it bleed too much.

A method serving for the knowledge of the LETHARGY.
LEthargy is such a necessity of sleeping, that cannot by any means be with
stood. Or, it is an obliuious disease caused by a cold Impostume of the brain.
The disease called Caros, has great affinity with this, only herein they
differ: Caros does not bring a Fever with it; and besides, Caros causes a
deeper, and more profound sleep then the Lethargy. For prick them bot^
frequently, and to the quick, and such as are vexed with that disease, will
scarce be awaked. And being asked questions when they are awaked, they make no
answer. The Lethargy does differ from a phrensy herein; these sleep very
little, or not at all, and the contatry happens in the Lethargy. It does also
differ from the Apoplexy herein, (for in both, the sense and motion and
function of the mind alike do perish) in the disease Caros breath is not taken
away, for herein, they do breathe, and that easly. In the Apoplexy with much
difficulty; and by degrees the patients breath is diminished, oppressed, and
thereby he is at the length stifled.

The part affected.
The substance of the brain is here affected, and chiefly the hinder part,
but not the Ventricles, as may appear by the offended functions of the brain.
Experience tells us, that the patient is deprived both of reason and memory,
which are the principal functions of the brain. In a word it is such a
disease, whereby reason, memory, the imagination, and the other senses are
annoyed.

Signs.
An urgent necessity of sleeping with oblivion does possess the patient, a
lingering and continual Fever comes withal, nevertheless the Fever is
scarce perceived seeing the phlegm easly rots. They answer slowly, though
provoked thereto: they lie with their eyes shut, sometime they open them, if
they be called upon with a loud voice; and then closing them again, fall fast
asleep, insomuch that the patient does not feel that pain which he does
suffer by being plucked by the hair. These things happen, when as the
substance of the brain is vitiated by an Impostume. In which cause, the eyes
stick farther out then usually they were wont. Likewise they move with pain
and difficulty; also the tongue is white, they are as forgetful as mad men;
for if they ask for a vrinall to piss in, they immediately forget for what
end they did call for it. By this it may easily be guessed, that reason and
memory are banished, and that there is a defect in the imagination: they yawne
often, and the pulses beat slowly and faintly, even as the Fever comes upon
them very slowly, thereby making them faint: the bodies of some are loose, of
others bound; in like manner is it in their making water, and their vrines are
not unlike the stale of beasts; and do signify a great disquietnes of spirits
within the veins. In some sweat and trembling meet together; they breathe
very much, though weakly. The whole body is lazy, and dull, but chiefly the
head. Although such as stand by, turn the patient on the one side, yet of his
own accord he does turn upon his back again.

The Causes.
The causes are from a cold and moist distemper of the brain, and abundance of
phlegmy humors so putrified, that they do bring a Fever with them: these
humors flow in the substance of the brain, and cause a cold tumor: therefore
it is no wonder, though motionan^d sense be taken away, because motion comes
by heat, lazines by cold.

Prognostiques.
This disease does speedily kill the patient, if it be not met withal in time:
for the space of seven days the patient is in danger of death, and if they do
escape then, they do often recover. As a true lethargy for the most part is
mortal; so trembling is a sure messenger of great danger. Cold sweat about the
head is another. They that do recover of this disease, have an imposthume in
their breast. But it: is best in a Lethargy, if an impostume arise behind the
care the excrements are for the most part liquid, and great plenty of liquid
excrements threaten danger.

A method serving for the cure of the LETHARGY.
THe air must be clear, hot and dry, if otherwise, it may be rectified with
Juniper wood, Rosemary, and Bay leaves. his diet must be such, as may
extenuate, viz: Capons, Hens, Chickens, Partriges, Feasants, birds of
Mountains, stick them with Cloves, and cast Cinnamon upon them. Flesh broth is
also good wherein some Cinnamon and Pepper have been strayned. Let his drink
be small wine and ptisan, and let it be made with Thime, Hyssop, honiedwater
or Hydromel, he must have a care of drinking water; sleep must be hindered as
much as may be, with pricking and pulling of the hair: or with the smoke of
Brimstone, Beauer-stone, Galbanum, Sagapenum. Place this under their noses,
that they may be forced to draw the fume into their nostrills, for the same
purpose the nose must be chafed and rubd with Vinegar. The excrements of the
belly must be brought down with a Clyster, or suppositor. In stead of
exercise frictions and ligatures of extreme parts, viz. the hands and feet,
must be used.

Preparers.
A decoction of Sage, Hyssop, Time, Maioram, Betony, Penny-royall, Fennel,
Smallage, Maydens-haire, Baulme, the Roots of Knee-holme, grass; add to the
strayning Mel rosac^um, or Oxymel. The sirupe of Staechas, Betony, Borage;
M^licratum, Hydromel, Oxymel Simplex and Compositum. The water of Maioram,
Rosemary, Betony, Sage, Staechas. We may first use these preparing medicines,
if the evil happen to be of any continuance; otherwise we may resist the
disease by purging medicines And if the patient be unwilling to take any
medicines, we must labor to put them into him with a squirt.

Emptiers.
A Clyster of Mallows, Cammomill, Sage, Calamint, Maioram, Origan, Betony,
Centory the less, Rosemary, seeds of Fennel, Colocynthis, Hiera Simplex,
Agaricke, Hiera logodij, Archigenis, Electuario Indo, Diaphaenicum, Oil of
Cammomill, Rue, Melrosatum. Hieradiacolocynth* Logod. Picra, Diaphaenicum.
Electuarium Indum maius. Agaricke made into a trochiske, Agaricke. A suppositor
of Hiera picra, Benedicta laxatiua, Colocynth. Honey, and Salt. A Vomit of the
decoction of Radish, Orache, Dill, Oxymel. Squillit. The Cephalica vein must
be first opened, because the body is full. Then a vein in the forhead shall
be opened. But first the excrements shall be euacuated by a gentle Clyster.
The order of medicines shall be renewed, and sharp Clysters, and strong
suppositors will be better then such medicines as are taken in at the mouth.

Auerters.
A vein must be opened, a Clyster and suppositor administered; the tongue and
palate must be rubd with Vinegar and Honey, wherewith Bastard Pellitory,
Mustard Seed, Triacle, Mithridate, aurea Alexandrina are to be mingled. The
extreme parts of the body would be rubd, until they wax red and smart. The
aforesaid parts shall likewise be pinched and pricked, and the hairs of the
head must now and then be strongly pulled, that the patients may be ^owzed from
their lethargy. Cupping-glasses must be set to the hinder part of the head, or
to the turning joints of the backe-bone, as also to the buttocks, and Legs, and
of some of them with scarification, others without, yet with great store of
flame. Errhins must be made of Vinegar, wherein Origan, Thime, and
Penny-royall have been boiled; the vapors hereof received up into the
nostrils, do dissipate the gross humors. A suffumigation of Galbanum, and
Harts-horne awakens the patient. Gargarismes, Apophlegmatisms. Make an epitheme
of Rue boyld in wine, sneezings of white Hellebor, Pepper, Beauer-stone. A
fomentation of the head, which must be first shaued, especially the hinder
parts; this must be made of the decoction of Rue, Origan, Sauory, wild Betony,
Hyssop, Beauer-stone dissolved in Oil. A sinapism of Mustard Seed, dried Figs,
Pigeons-dung. Cantharides, whereto Pepper and Euphorbium may be added, i^ a
stronger medicine be required: and when these medicines have exercised their
strength, then shall the place be anointed with hot Oil, and the pain
assuaged with the decoction of Roses, Mallows, and Cammomill. His Legs also
must be rubd with nettles.

An ointment for the head, of Oxyrrhodina, Auerters.
with a little Vinegar. an ointment of the Oil of Roses and Cammomill with a
little Vinegar: the first day the former ointment must be used, and when it
does begin to increase, the second: or in stead of this, boil Thime, Calamint,
Penny-royall, the Roots of white Lillies and a little Beauer-stone, with the
former ointment; these must be laid to the coronal feame.

Triacle, Mithridate, with Aqua vitae* Diamuscum dulce, Strengthners.
Diambra, Conserve of Sage, Betony, Maioram, Beauer-stone, with Oxymel, is of
great force for the cure of this disease. An odor must be made of juice of
Laserpitium, Penny-royall, Thime, Southern-wood, Origan, Galbanum, Sagapenum,
Beauer-stone, Hearts horn, Vinegar, and Rue. It is good for the patient to
bathe in frst water. Anoyntment for the head of Beauer-stone, or the oil of
Bays, Philosophers, of Pepper, Costini, Nard, Acetum squilliticum. An Embroch
of Betony, Sage, Serpillum, Maioram. A Quilt put upon the head, being first
shaued, of Millet, and fried Salt: here strong resoluers are requisite, quite
contrary to the custom of other impostumes; because the Impostume cannot by
other means be resolved; because it does cleave close unto the inside of the
Cranium.

A more particular method serving for the cure of the LETHARGY.
A Clyster.
of the roots of white Lillies i. of the leaves of Rue, Sage, Maioram,
Mallows, ana M i. flowers of Rosemary, Cammomile, Mellilot, the lesser
Centory, Betony, ana M ss, Linseed, Anni-seeds, ana ss, of white and light
Agaricke, iii. Polipodii quercini, i. Colocinth. i. ss: boil these in water q.
s. unto lb i. ss, add to the strayning, Hierae logod. ss. Electuarij Indi, v.
Mellis rosac^i i. ss, oil of Rue, iii* of Beauer-stone, i. ss, or in the place
of this make a suppositor of Honey, i. ss, Hierae logod. ss, of Salt, i.

A Iulep.
Sir. Staechados, of Betony, ana i. of Borage, Oxymellis simplicis, ana ss, the
water of Hysop, Rosemary, Betony, Maioram, ana iii. of this give the patient
iii. in the morning.

A Potion.
of the roots of Fennel, Parsley, Grass, Angelica, ana vi. of Hysop, Thyme,
Penny-royall, Baulme, ana M i. of Sage, M ss, of the flowers of Betony,
Rosemary, ana M i. of Borage, Buglosse, ana M ss, of the seeds of Fennel,
Annise, Smallage, ana iii. of Licorice scraped, ss: boil these in water q. s.
unto lb i. ss, add to the strayning Mellis rosacei, Oxymellis simplicis, ana
i. ss. Give of this iiii. in the morning.

A draught.
Electuarij Indi maioris, ii. Diacath. iiii. Diaphaeniconis, Diaturb. cum
rhabarb. ana i. sirupe of Staechas, i. of the waters of Betony, Sage, ana i.
ss, mix these.

Pillularum hieroe picrae Galeni ii. Hierae Diacolocinth. Pillularum cochiarum,
of Beauerstone, ana ss, Pills.
with a sufficient quantity of the sirupe of Staechas, hereof make 8. Pills, if
he be not able to swallow these, dissolve them with iiii. of Betony water,
Mellis rosati, i. Give the patient this to drink.

Hierae logod. i. ss dia Hierae colocyn. ii. of the decoction of wild Betony,
Penny-royall, Betony, Calendula, A draught.
ana iii. sir. of Staechas, i.

of the decoction of Radish, Oxymellis simplicis, squillitici, ana ss, of
common oil ii. mix these, and drink it off lukewarm, if he do not then
vomit, A vomit.
dippe feathers in Oxymelle squillitico, and herewith mix some Mustard, and
rub the chaps and palate of the mouth.

Confect. anacardinae, of Mithridate, Triacle, ana ss, A Potion.
of Nutmeg, Beauer-stone, ana ss, Aqua vitae, Calendul^e, ana i. ss.

of the conserve of Rosemary flowers, i. Aromatici rosati Gabrielis, i. ss, of
ancient Triacle, ii of Mithridate, An Opiate.
i. sir. Staechados q. s.

of the roots of Angelica, ss, of Sauory, A Potion.
M iii. of Thyme, Penny-royall, ana M i. boil these in white wine q. s. give
of this iii. for some few days every morning.

of Origan, Betony, Sauory, Bawlme, Penny-royall, A Fomentation.
Rue ana M i. flowers of Staecha^, M i. ss, boil these in an equal quantity
of wine and oil of Cammomile, until the Wine be consumed. It is for the head.

of Nutmeg, Pepper, ana ii. of white Hellebore, Euphorbij, ana gr. vi. of
Beauer-stone, bastard Pellitory, A sneezing medicine.
of Pepperwort, ana ss, he must receive a small quantity of this into his
nostrills after he has been well purged: Not before by any means.

An apophlegmatisme.
of Hysop, i. of Nutmeg, ss, of bastard Pellitory, of Mustard, ana i. ss, of
Staues-acres, iiii. bruise these, and sew them in a fine cloth.

A mixture.
Confect. anacardinae, of Mithridate, ana i* aureae Alexandrinae ii. of
Mustardseed, the roots of bastard Pellitory, ana i. Hierae picrae Gal. i. a
little Honey. Rub the tongue and palate of the mouth with it. Or else the
tongue alone may be rubd wi^h Mustardseed bruised, and mingled with Honey and
Vinegar.

A Suffumigation.
of Gum Ammo^iacke, Assae Faetidae, ana i. of Harts-horne, ii, Galbani,
Beauer-stone, ana ss, of Frankincense, i. ss.

A Cerate.
of the oil of Tiles, Bays, Lillies, ana iiii. of Nutmeg, i. ^, of
Beauerstone, ii. of Triacle, i. ss, of Wax q. s.

An Ointment.
of the oil of Tiles i. de Euphorbio iii. oil of flower-de-luce, of Bays,
ana vi. of Beauer-stone, i. ss, Euphorbi^ gr. x. of Nutmeg, ij.

An Emplaister.
of Mustardseed, ^, of Cantharides, the wings and heads being taken off, no vi.
of leaven, Doves dung, ana i. Euphorbii, ^^, of a raw Onyon, ^, Emplastri
apostolorum, iii. a little Vinegar: make a red plaster, which shall be laid
to the hinder part of the head, the hair being first taken away.

An Ointment.
of the oil of Flower-de-luce, Aceti squillitici, ana iii. wherein a little
Thyme, Penny-royall, and Origan must be boiled: add to that which is strayned
forth, a small quantity of Beauer-stone, of the hairs of a man burnt, ^.
Mingle these, and apply them to the nostrils and forehead.

An Appendix, serving for the cure of the LETHARGY.
FIrst of all, the Cephalica vein must be opened, in the mean time a gentle
clyster must be given. The vein being opened, the surcharging matter shall
be euacuated by a stronger clyster, and it shall often be renewed; because
these humors are viscous and gross, and natural strength somewhat drowsy. In
the mean time, and presently after the beginning of administering medicines, we
must administer such as may drive back the matter, that it run not to the
brain. viz. oil of Roses, and Vinegar, which we will apply to the coronall
seame. After the fourth day we will add resoluers to the former ointment. viz.
oil of Lillies, oil of Beauerstones, oil of Rue, Cammomile, and a linen
cloth dipped herein, shall be laid to the coronall seame. But such as may draw
back, and turn aside the matter of the disease, and awaken the patient, are
chiefly to be required. All this is effected by Clysters, Ligatures, Frictions,
Cupping glasses, which shall be applied to the shoulders with scarification,
especially in the beginning of the disease. When the disease is somewhat
qualified, they shall be applied to the hinder part of the head, and then also
it shall be lawful to purge. And because the disease is violent, and suddenly
kills many, the former medicines shall be admininistred warily, although no sign
of concoction appear. Lastly, such shall be given, that may strengthen the body,
and amend the distemper left behind: all which we may effect by these, and the
former medicines, so that universals be well sorted with particulars.

A method serving for the knowledge of CATALEPSIS or CONGEALATION.
CAtalepsis is a sudden detaining both of soul and body, with the which,
whosoever is taken, the same figure of body does nevertheless remain; he
abides sitting, or lying, if he did either sit, or lie when the fit took
him; by some this disease is stilde An awaking amazement; because this disease
takes away sense and motion from all parts of the body. Herein it does agree
with the apoplexy, for in both, sense and voluntary motion perishes: but
herein they differ; for in this disease, even the spirits are affected, for
they are as it were frozen, and they rest quietly in that part of the body,
wherein they were when the fit begun to seize upon the patient; but this
happens not in Apoplexies; for they are only by stopping so hindered, that they
cannot disperse themselves into the other parts of the body, whereby the parts
are left as it were resolved, and loose; not cold and stiff, as in a
Catalepsis: and the members change their former figure in an Apoplexy, because
the Spirits are sound. Also in Apoplecticks, the eyes are shut.

The Part affected.
The brain is chiefly affected, as may appear by the hurt of the animal
faculty, as well imaginatiue as sensitive, and motive, and the brains
hinderpart is chiefly offended.

Signs.
The patient is dumb, which does appear by his not answering: his body is
bereft of sense and motion; and though he retain the form of one being awake,
yet his mind and senses are asleep, and that on such a sudden, that the
lookers on are amazed, and it so vehemently seizes on them, that some think
they are rather transported into heaven, then dead. The mind is assaulted so
strongly, that they remain in the same figure, wherein they were when they
were stricken. He can neithet void excrements, nor make water, because of the
senses dulnes. The pulse does bea^e little and faint, and very equal.

The Causes.
This affect is caused by a cold and dry distemper of the brain, whereby the
brain and animal spirits are congeald and dried up, not only coold. A cold
and dry matter causes this disease, as melancholy, and the air cold and dry,
and the mixture of phlegm and choler when both over flow: these causes do not
only cool, but also wither, and freeze the brain, and animal spirits.

Prognostics.
This affect is more common to cold regions, then hot, and they are in great
hazard of life that are taken with this disease: wherefore present remedy must
be sought for, because unless they be speedily cured, they die as it were
maimed and killed with cold; yet if it be a strong Catalepsis, it will hardly,
or never by cured.

A method serving for the cure of CATALEPSIS or CONGEALATION.
THe air must be hot and moist; his meat p^isan, Cream, his drink small
white wine, and somewhat astringent.

Sirupe of Epithym^n. The juice of Fumitory, Staechas, Prep^rere.
Buglosse; the water of Buglosse, Fumitory, Baulme, Hops, Betony, a decoction
of Smallage, Dill, Fennil, Calamint.

A decoction of Fumitory, Hops, Polypody, Seen, Emptiers.
Epithymon. In this dissolve Diasena. Confect. hamech. Diacatholicu^, Diasena.
Hiera logodij, Hermetis, Hiera Diacolocynth. Sena, Polypodium quercinum. Vomit
must be provoked. Also a sharp clyster must be made of Stachas, Sage, Beete,
Calaminth, Penny-royall, Epithymon, Camomile, Mercury, Borage, Thyme, Polipody,
Seen, black Hellebore, Hiera logod. confect. hamech; ^ndum maius, oil of
Cammomile. If the patient be troubled with slimy phlegm, instead of the former
purgers, give Agarick, Colocynthes, an Electuary of bay berries.

Auerters.
The C^phalica vein must be opened; if it be caused by great store of blood,
and his strength fail not; we may likewise take away ^ore of blood. The
clyster above mentioned, Frictions, Ligatures of the arms, back, legs,
feet; Hemriods, if they did flow before the coming of the disease, must be
caused to flow afresh, great outcries must be made about the patient, and
sneezing medicines must be given to him with black Hellebore.

Strengthners.
Triacle, Mithridate; Confect. anacardina, Diamuscum dulce, Latificans Gal.
plerisarcoticum, Diambra, Conserve of Buglosse roots, Malmesey* Hypocras. A
foment for the hinder part of the head with Aqua vit^. Vnguentum Martiatum et
dialthaea. A decoction of Maioram, Staechas, Sage, Betony, flowers of Cammomile
Mellilot, Wine: this must be made for a fomentation. Likewise make a
fomentation of the oil of Lillies, Cammomile, sweet Almonds, Sesame But in
time we may use stronger, as the oil of Bays, Rue, Euphorbium, Spike, or else
some Euphorbium may be added to the former. An ointment for the hinder part of
the head, of the oil of Lillies, Cammomile Dill, Rue, Elder, Beauer-stone: in
these we may boil Hysop, Thyme, Serpillum, Epithymon, Fumitory, flowers of
Buglosse, and Borage: dippe a linen cloth in these, and apply to the head.

A more particular method serving for the cure of CATALEPSIS, or CONGEALATION.
of the flowers of Camomile, Mellilot, ana M ii. of Mercury, M i. ss, of Sage,
Thyme, Penny royal, Epithymon, A Clyster.
ana M i. sen^ Alex. Polipodij quercini, ana v. Epithimi, ii of back H^llebor,
i. boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss, add to the strayning Confect.
hamech iij. Hierae logod. vii. ss* Melli^ rosati, common oil, ana ii. of Salt,
i ss.

of the best Triacle, i, Mithridate, A draught.
i. of the water of Carduus benedictus iii. give this after the clyster has
sufficiently purged.

Hier^ logod. ii. hier^ diacolocynth, A Suppositor.
i. Diagridij gr. vi. of Salt, i. of Honey, made hard by boiling q. s. a
suppositor of this which must be given, if the clyster remain not with the
patient.

Syrup de Epithymon, Staechados, ana i. syrup of Fumitory, Buglosse, ana ss,
water of Hops, Betony, Borage, A Iulep.
ana iii.

Dias^ iii. Confect. hamech ii. de Epithymo i, A draught.
the water of Betony, Carduus benedictus, ana i. ss, give this in the morning.

of the roots of Buglosse, Borage, i, ss, flowers of St^chas, Buglosse,
Carduus benedictus, Epithymon, A Potion.
ana M i. of the seeds of Fennel, v. of the best Barley ii. of Raysins, the
stones being taken out i. ss, boil these in Buglosse and Betony water q. s. to
lb i. when it is almost boyld, put in a little white Wine, wherein one Nutmeg
has bin infused for the space of 12 hours* to the strayning add sir.
Staechados, iiij. sir. de Epithymo i ss.

of the leaves of Seen ss, rhabarb. Electi. i. Polipodij quercini iiii, of the
flowers of Staechas, M ss, of Nutmeg, A Potion.
ii. ss, infuse them in lb i* of the aforesaid decoction 12. hours to the
strayning add sir. Staechados iii.

A draught.
Sp. laetifica^tis Galeni, ii. conserve of the roots of Buglosse, ii. of
Nutmeg, i. ss, infuse these in lb i. ss, of Malmsey, for the space of 12
hours. This must be given thrice in one day.

Lozenges.
Diamusci dulcis, Laetificantis Galeni, ii. trochiscorum de Eupatorio, ana ii.
of the roots of Angelica ss, the water of ^arduus benedictus, Angelica, and of
fine Sugar q. s. make an Electuary in Lozenges, which must be taken morning
and evening until the patient does begin to wax strong.

An Electuary.
of old Triacle, i. Diamusci dulcis, laetificantis Gal. ana ii. ss, conserve of
Buglosse, Rosemary flowers, ana ss, sir. Buglossati q. s.

A Fomentation.
of the leaves of Betony, Sage, ana M iii. of Fumitory, Epithymi, Baulme, ana M
i. of the roots of white Lillies, ii. of the flowers of Staechas, Carduus
benedictus, Cammomile, ana M i. ss, boil these in an equal quantity of Wine
and water, and wash the head with the strayning, and the other being warm,
must be put into a bag, and applied near unto the fundament, the heat must
be preserved with warm clothes.

An Epithime.
of the roots of Buglosse, Borage, ana ii. the diverse kinds of Diamuscum dulce,
Laetificantis Gal. ana iiii. the flowers of Carduus benedictus ana M iii. boil
these in water q. s.

An Ointment.
of the oil of Dill, Cammomile, Lillies, i. ss* boil Hysop, Thyme and wild
Betony: add to the strayning of Beauerstone, i. ss, make an ointment for the
hinder part of the head.

An Ointment.
of the oil of Lillies, Elder, ana i. of Beauer-stone, ii. Euphor^ij i. Aqua
vit^, ss, mix a little wax, and make hereof a soft ointment.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the CATALEPSIS.
SVch medicines as are moderately hot, and moist, are requisite for the cure of
this disease: the belly must be emptied by a clyster, then with loud outcries,
Ligatures, painful Frictions of the extreme parts the patient must be
awaked. And for this purpose, sneezing medicines shall be prescribed; at that
time also if necessity require, the patient shall be let blood; at the length
with strengthening ointments and resolving, we will endeavor to shake hands
with the disease. The hinder part of the head chiefly shall be anointed: a
bath of common oil being made lukewarm, is good for the former purposes. When
the patient is again come to himself, such medicines must be used as may make
the humors obedient to nature, for the space of 4 or 5 days, then we may
drive them out of the body; and at the length prescribe such as may strengthen
the body, and consume the relics; all which we may effect by these and the
former medicines; but we will begin with such as have a resolving force, and by
degrees proceed with stronger; at the first we will rub the whole body with
warm clothes. Vinegar, and other drying medicines are prohibited.

A method serving for the cure of MANIA or MADNESS.
MAnia, fury, or madness, is an inclination of melancholy to great fierceness
and alienation of mind, without fever, fear, or sadness: sometime, such as
have this disease, rage like beasts: for seeing that the humors offending are
hot, it stirs up dotings, and as long as this humor is in the body, mad men
cannot but rage: herein does madness differ from the phrensy; a Fever is the
companion of a phrensy; whereof madness is freed. Lastly the phrensy is caused
by the distemper of the brain alone. Madness is caused by the distemper of the
inferior parts, and of the brain afterward. It does differ from melancholy
herein, madness is caused by a hot distemper of the brain, melancholy is caused
by a cold destemper, besides, melancholians fear much and are sad: mad men
do banish fear, and sadness. In melancholians only imagination is hurt: in
mad men imagination and reason cannot be found.

The part affected.
The brain is affected, which does appear by the hurt of the principal
functions of the mind. Sometime the cause of the brains trouble is in it
self, sometime it does proceed from the lower parts. For black choler,
whereby this evil is caused, is sometime caused by the heads distemper,
sometime it does arise from the body, and sometime is generated in the fylmes
which cover the heart. In a word, madness is such a passion, that does plainly
demonstra^e the action of the principal faculty to be depraved, not taken
away.

Signs.
They are now laughing; anon they are sad; sometime (though but seldom) they
are in great fear; on a sudden they are rash, furious, crying out, and
theatening wonders, sometime they leap and skippe up and down disorderly,
Another while they are so serious, that they hurt either friend or foe, by
blows, bitings, and other injuries, and express most savage manners. They
have eyes grimme, stout, and staring, and they are always plotting some
mischief. Sometime they are so mad, that they do hurt themselves, and then
they ought to be bound. They are very watchful; and for the most part are not
subject to feauers. Their eyes in time grow hollow; unusual and violent wrath
is the forerunner of madness. Glisterings do appear before the eyes of madmen,
and a certain ringing in the ears. They are p^oner to Venery then before, and
are very much troubled about worldly affairs: all which increase by degrees.

The Causes.
It does arise from a hot distemper of the brain. Sometime it is caused by
the presence of hot and biting humors, and of melancholy humors so much dried
up, that it does turn to black choler, and then they dote with fear, and
are silent by fits, and if once they do begin to speak, they will scarce have
done. It is sometime caused by yellow choler ouer-burnt, and then they are
furious, like wild beasts, and withal are very strong, offering injury
sometimes unto all they meet with. It is sometime caused by the abundance of
boiling blood turned into black choler, which, if it do get into the head,
they do commonly fall mad with laughter and singing. Sometime it is caused
by immoderate watchings, care, and too much heating the brain.

Prognostiques.
Young men, and men of middle age, are most subject to this disease; dotings
which come with laughing, are less dangerous, then such as come with study,
and therefore more dangerous, because of their rashness. But of dotings, that is
most dangerous, which is caused by the ouer-burning of yellow choler. If
months, or hemroides run, it is good. It is an ill sign, if the patient
have no stomach. It is likewise no good sign, if ulcers arise in the face,
and in a^^, and in the feet.

A method serving for the cure of MANIA, OR MADNESS.
The air must be temperate and somewhat inclined to mostynes, his diet must
be liquid broths, and moystners of the body. viz. furmenty, the strayned broth
of Chickens, Hens, Partridges, such meats as do breed wind and choler must be
avoided. His drink must be Barley-water, by no means wine, unless the
original of this disease did come by fear, or burnt melancholy, then the
patient may be permitted to drink a little quantity of thin wine. Exercising
the body moderately, is good; and it is expedient that he sleep more then is
usual; and this must be procured by inward and outward medicines. If nature
be deficient in casting the excrements out of the body, then must art be used;
for it is expedient that the patient be soluble. Such, with whom the patient
is well acquainted, may be admitted into his company, but strangers, and they
that have angerd him, must not come in his sight.

Preparers.
Sirupe of violets, Fumitory, Water Lillies, Aceto^us Simplex, sir. of Buglosse,
Borage; sir. of Succory with Rhabarb. The water of Violets, Hops, Buglosse,
Water Lillies, Succory, Endive, Sorrel.

Emptiers.
A vein shall be opened, if the disease be caused by superfluity of hot
blood, whereof plenty shall be taken away. The Saphena vein shall first be
opened, the next day the median shoulder-veine, after this, a vein in the
forehead, unless the disease be caused by burnt choler without fulness of
blood. Sirupe of many infusions of Roses, Confect. Hamech. Diacatholico^.
Diasena, Nicholai, Hiera logodij. Hiera picra, Diacolocynthis. Pillulae Indae,
de lapide Armeno, Potion of Violets, Succhory, Fumitory, Endive, Buglosse,
Germander, flowers of water lillies; the greater cold seeds; Licorice, Raisins,
Epithimon, Manna, Cassia, Polipody, seen, Mirobalani citrini A Clyster of the
leaves of Violets, Lettuce, water-mallows, Mallows the greater, cold seeds,
Oil of Violets.

Auerters.
The Saphena vein shall be opened first of all, as was declared before,
horsleeches shall be applied to the forepart of the head, and to the parts
round about; means also must be used that the months may run, and the
Hemroids be opened.

An irrhigation shall be made for the head, of Roses, Repellers.
juice of Knot-grasse, Vinegar: dip a cloth in these, and apply it unto the
forepart of the head; the cloth must be often dipped in the liquor. A
fomentation likewise for the head, with the decoction of the flowers of
Stachas, Cammomile, Violets, Roses, Lettuce leaves, the heads of white Poppy,
and some Vinegar.

Diamargaritum frigidum, Electuarium de gemenis, Strengthners.
Diarrhodonabbatis; Diat^en sandal. manus Christi; Conserve of Roses, Buglosse,
Water Lillies, Borage, Violets, Venus hair. An Epitheme for the liver, of the
water of Endive, Roses, Sorrel, seeds of Purslane, Camphyer, Spikenard. An
Epitheme for the heart, of the water of Buglosse, Roses, Water Lillies,
Vinegar, Camphyer made into Trochisks. Diamargaritum frigidum. A bath of the
decoction of Cammomile flowers, Mellilote, Violets; the leaves of Violets,
Lettuce, Willow, Water Lillies, Mallows, Buglosse; the head shall herewith be
washed as long as the Patient is in the bath. An ointment for the backe-bone
and breast, of the Oil of Water Lillies, sweet Almonds, Roses, Violets. When
the patient is come out of the bath, he may use this ointment. Cauteries must
be laid to the coronall seame.

Diarrhodon, with the sirupe of water lillies. Procurers of sleep.
An embroch for the head of the seeds of Poppy, the flowers of water lillies,
Roses, Violets, Lettuce. An ointment for the brow and temples, of the Oil of
Violets, Mandrake, as also woman's Mike.

A more particular method serving for the cure of MANIA or MADNESS.
of the leaves of Mallows, Lettuce, Violets, the flowers of Violets, Borage,
Endive, ana M i. of Barley, i. boil these in flesh broth q s. unto lb i. ss,
add to the strayning, Hitrae picrae simplicis, ii. ss, of new Cassia i. of the
oil of Violets, iii.

A Iulep.
the sir. of Endive, Ac^tosi simplicis, of Violets, Buglosse, ana i. sir. of
Fumitory, ss, the water of Endive, Buglosse, Violets, Borage, ana iii. hereof
give the patient in the morning iii.

A Potion.
of the roots of Buglosse, i. ss, the leaves of Endive, Sucho^y, Fumitory,
Hops, ana M i. ss, flowers of Buglosse, Borag^, Violets, ana M i. seeds of
Melons, Cowcumbers, Gourd, ana ii. s^, senae Alex. Polipodij quercini, i.
Epithymi, ss, rhabarb. i. ss, of scraped Licorice, iii. of Raysins, the stones
being taken out, i. Tamarindorum ss, boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss,
add to the strayning Diasenae, vi. of new Cassia i. sir. of Roses ii. the
patient must take hereof iiii. every morning, until five days be expired.

A Potion.
Confect. hamech ii. ss, Electuary of the juice of Roses ii. Diacatholici, iii.
sir. of Violets, i. the water of Violets and Buglosse, ana i. ss. Give this in
the morning early.

Pills.
Pillularum de lapide lazuli, Armeno, Indarum, ana i. with the sir. of
Epithymon q. s. make 7 or 8 pills hereof to be taken after the first sleep.

An Electuary.
Diarrhod. abbatis without musk, iii. Sp. Diatrion sandal. i. ss, Sacchari
rosacei, sirupi violarum, ana i. ss.

Another.
Sp. Diamargariti frigidi, ii. conserve of Violets, Buglosse, ana vi. conserve
of Roses, ss, Lohoch of Poppy, iii. ss, sirupe of Violets, of Apples, ana i.
give unto the patient ss, two or three hours before dinner, or supper.

An Ointment.
of the oil of Violets, of Roses, ana i. oil of sweet Almonds, of
Water Lillies, ana ss, anoint the head with these, when the disease is but
fresh, afterward the breast and backebone.

of the water of Buglosse, Roses, Water Lillies, An Epitheme.
ana v. of Vinegar, ss. Sp. diatrion sandal. D^atragacanthi frigidi, ana iiii.
of Saffron* ss, hereof make an Epitheme, wherewith the heart will be
strengthened.

of the leaves of Lettuce, Violets, Water Lillies, A Bath.
Mallows, ana M iii. of the leaves of Willow, and Vines, the flowers of
Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M ii. boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss, and
let the patient enter into this bath, after he has been well purged: also
the head must be moystned herewith, so that it be first shaued. When he comes
out of the bath, he must be so laid in his bed, that he sweat not at all.

of the leaves of Lettuce, Violets, Willows, An Irrhigation.
the flowers of Water Lillies, Roses, ana M i. ss, of the flowers of Cammomile
p. i. seeds of Lettuce, ss, of white Poppy, i. ss, two Weathers heads, use this
4 or 5 times every day for the space of a week.

the sir. of Violets, Poppy, Diacodij, ana ss, A potion procuring sleep.
water of Lettuce, Ptisanoe, ana ii. give this at bed time.

of the oil of Violets, Mandrake, An Ointment.
ana iii. dippe a kercher herein; and apply it to the brow and temples.

of the oil of sweet Almonds, Cammomile, ana i. ss, Another.
oil of Violets, ii. make hereof an ointment for the head. Young whelps and
Chickens cut in two* or the lights of a Ram being warm, may also be applied
to the head. For these things do strengthen the brain, and do resolve, and
moysten the relics with their temperate heat.

An Appendix, serving for the cure of the MANIA, or MADNESS.
FIrst of all the belly shall be emptied by a clyster; and then a vein shall
be opened, with great care. The humors likewise shall be made subject unto
nature; if not, they must be expeld. In the mean time we may turn them
aside with such medicines as do bring down the months, and provoke Hemroids,
which may also be effected if the saphena vein be opened: at the length such
medicines must be given, as may strengthen the brain and heart, and disperce
the relics: all which we may effect by these and the former medicines, so
that particulars and vniuersalls be rightly sorted: if the former medicines
will not prevail, an actual or potentiall cauterie must be made in the
forepart of the head, where the coronall seame does meet with the sagittall,
and they must be made so deep, that the bone may appear: whereof a quantity
must be taken away, and so it must be kept open for the space of a month.
Though the other medicines fail, this is very seldom used in vain. The cure
of Mania or Madness does herein differ from the cure of the melancholy. For in
the cure of Madness, especial care must be had, that the sharpness of the
humors may be mitigated: and this may be effected by moystners, and moderate
coolers.

A method serving for the knowledge of PHRENITIS or PHRENSY.
A True Frenzy is an inflammation of the brain, or of the fylmes thereof,
bringing with it a sharp fever, doting, and alienation of mind. It is a
kind of Madness both dreadful and dangerous; because the disease is
generated in that part which is the chief feate of the faculties of the soul,
and because a true Frenzy has his beginning from a false, therefore we will
here treat of a false Frenzy. It is an alienation of mind with
disquietnesse, and without an impostume of the brain; and it does follow a
fea^er caused by blood or choler. Dotings are not here so much observed,
neither do they (...) and grieve so much, as they do that are possessed with a
true Frenzy, and even as the fever does increase or decrease, so this fit
of Frenzy is increased or decreased, especially in the hour of the crisis,
or conflict between nature and the disease: sometime this fit does come
sooner then the fever, and then the fever does increase, even as the disease
does, and by this means it will be more violent in the hour and day of the
fit of Frenzy, then in the hour of quietness and rest; for in these
feauers, dry vapors get up into the brain, whereby the animal spirits are
disquieted. Sometimes Impostumes are the causes of this disease; for from
these, sore feauers do arise. This cannot absolutely be termed a disease, but
rather the passion that does follow the disease: And this is more frequent then
a true Frenzy.

The Part affected.
The parts affected are Dura et tenuis matter, as may appear by the hurt of
such functions that come from hence. Oftentimes it is caused in this, and then
it is less dangerous. And there is a principal, and proper affection
appertaining to this disease, whereby the patient is continually molested. This
Frenzy never goes alone: the temperature of the patients body is too hot; and
the disease too violent.

Signs.
There is a continual and dry fever; and as they sleep very disqueitly, so
their watchings are more troublesome, whereby they are very much disquieted;
they ^rt out of their beds suddenly, they breathe by fittes, seldom and
vehement. The patients eyes are red, dry, and in a manner withered, and more
quicke-sighted then usually they were; yet of one of the eyes tears flow out,
and the eye-veines swell with blood; the pulse is thick, quick, and great,
there is also doting and alienation of mind; for being asked a question, they
do answer nothing to the purpose; and their memories being decayed, they never
think of any thing they have spoken, or done, whereby they utter words without
order and sense; they imagine strange things, and now they weep, anon they
sing; sometime they cry out, another while they are fiercely desperate; the
tongue is withered, rough and black; they are very thirsty, they gather
straws, and other trifles from the ground; their hands tremble, they breathe
deep, their urine is thin and fiery, sometimes it is white and thin, and
then there is great danger at hand.

The Causes.
It is often caused by too much blood, and these are mad with laughter, yet
they dote less, and are not so feauorous. But when it is caused by burnt
choler, then are the patients impatient, and stark mad, and therefore they
must needs be bound; the phrenticke by the reason of drynes are very strong. A
fever is an inseperable compainion of this disease.

Prognostiques.
It is a most sharp, and dangerous disease, and speedily kills a man, if
present remedy be not given. For all kind of phrensies are mortal, and do
breed in the place, wherein the souls principal part is resident, but such
dotings which come with laughing, are less dangerous, then they that come by
study: but that is thought to be worst of al, which is bred of burnt choler.
If sleep do appease doting, it is good, if otherwise, it is an ill sign. But
continual doting and waking is mortal.

A method serving for the cure of the PHRENSY.
A Temperate air, and somewhat bright must be procured; no variety of pictures
must remain in his sight. His diet must be such as may moisten and cool the
body, as ptisan. And as it is hurtful for the patient to eat immoderatly, in
like manner it is hurtful to be too long fasting: the one weakens the body,
the other does increase the disease. His sallets may be of Lettuce, Mallows,
Endive. In the declination of the disease, fishes that do breed in stony
places, and scaly fishes may be given. His drink must be barly-water,
whereunto it will be good to add some sirupe of Violets, Water Lillies, Roses.
The decoction of Cinnamon shall sometime be prescribed. Inordinate motion must
be avoided, and rest desired, yet frictions of the lower parts must be used,
especially when the disease is milder. Also sleep must be procured by local
medicines, and such as are received in at the mouth: the excrements of the
belly must be euacuated. For if they be kept in, they do increase the disease.
Perturbations of the mind are very offensive to this disease: wherefore such
friends he best likes, must be admitted to his presence, and sometime they
must speak him fair, another while chide him.

A vein must be opened at the first if the patients strength will permit; in
delay there is danger, Emptiers.
neither is there any better means whereby this disease may be cured, then by
the opening of a vein: in gentler phrensies the belly must first be euacuated,
then the shoulder vein shall be first opened, and then the Cephalica. If the
first do not appear, and when the matter ruins, a vein in the forhead shall be
opened; and that it may be done aright, the neck must be tied with a scarce,
that the vein may rise, and appear: at the first gentler Clysters of the
decoction of Mallows, Bee^e Violets, Lettuce, Barley, seeds of Cowcumbers,
Gourd, Cassia fistula, the Electuary of the juice of Roses, Diaprunum
solutiuum. Diacatholicon, Hiera picra, Oil of Violets, Mel rosatum,
Electuarium Indum, of the juice of Roses, Electuary of Roses, Diaprunum
solutiuum, Sirupus Rosarum Laxatiuus. Pillul. Aggregat. Aureae. Trochisci de
Rhabarb, Rue, Cassia, Ma^na, mirab^lani, Rhabarb infused in Endive water. The
choleric matter must be emptied in the beginning of the disease. In the
mean space a gentle medicine that may turn away, must be prescribed, lest the
humors seem rather to be stirred up then purged. Softening Clysters must also
be given every third day.

Auerters.
A vein must be opened, as was said before, and gentle Clysters at the first,
then stronger. The former purging medicine; for this, by turning aside the ill
humors, is very preualent, and will hinder the making up of Erysipelas.
Cupping-glasses with scarification must be applied to the backe-bone, the
hinder part of the head, shoulders and buttocks, if the cubit vein were not
opened; if it were opened, then no scarification shall be used: when the
disease is at full height, blood suckers shall be set to the forehead, and
temples of the patients. Bonds, Ligatures, and painful frictions of the
extreme parts, do serve to turn the humors from the head, because they stop,
and pluck back the humors arising upward. The hands and feet may be washed
with the decoction of Lettuce, Violets, Barley, the heads of Poppy. Also the
head shall be moystned with this decoction by the means of a sponge.

Repellers.
Oxyrrhodum of Rose Water, Vinegar, Oil of Roses: dippe a cloth in these, and
apply it to the forepart of the head and to the neck, and renew it often; and
in time oil of Cammomill shall be added. Rosewater, water of Plantane,
Vinegar, Oil of Roses. An irrhigation must be made of the decoction of the
seeds of white Poppy, of Henbane flowers, of Water Lillies, of Violets, Roses,
the juice of Plantane and Lettuce. Dippe wool in these, and lay it unto the
forepart of the head, and above the neck, for this thickens the humors, and
makes them unfit for motion, because the passages of the body through which
humors creep to the brain, by the virtue of these herbs are shrunk
together. The juice of Lettuce, Plantane, Roses, water lillies, Gourds. An
odor of the water of Plantane, Roses, Housleeke, Sorrel, Camphyre, flowers of
Roses, water lillies, a little quantity of tosted bread. An ointment of
populeon not made after the manner of our ancestors. At the first we may use
these medicines without resoluers, but toward the increase, state, or
declination of the disease, we may add to them more or less, even as reason
shall give directions. But as in the increase repulsers must be above
resoluers; so in its declination resoluers must be above repulsers; and when
the disease is at the height, there must be an equal quantity of both. Therefore
the continual use of these mixed together must be avoided, unless they be
mixed with skill; for they thicken the matter, and will not let them be
resolved: insomuch that by continual use the Lethargy may be procured:
wherefore toward the state of the disease, we must abstain from such
medicines as drive back the humors, because it is requisite that the passages
be opened, and the humors discussed.

Diamargaritum frigidum, Beauer-stone. Sirupe of Pomegranates, Roses, with the
waters of Roses, Strengthners.
Buglosse, Plantane: After meat give this, for thereby the force is better
conveyed to the head. Conserve of Roses, and Violets, flowers of water lillies
and Buglosse; make an irrhigation for the head of water-lillie flowers,
Lettuce, Cammomill, Poppy, Mellilote, Althaea. A warm bath of fresh water is
good. A rams Lungs or Liver, or a Whelpe, a Capon, a Hen, a Cat, and other
such beasts bowelled, shall be cut along the midst of the backe-bone, and so
they shall be laid hot to the head; they are very good for the brain;
bloodsuckers must be laid to the forehead and temples* but that the local
medicines here prescribed, may with better success be ministered to the head,
and that the excrements may the better be avoided, the patients head shall be
shaued presently after meat, and when the fit of madness has left him.

Strengthners of accidents.
Philonium Romanum, Philonium Mesus, with the water of Lettuce, or sirupe of
Poppy, does greatly induce sleep. sir. of Violets, Poppy, with the water of
Lettuce. Broths wherein the greater cold seeds, or one head of white Poppy, or
the leaves of Lettuce are boyld. The juice of Violets, of Poppy. The ointment
made of the buds of black Poplar, Roses, of the Oil of Violets,
water lillies, Poppy, Mandrake, the seeds of Henbane, Saffron, Opium, Vinegar.
A lotion of the Head, Face, Hands, and Feet, with the water wherein the leaves
of Lettuce, Violets, the flowers of Roses, water lillies, the seeds of white
Poppy, Cowcumbers, Gourds, and Melons* were boiled. Dip a sponge in the
aforesaid decoction, and it will serve for an odor. A fomentation of the privy
parts and Perinaeum, with the decoction of Pellitory of the wall, the Roots of
Asarum, and Parsely in wine. A Cataplasme also shall be made of Pellitory of the
wall boyld with a little white wine, whereunto add the Oil of Scorpions:
apply this to the privy parts and Perinaeum. Make an ointment of the Oil of
scorpions and the ointment of Agrippa, and anoint the privy parts. Sirupe of
Violets, decoction of Barley-Fresh water whereto sirupe of the juice of
^oose-berries, and sirupe of the juice of Oranges must be added. In this
disease there is great need of such as may procure sleep, because the sick is
wasted with continual watchings: but lest the feeble heat which remains be
extinguished, hot things must be mingled with opiates: for it is to be
feared, that a lethargy may be caused by too much use of them. The passage of
the urine is sometimes stopped, which evil may be cured by such medicines as
follow. The last of the former sort of medicines do slacken thirst.

A more particular method serving for the cure of the PHRENSY.
of the four cold seeds, the seeds of white Poppy, Sirupe.
ana ii. boil these in water q. s. unto iii. of this decoction, add of the
sirupe of Poppy, i. ss, a little of the best Vinegar. Give this in the morning
and at night.

of the leaves of Lettuce, Mallows, Violets, Beete, A Clyster.
Borage, ana M i. Barley, the tops of white Poppy, without seeds i. seeds of
Cowcumber, Gourd, ana ss, boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. add to the
strayning oil of Violets, iii. new Cassia, Diacath. ana i. of Salt i.

of the sirupe of Pome-granats, Violets, Acetosi simpl. ana ii. let the patient
take ii. with the decoction of Barley, Violets, Pruines, Licorice, seeds of
Lettuce, Gourd, whereunto also add a little Rosewater, or Buglosse water, also
the sirupe of Poppy may be added, that the patient may sleep well.

of new Cassia, i. sir. rosarum solut^ ss, A draught.
of the waters of Buglosse, Borage, Violets, ana i.

of the roots of Grass, i. of the flowers of Woodrowell, A Potion.
p i. of the leaves of Sorrel, Endive, ana M i. ss, of Violets, M i. the seeds
of Gourds, Melons, ana i. ss, of Raysins, i. Polypodij quercini, ss, Rhabarb.
Electi. ii. Tamarind. iii. boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. add unto the
strayning of the sirupe of manifold infusions of Roses, iii.

Electuarij de succo rosarum, ii. Diacath. ii. sirupe of Violets, of the
manifold infusions of Roses, ana ss, A draught.
of the decoction of Barley, iii.

Hiera picroe i, Diagridij gr. vi. salis gemmae, ss, A Suppositor.
of Honey hardened with boiling, a small quantity.

An Electuary.
of the conserve of Roses, Violets, ana v. conserve of Buglosse, Water Lillies,
Diatragacanthi frigidi, ss, Diamargariti frigidi, i. the seeds of Sorrel,
Purslane, ana ii. sirupe of Violets, q. s. at some time of the day the patient
must take i.

An Epith^me.
of the waters of Buglosse, Roses, Violets, ana v. Diatrion sandal. i. ss, a
little Saffron, and Vinegar: Sprinckle this upon the stomach.

An Embroch.
of the flowers of Violets M ss, of Roses, M i. ss, the flowers of Lettuce, M
ii. ss, seeds of white Poppy, Lettuce, ana iii. boil these in water q. s.
until the third part be consumed then add a little Vinegar, and besprinkle
the coronall seame with this decoction, but the head must be first shaued.

A Liniment.
of the oil of Roses ii. of Rose Water iiii. of Vinegar ss, dippe a cloth in
these, and lay it unto the ^row.

A Iulep.
of the sirupe of Violets, of Water Lillies, ana i. ss, of the sirupe of Poppy,
i. of the decoction of Violets, of the heads of white Poppy, ix. Give this at
bed time.

A broth.
the broth of a Hen boyld with the leaves of Lettuce, one or two of the heads
of white Poppy. This is also good to procure sleep. For the same purpose boil
Roses, Violets, the leaves of Woorm-wood, one head of white Poppy, Opij. gr. i.
iii. of this must be drunk with the broth of a Capon.

A Decoction.
of cleansed Barley, M iii. of the seeds of Cowcumbers, iiii. of Poppy, i ss, of
Lettuce leaves, M ii. boil these in water q. s. until the third part be
consumed. For the same purpose the feet must be washed with the decoction of
the heads of white Poppy, leaves of Violets, Water Lillies, some Barley huld,
and the roots of Mandrake. Of this decoction also an odor may be made.

A mixture.
of the oil of Roses, iii. of Vinegar i. Opij, gr. ii, apply these unto the
brow and temples. Anoint also these places with Cream, taken from the milk
when it has boiled: but the head must first be shaued. Or do the like with
the ointment following.

of the ointment of Roses, An Ointment.
of Poplar ana i. oil of Water Lillies, Mandrake, ana ss, of Vinegar i. if all
these cannot procure sleep, add unto the aforesaid Opij gr. iii. or iiii. of
Saffron, gr. v. mix these with care and diligence, and anoint the temples and
hinder part of the head therewith.

of the leaves of Lettuce, M ii. the flowers of Roses, A Cataplasme.
M i. the seeds of white Poppy. i. ss, boil these in water q. s. unto a
softness: add hereto of wheat meal, vi. of the oil of Violets q. s.

of the oil of Violets, i. of Water Lillies, ss, An Ointment.
of Cammomile, Poppy* ana iii. some few drops of Vinegar, of Wax q. s. if the
other ointment will not prevail, then use this.

of Betony, Fennel, Mallows, ana M i. ss, the flowers, A Fomentation.
of Cammomile, Mellilot, Elder, ana M i. of Line-seeds, Fennel, Fengreeke, ana
ss, boil these in water q. s. until the third part be consumed: wash the head
with this, for when the disease does begin to decline, this does dissolve the
relics: Also a whelpe of a month old, cut in two parts, or a young Pigion, or
the bowels of a Ram laid hot to the coronall seame. And when these do begin
to wax cold, Roses, and put them into the decoction of Cammomile, and apply
them as before: do this often.

Oxymellis squillit. sir. de duabus rad. ana ii. of the gum of Pruines, A
Potion.
ii. of the decoction of the fruit Alkekengi, roots of Parsely, Saxifrage lb i.
A potion to provoke urine.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the FRENZY.
Seeing no good can be done against this disease, if it be grown to an
Impostume, first a vein must be opened, that it increase not; for this is the
presentest remedy, yet the belly must first be brought down by a clyster. At
that time also we must keep back humors and blood running to the head, with
repelling medicines, and if opening a vein be for some cause omitted, we will
apply Cuppinglasses with scarification, otherwise not. In Conclusion, that the
blood be not too hot (for it does soon turn into choler) a cooling sirupe
shall be given, and also it shall be so mixed, that it may cause the patient
to sleep. At the length with purging medicines we may expel the sharp
humors out of the body, when they have been first turned from the head with
Ligatures, Frictions of the extreme parts, and washings. And by this means at
the last we may strengthen the brain: all which we may effect by these and
the former medicines, so that universals in due sort be joined with
particulars. Thirst also must be quenched, because this does not a little
trouble the patient, for this purpose give the patient i. of the juice of
Gooseberries in a convenient decoction: Sleep also must be procured by art,
and the urine must be provoked by medicines: with such medicines as are taken
inwards, we must mix such as may help the parts affected, as well as the
disease.

A method serving for the knowledge of CATARRACTA or SVFFVSION.
CAtarracta. or suffusionis, when the sight by little and little is duld by a
slymy humor frozen like Ice, and dropping out of the eyes of the patient:
sometime it sticks so fast over the ball of the eye, or between the
christalline humor, or the tunicle Rhagois, thereby hindering the sight of
such things as do present themselves to our view. This humor is conveyed
thither from the brain by the opticke nerve, and oftentimes so slowly, that it
cannot be perceived at the first. Sometime it is suddenly carried thither, and
then if that humor stick close unto the ball of the eye, the outward shape of
things cannot be communicated unto the cristalline humor which is the
principal instrument of seeing. In this disease at the first there is said to
be an imagination, or fancy, in the increase, a mist obscuring the eyes.

The part affected*
Is the eye it self, and especially about the ball thereof; and sometime the
cause does come from it self, and then suffusion neither begins in both eyes,
neither are they alike affected; for sometime one only eye is affected. But if
it be caused by the default of the mouth of the stomach, then such things as
are represented to the sight, appear to both eyes alike, and then neither
dimnes nor congealed slymy humor can be discerned at that time chiefly does
the stomach cause this disease, when as it cannot digest the meats and
nourishments formerly received. Again this may plainly demonstrate the fault
to be in the stomach, because after vomiting the pain of the eyes is
assuaged; which is usual in the time of Crisis, when as nature expells that
which is hurtful unto the body, or any part of the body: these affections of
the eyes do not always appear, for if the stomach can well and easily digest
the nutriment, then no affections do molest the eyes. For when it is caused by
the default of the stomach, as the stomach does better or worse concoct, so
the eyes pain is either decreased or increased, neither for many months can
any such defect of the eye be discerned, for it is long in breeding.

Signs.
In the beginning of this disease, cetaine fumes and breaths do present
themselves to the sight: other-while flies and Gnats; sometime darksome bodies,
then again shining with unstayed motion, are driven up and down. Some imagine
cobwebs, others think woollen threads are before their eyes. Sometimes round
circles appear about Candles, and such other unaccustomed sights present
themselves to their eyes. Their sight by degees waxes dull even as the thin
vapor, or humor does thicken, or congeale; and then there is as it were a
clowd before their eyes. Last of all, by greater congealation it is turned into
a skin or Panicle, and then the Pupilla does appear muddy, and darksome; in
process of time the eye does appear as if it were of the same colur with the
sea; at the length this mischief is so far extended, that the patient is
deprived of sight, which then is, when all the holes of the Pupilla are
stopped; And yet the patient does then see light, though but very little. If
that humor be spread before the Pupilla, and the parts round about it do
remain pure, the object of sight does seem to be full of holes. At the last
this mischief increasing, the Pupilla does send forth no light, and is turned
unto whitenes; hereby the eyes of some are blue, others eyes are gray. This
mischief for the greater part does lighten but upon one eye, and being once
fastened, will not easily be removed.

The Causes.
Cold and gross humors falling upon the opticke nerve, or growing between the
cristalline humors, or the tunicle Rhogois, cause this disease by stopping the
holes of the Pupilla, whereby the shapes of external things should be derived
to the sights faculty, and are hindered by the means of obstruction, that they
can not be communicated to the cristalline humors, which is the principal
instrument of seeing.

Prognostiques.
Amongst the slighter suffusions, that is the worst of all, which is caused by
grievous diseases, and great pain of the head: this evil may be cured at the
first, but if it continues long, and the suffusion waxes gray, the eye is
deprived of sight. But that suffusion which is without brightness, and is
somewhat white of color, will admit of no cure. Again if the suffusion be of
a leaden color, or black, or very yellow, it can neither be cured by
physic, or Needles. In like sort the eye wherein no hardened matter does
appear, is incurable; for though the eyes do seem to be clear, and fair,
yet they see nothing; and this is termed a fair dropping; also medicines are
not auayleable for that suffusion which has changed the figure of the Pupilla.
If the humors come to the consistence of a pannicle, there remains no other
way for the cure of this, then by the thrusting a needle through the Cornea;
and it is expedient that the humors by congealing, at length become firm, for
unless the needle may be put underneath the congealed humors, the cure is
uncertain: in five years it is hardened, and fit for the needle, yet if it
have been of long continuance, it cannot be cured. But if that which is
congealed by rubbing be rent asunder, and does not remain so long, but grows
together again, and is of a sad white color, there is some hopes of the cure
hereof.

A method serving for the cure of CATARRACTA, or SVFFVSION.
THe air must be hot and dry. The flesh of Hens, Capons, Pullets, Birds of
mountains are good. Such things as moisten the body too much, are prohibited.
Among pot-hearbs, Fennill, Betony, Sage, Serpyllum, Maioram, Penny-royall are
wholesome: he may drink the decoction of Cinnamon, honyed water, but by no
means wine. His exercise must be moderate, and his lower parts often rubd;
his sleep shorter then ordinary, the excrements of the belly must be
answerable, pertturbation of the mind, and other affections must be avoided.

Preparers.
Oxymel simplex, Mel rosatum, Sirupus Staechados, sirupe of Hyssop, the water
of Fennill, Betony, Hyssop, Maioram, Ey-bright.

Emptiers.
The Caphalica vein of that side the disease is, must be opened at the
beginning thereof, if the body be full, otherwise not; because hereby the
brain is too much coold, whereby plenty of excrements are generated. Pillul.
Aureae, Cocciae* de agarico, Luci^ maioris, Assaieret, Mastichinae, Pillulae
sine quibus esse nolo. Hiera picra, Agaricus trochischatus. The patient must be
often purged of this watery matter which does cherish the disease.

Auerters.
A vein must be opened in the brow, and bleeding at the nose must be caused. A
Clyster of the Roots of Fennel, flowers of Staechas, Cammomill, Mellilote,
Centory the less, Betony, Anniseed, Fennill seed, Colocynthis, Diacatholicon,
Hiera Gal. Hiera diacol. Oil of Cammomill, Lillies: Soap or bloud-suckers must
be laid behind the patients ears; Or in stead of these, a cautery, Frictions
and foments of the extreme parts with hot water, as also painful ligatures
thereof: Apophlegmatismes, Masticatories of Cubebs, Fennell-seed, Masticke,
Bastard, Pellitory. cupping-glasses with scarification must be applied to the
hinder part of the head, sneezing medicines. Seto may be fastened to the neck.
A cautery of Ca^tharides, Leaven; Pigeons dung shall be applied behind the
ear; rather then in the hinder part of the head, it shall be made in the
coronall seame, because it is nearer to the eyes; and then let the humors run
many months.

A Collery of the water of Eyebright, of Celandine, Strengthners.
and Fennel, wherein some Honey, Pompholix, Sagapenum are disolued. The
conserve of Gall mingled with Honey will avail much; because Gall makes the
humors more subtle. The water of Honey distilled. The Gall of Swine, and Goats,
dissolved in the juice of Fennel. Sagapenum dissolved in the water of Honey
distilled, or in Rosewater: this may be used for many months. A lotion for
the head, of the decoction of the leaves of Betony, Maioram, Wormwood, Fennel,
flowers of Staechas in lie. Mithridate, Triacle, Diamargaritum calidum.
Diagalanga, Diarrhod. Abbatis, Diamuscum dulce, conserve of Buglosse. The
decoction of Guaiacum with capital things, or in stead thereof, a decoction of
Fennel, Eyebright, Betony, Cloves, Cinnamon, Cubebs, Mace: drop the water of
Honey in the patients eyes. A collery of Honey, the juice of Fennel, Gall. The
stale of infants by its drying faculty, does cure moystnesse which does nourish
the disease. A lotion of the head with the decoction of Maioram, Rue, Staechas,
Fennel, Betony, Eyebright, Wormwood. An ointment of the gall of a Partridge,
the juice of Fennel, Honey: a needle shall not be used, until the matter be
well hardened.

A more particular method serving for the cure of CATARRACTA, or SVFFVSION.
of the flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M ii. of Betony, Eyebright,
Centory the less, Fennel, ana M i. ss, seeds of Annise, and Fennel, ana iii.
of Agaricke, i. ss, colocynth. i. boil these in water q. s. vno lb i. ss, add
to the strayning benedictae laxatiuae, vi. oil of Rue, Lillies, ana i, ss, of
Salt, i. once a week before dinner administer this.

A Iulep.
the sirupe of Hysop, ss, sir, of Staechas, Oxymellis simplicis, squil. ana i,
of the water of Eye-b^ight, Fennel, Betony, ana iiii. mix these, and give the
patient iiii. in the morning 4. or 5. days.

Pills.
Pillul. lucis, Cochiarum Aur^arum, ana i. of Agaricke made into a Trochiske
ss, sir. of Staechas q. s. make hereof 8. or 9. Pills take these after midnight
in the pulpe of an Apple.

Pills.
Hierae diacolocynth. ii. ss, of Agaricke made into a Trochiske, i. of Nutmeg,
gr. vi. of the juice of Centory the less q. s. make hereof pills, and give
twice or thrice of them in a months.

An Electuary.
of great Triacle, aureae Alex* ana i. of Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Cloves, ana ss, the
seeds of Fennel, Eyebright, ana i. ss, conserve of Rosemary flowers, i. ss,
sir. of Staechas, q. s. thrice in a week the patient may take i. 4. hours
before dinner.

A Fomentation.
of the flowers of Cammomile, M ii. ss, the leaves of Mallows, Althaea, ana M
ss, the seeds of Fengreeke, Lini, ana ss, bruise these, and boil them in water
q. s. make a fomentation hereof for the eye, before the colleryes be dropped in
with a sponge.

Another.
the flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, Fennel, Betony, ana M i. seeds of
Fengreeke, i. boil these in water and wine q. s.

A Collery.
of decoction of Celendine, Betony, Roses, Tormentill, ana ii. of the juice of
Fennel, Eyebright, ana iii. of Myrrh i. Mellis despumati, q. s. make hereof a
Collery: sharp Colleries must be laid to the eyelids.

A Collery.
of the powder of Swallows heads, ss, the gall of a Pike, ii. Pompholycis, i.
ss, of Myrrh, ss, of the decoction of Tormentill, Fennel, ii. of distilled
Honey q. s.

the water of Honey distilled certain ounces; of Sugar Candy and Myrrh a
little, drop a little of this into the eye.

of Turpentine, ii. ss, Sulfuris v^ni i. ss, Mellis rosati, Another.
vi. of Salt, iiii. of the juice of Fennel, the urine of Infants lb i. distill
these for a Collery. If the eye be pained with the Collery, mitigate the pain
with the white of an egg, beaten, or woman's milk, or Rose Water.

of the water of Fennel, Eyebright, Another.
ana iii. Vitrioli albi ii. Aloes, i.

of Centory the less, Maioram, Betony, Wormwood, A Lotion.
ana M ii. of Fennel, M ss, of the flowers of Staechas, M i. of Nutmeg, no ii.
boil these in an equal quantity of wine and water; wash the head herewith.

An Appendix, serving for the cure of CATARRACTA or SVFFVSION.
THe superfluity of humors must be expelled by a clyster, the next day a vein
shall be open, if the body be full, and then the offending humors shall be
made subject to nature, and at the length driven out by purging medicines,
which must often be renewed. A cautery must be made of iii. of Leaven, of
Cantharides the head and wings being cut off no vi. this must be applied to the
coronall seame, or behind the ears. Also Figs with Honey may be laid to these
places, and then blisters being opened must run. A cautery behind the ear
is best: or in stead of this, a seaton may be set upon the neck, then shall
the matter be turned away with Ligatures of the extreme parts, sneezing
medicines, Errhines, Friction, Apophlegmatismes, Clysters, and sharp
suppositors: and lastly, such medicines as will strengthen the head and sight,
and dissolve the relics must be prescribed, but milder medicines must first
be used: for by this means the body will the better endure stronger. Such
also must be used, which do allay the heat of the eyes. And seeing that
suffusion may be caused by consent of the stomach, therefore it is requisite
that the stomach be emptied of these crudities. But if the disease be so much
increased, that mists do clowd the eyes, then both head and stomach must be
purged; then digesters and discussers of relics which offend the eyes, may be
given in colleries. And it shall likewise be expedient to raise a cautery in
the hinder part of the head, to keep the humors from running to the eyes; for
else the eye would be inflamed. That suffusion which is caused by the default
of the stomach, is often cured by a vomit, but care must be had that it be
not done when the head is full, lest the matter get into the Opticke Nerves.
Pillul. mastich. are very good, if they be often used. But if the suffsision
be at an end, the humor which is before the Pupilla, must be thrust back
with a needle unto the little corner of the eye: also when this is to be done,
the humor must be of a mean consistence, for if it be liquid, the needle
will not prevail, and again if it be too thick, the tunicle will sooner be
rent, then that can be taken away, and besides, the patient will be put unto
great pain.

A method serving for the knowledge of OPTHALMIA, or Inflammation of the Eyes.
OPthalmia is an inflammation of the Tunicle or Membrane growing close unto the
eye, spread over all the membrane from the corners of the eyes. This evil often
takes its beginning from the Pericranium, from whence veins are conveyed to
the eyes through the forehead, and temples.

The Part affected.
It is chiefly the eye, and chiefly the Tunicle growing next the eye, which
does manifestly appear to be affected, because the sight of the eye is
offended, and the tunicles near adjoining,

Signs.
There comes withal a tumor of the eye, rednes, and a loading pain; and it
oftentimes so swells, that the tunicle, and the parts near adjoining are
sore stretched; sometime the eye is swollen, to the cheeks, and store of
tears fall from them caused by vehement pain, and pricking of the eye, which
does sometime accompany this disease. Such thin humors do demonstrate from
whence this disease did take its beginning, then does follow filth, which does
stick in the corner of the eye; and when this filth by degrees grows so
thick, that it does as it were glue the eyes together, then is not only the
disease increased, but also it is at full height. In this disease also the
arteries about the eye do beat strongly; and the small veins which before did
lurk in the white of the eye, are now swollen, and easy to be seen, and that
part which was wont to be white, is now red; the affect is answerable to the
signs all manner of ways.

The Causes.
There be three causes of this disease: the first by fulness and great store of
blood, wherewith the membrane growing close unto the eye, is filled and
stretched. Then the temples beat much, and extreme pain is about the eye. The
veins seem broad, the face and tunicle next unto the eye look red, and the
eyelids are very often closed. Tears gush out of the eyes, which are neither
sharp, nor biting. Age, diet, temperature, the season of the year, the region
hot and moist may cause this disease. All the parts about the eye, as well as
the tumicle are red. If it be caused by phlegmy blood, these parts are not so
stretched. And as it is often caused by blood, so is it often caused by thin
and sharp choler running from the temples and corner veins, secretly into the
eyes veins, and then such hot and biting tears gush out of the eyes, that
the next parts seem also burnt, and are sometime exulcerate. Dry and rough
excrements are gathered about the corners of the eyes. Age, season of the
year, chollericke temperament are sufficient witnesses of these humors, the
patients former diet did breed sharp humors. Sometimes, though but seldom,
it is caused by flatuous spirits, and ventosities, and then the next tunicle is
so stretched, that it often seems to burst, whereby it remains in great pain;
and then only small tears run out of the eye; neither is there such a heaviness
of the eye, or heat, or gnawing, although rednes do appear.

Prognostiques.
Opthalmia, oftentimes destroys the Vtea, when as the Cornea tunicle is burst
by corrosion, or putrefaction, if the disease do last long, and the gnawing
matter does still keep its course toward the eye. Opthalmia, which does come
from the inward tunicles, and from the brain, is worse then that which comes
from the pannicle covering the Cranium, and the greater the store of tears be
that run, and the sharper they be, the sooner is Opthalmia at his height.
But the Pupilla is in danger of being exulcerated, if the tears that flow from
the eyes be salt and hot. There is danger of blindness, if Opthalmia cause
continual pain. If the patient be loose of body, it is a good sign, also a
great dry swelling with little pain is none of the worst signs. But if the
tumor be great, and dry, and with much pain, the eye is in danger of being
exulcerated.

A method serving for the cure of OPTHALMIA or INFLAMMATION.
THe air must be cold, dry, and obscure, his meat somewhat cooling, and little
nourishing, and he must take but a small quantity in the first days of the
cure. His drink must be Barley-water, motion must be avoided, and rest
permitted; his sleep must be longer then ordinary; for it does assuage pain,
and hinders the stirring of huhumours. The belly must be euacuated by art or
nature. Perturbations of the mind must be avoided.

Syrupus rosatus, de rosis siccis. sir. of Violets, Preparers.
Pomegranates, Sorrel, water lillies, Acetosus simplex. The water of Sorrel,
Endive, Plantane, Roses, and Violets.

Sirupe of manifold infusions of Roses, Diaprunum simplex, Emptiers.
Diacath. Electuarium de succo rosarum, Pillulae Aureae, Aggregatiuae, Lucis,
Hiera picra. Hiera Diacolocynth. Tamarindi, Mirabolani, Rhabarb, manna, Cassia,
Diaphaenicon, Pillulae Cocciae, Alephanginae, Hierae picrae, Agarici, Faetidae.
First let the head vein of the same side be opened; if the body be full, and
the affect be great, plenty of blood shall be taken away: for by opening of a
vein, this evil for the most part is rooted out, yet if choler more then any
other humor does abound, so much blood must not be taken away, as if the
disease were caused by blood, but we will effect the rest with altring and
emptying medicines. Stronger medicines are prohibited; because the humors being
disquieted therewith, would run unto the eye. The former medicines shall be
used if the blood be choleric: and the latter if it be watery o^ flegmaticke.

The forehead vein must be opened. A clyster, Auerters.
a suppositor, friction, ligatures, lotions of the feet, Shoulders, Arms,
Hips, and Legs, must be used. Cuppinglasses with scarification must be applied
to the Shoulders, Neck, tops of the Arms, and beginning of the chine. Blood
suckers must be laid to the veins of the forehead, or behind the ears, if
opening of a vein for some cause be omitted. A cautery must be made in the
coronallseame, the hairs being first shaued. A gargarism, a masticatory, a
seaton by taken hold of the skin of the Neck, with the Fingers, and a needle
having a great thread shall be thrust through, and the excrements of the head
shall run forty days like a fountain, sometime drawing the seaton up and
down; or the skin must be pinched with pincers having two holes, and the neck
be bored with a hot Iron, then a needle shall be put into this hole, and a
thick twist of silk drawn after it, that it rots not too suddenly; this
silk must remain in the hole, and be moved to and fro twice or thrice every
day.

Auerters.
A foment of warm water wherein were boiled Roses, Violets, flowers of
water lillies, the leaves and Roots of Plantane, the seeds of white Poppy,
Myrtill, Roots of Mandrake, when the disease begins to increase, the leaves of
Mallows, Cammomill, and Mellilote must be added; and when it is at its full
height, the seeds of Fengreeke may be added. Rose Water may be also dropped in
the patients eye. A Collery of tragacanth, Pompholix, gum Arabicke, Masticke,
bole Armoniacke, red Coral, whereunto Opium may be added (if the disease be
not mastered by those medicines) for this stays the flux of humors. The
liquor of an Egg mixed with woman's Milk, may be applied to the eyes; or else
the liquor of an Egg mixed with the decoction of white Poppy, or with
Rose Water and woman's milk. The water of Roses, nightshade, Plantane, wherein
the seeds of Poppy must be boiled, with which the liquor of the white of an
Egg well beaten shall be mingled. The white trochisks of Rasis dissolved in
Rose Water, if the pain be great, are very good. A cataplasme of Poppy heads,
Roses, the flowers of wild Pomegranates, Nightshade, Plantane, the rinds of
Pomegranates, Bole armoniacke, Sanguinis Draconis, must be applied to the
forehead and temples, with the yolke of an Egg. A plaster of bean flowers,
Linseed, Fengreeke, Vinegar, the white of an Egg must be laid to the brow. If
the humors run through the veins and arteries without the skull, such as are
too astringent must not be used about the eyes, for thereby the matter may be
driven back into the hollownes of the eyes and sinews, and so bring a
continual catarract and blindness; but this is more to be feared, if the matter
run through the veins in the Cranium; because the matter about the opticke
nerves is more congealed Such as bind much, shall be applied rather to the
circle of the eye, or else to the forehead and temples, and by no means upon
the part affected; if the pain be great, these shall be renewed twice or
thrice every day; and such medicines as may dull the parts, are not requisite
for the cure of this disease, because they do offend the sight. When the
disease does begin to increase, resolving medicines shall be mingled with
repellers, and the more the disease does increase, the quantity of these
medicines shall increase.

Diatragacanthum frigidum, Diamargaritum frigidum, Strengthners.
a decoction of the roots of Cyna. The water of Fennel, dissolve a little
quantity of Aloes, and it is very good. Woman's milk, or Rosewater, wherein
Sarcocolla is dissolved. A collery of the water of Eyebright, Fennel, Roses,
Pompholix, aloes: a Fomentation of the decoction of the flowers of Mellilot,
the seeds of Fengreeke washed is a very good medicine. Fengreeke washed twice
or thrice in hot water, and then boyld unto the thickness of Honey. Also an
Egg laid hot unto the eye, when as it is sod somewhat hard.

A more particular method serving for the cure of OPTHALMIA or INFLAMMATION.
of the roots of Fennel, ii. of Barley, A Clyster.
M ii. leaves of Mallows, Mercury, Violets, ana M i. ss, flowers of Cammomile,
Mellilot, ana M i. seeds of Cowcumbers, Melons, ana ss, boil these in water q.
s. unto lb i. ss, add to the strayning of the Electuary of the juice of Roses,
v. of the oil of Violets, iii.

Oxymellis simp. sir. Stachados, ana i. ss, Mellis rosati colati ss, the water
of Fennel, Rosemary, Maioram, A Iulep.
ana iii.

A Potion.
of new Cassia i. Electuary of the juice of Roses, i. ss, sir. of many
infusions of Roses, i. the water of Lettuce, Violets, ana i. ss.

Pills.
Pillul. sine quibus esse nolo, cochiarum, i. Pillul. lucis, i. ss, of the best
rubarb, ss, Diagridij. gr. iiii. sir. Stachados q. s. Give these after the
first sleep.

Pills.
Massae pillul. de hiera cum Agarico, ss, Pillularum lucis, ii. Diagridij, gr.
ii. sir. Staechados, and water of Eyebright q. s. make hereof 6 or 7 pills.

A mixture.
Diamargarit^ frigidi, ss, Diatragacanthi frigidi, v. sir. de rosis siccis
violarum, ana i.

Another.
of Rosewater, iiii. Macilaginis Fenugraeci, ss, of the white of an Egg
beaten, ii. ss, Woman's milk, i. mix these and lay them about the eyes. This
medicine is good in the beginning of the disease, for it does not only
mitigate the pain, but also stop and resist the violent force of the humors.

An Irrhigation.
of Rosewater, of the decoction of white Poppy, ana ii. of the white of an Egg
dissolved in water i. of Camphire, Saffron, ana gr. iiii. Opij, (if the pain
be great) gr. i. mix these and drop them into the eye, and then wash it with
the decoction of Mellilot.

A Cataplasme.
of the pulpe of an Apple roasted in Cinders, iiii. of Camphire, i. ss. Saffron,
ss, of Rosewater, Womans-milke, q. s. this may be used when the eye indures
extreme pain.

A water.
of Masticke, Olibanum, ana q. s. dissolve them in the white of an Egg, it is
good against the humors, running unto the eyes and teeth.

An Emplayster.
of Woman's milk ii. the yolks of three Eggs, of the flowers of the seeds of
Linu^ ss, oil of Roses, i. mix these together.

Another.
of the flower of Barley, Frankincense, Olibanum, ana q. s. this does hinder
the falling down of tears into the eyes.

Another.
of Frankincense, the flowers of Pomegranats, sanguinis draco^is, Bole
Armoniacke ana i. of the white of an Egg q. s. to incorporate the aforesaid;
when they are to be used, dissolve them in Vinegar, q. s. wherein Roses,
Masticke, Olibanum, and red French Wheat have been boiled, and apply these to
the brow and temples.

of Bole Armoniacke, Masticke, Sanguinis draconis, A Cataplasme.
Barley flower, ana i. ss, of red Roses, M i. the white of one or two Eggs,
oil of Roses, i. ss, a little Vinegar. Apply this to the forehead and temples,
if the humors run through the veins without the head, which for the most
part happens.

of Masticke, Frankincense, Myrrh, ana i. ss, A Frontlet.
of Bole Armoniacke, of Beanes-flower, ana ss, of Saffron, i. with a little
oil of Roses, Vinegar, and the white of an Egg, dippe a fine cloth herein and
apply it to the forehead.

of the roots of Mandrake, ii. leaves of Violets, A Fomentation.
the Blacke-berrie bush, Willow, ana M i. of Roses, p. i. of white Poppy, ss,
of the seeds of Flebane, Quinces, ana i. boil these in water q. s. until the
third part be consumed, this may be used in the beginning, but when the
disease does increase, add to the former the leaves of Mallows, Al^haea,
flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, Fengreeke, Linseed, Sarcocolla, and increase
these latter still as the disease does increase.

Tutiae praeparatae, and beaten into very small powder, A Collery.
i. ss, of Camphire gr. xii. searce these together in a fine cloth. Wet them in
iii. of Rosewater, and Wine; two or three drops are sufficient for one time.

Barley-flowers, ii. of Saffron, An Emplayster.
ii. of the water of Roses, the whites of Eggs, q. s. lay this softly about
the eye it does much help the inflammation, redness and pain of the eyes.

of Woman's milk warm, the decoction of white Poppy, the white of Eggs
beaten, ana ss, A Fomentation.
this stays the flux of humors in the beginning, it does assuage the pain,
and induce sleep.

A Collery.
Collyrij albi, ss, Mucilaginis Psyllij, iii. of Woman's milk, iiii. mix these
well on a painters stone* adding thereto the white of an Egg beaten, i.

Another.
of Rosewater, iii. of Eyebright, i. Mucilaginis Foenugraeci, ii. ss, of
Camphire, i. a little quantity of the white of an Egg, Opij gr. i. Grind
these well on a painters stone, before the third day, no collery shall be
dropped into the eyes.

Another.
of the white of an Egg dissolved in water, ii. ss, of Woman's milk, iiii. the
juice of Cammomile, Rosewater, ana i. Opij, gr. i. if necessity require, drop
it into the eye, but afterward dippe a soft cloth herein, and lay it above the
eye. This must be often renewed.

A Fomentation.
of the flowers of Mellilot, M iii. Fengreeke grossly beaten, iii. boil these
in water q. s. until the third part be consumed. Make a Fomentation for the
eye, which must be used often every day.

A Collery.
Collyrij Rhasis, i. ss;, dissolve it in Woman's milk, and drop it into the
eye; at the length boil the seeds of Fengreeke, in water, (but the seeds must
be very clean washed) then wash the eye with the strayning, or dippe a sponge
in the liquor, and sometimes moysten the eye therewith, if by reason of the
sharpness of the humors, there be any danger of exculceration.

Another.
of the seeds of Fengreeke bruised, ii. the flowers of Mellilot, M ii. boil
these in water q. s. until they be soft, use this as the former. Likewise
sees an Egg somewhat hard, and lay it hot unto the eye, for beside that it
does concoct and digest the humors, it does also take away redness.

of the crumme of white bread i, moysten this in Rosewater, An Emplayster.
add to this of sweet Apples, ii. of Woman's milk q. s.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the OPTHALMIA or INFLAMMATION.
FIrst the belly must be euacuated with a Clyster; the second day a vein shall
be opened. Then such medicines as may drive back the matter running unto the
eye, shall be applied unto the brow, and dropped into the eye, especialy when
the disease is fresh. In the mean time we must endeavor to make the gross
and windy humors obedient to nature. When we have effected this, we will purge
the body of them, and if they be so sharp that they threaten to eat into the
eye, without the use of preparing medicines, we will empty the body of them, at
the length with frictions, Clysters, and lotions we will turn back the humor
running unto the eye. The fifth day we will mix such, as may resolve the
humors, with such medicines as drive them back from the eye, for then the
disease does begin to increase, but first wash away all the scurfe from the eye
with Rose Water, and then we may proceed unto such as do digest the humors:
all which may be effected by these, and the former medicines, so that
universals and particulars be rightly applied. If the former medicines can
nothing prevail, run a silk thread twisted through the flesh in the hinder
part of the head, so that it may sometime be drawn up and down. If
inflammation be caused by the pain in the head, first this pain must be taken
away, for this pain does stir up the humor, and thereby cause the disease.
If inflammation be caused by a blow, wash it over with Rose Water, and the
white of an Egg. If the inflammation be not great, it will be sufficient to
wash it with Rose Water, the water of the white of an Egg, woman's milk,
Psyllii mucago. Dip a linen cloth in these, and drop them into the eye, as
also lay it unto the eye. these medicines shall be often renewed every day when
the disease is at the height, some Sarcocolla must be dissolved in woman's
milk: for this does both digest the humors, and drive them back from the eye.

A method serving for the knowledge of the difficulty of hearing.
SVch men are said to be dull of hearing, who cannot hear a low voice, and
scarce understand loud voices; such men as these we say are deaf: therefore
thicknes of hearing, and deafnes differ in greatness only.

The part affected.
The ears are chiefly affected. Sometime the cause of his affect is in it
self, when as the chief instruments of hearing are hurt. Sometime it is
caused by another member, when as the brain, or the nerve, through which this
faculty is conveyed, is by some means offended. If the brain be faulty, then
the other sense likewise suffers. This disease is an affection which shows the
faculty of hearing either to be diminished, or taken away. This affection
follows the disease at all times.

The Signs.
This disease is known by the patients complaints and answers.

The Causes.
Oftentimes it is caused by a cold distemper of the brain, or instrument of
hearing: oftentimes it is caused by gross and cold humors thrust into the
ears, and there fastened; for such humors do amaze the senses, with their
functions, which the dulnes of the head, and of the part affected do plainly
demonstrate; also the other senses have hereby been hindered: also choleric
blood ascending upward, does stop the passage of hearing, because great store
thereof falls upon the chief instrument of hearing, which does often happen
in the time of Crisis in sharp Feauers. It is also caused by the filth in the
corners of the ear, Schirrho, thick skin about the place, and a fleshy bunch,
by an ulcer, impostume, and some other outward causes. Also hot vapors in
great plenty get up to the head and ears, from the bowels, and stomach,
whereby though the sense of hearing remain perfect, yet the patient does not
hear very well: this is incident unto many, but especially unto such who have
a foul body, and even as in the suffusion caused by superfluity of excrements
in the lower parts, the patients see not very well: so is it with hearing: the
windy spirits do cause great pain by stretching the membranes to get out. Also
these are the signs of this disease: a great sounding in the ear, and
stuffing thereof without either heat or heaviness.

Prognostiques.
Difficulty of hearing is much suspected, especially if it do slowly increase,
because in process of time, it does bring with it deafnes, but that deafnes
that is either absolute from the birth, or afterward, is incurable. And that
which is not absolute, if it be of long continuance, will hardly, or not at all
be cured; but that which is caused by gross humors, if it be neither
absolute, nor of long continuance, is curable; deafnes also, caused by choler,
is cured by such as draw down choler, and sometimes of its own accord it
comes down; if deafnes caused by a blow, remain many months, it is
incurable, especially if the sinews which appertain to hearing, be dissolved.
Deafnes also caused by a secret impostume hardened within the ear, is
incureable.

A method serving for the cure of the DIFFICVLTY of HEARING.
THe air must be hot, and dry, he must also use slender diet, and sometime
suffer hunger, such meats as do breed gross nourishm^nts and vapors, as
cheese, pulse, and fruits must be avoided; and his meat may be seasoned with
Anni-seeds, Cummin, Carrowaies, and Parsley. His drink must be small wine and
old. He must moderately exercise himself, and his belly must be kept loose by
art or nature.

Preparers.
Oxymel. squilliticum, sir. Staechados, the water of Elder, Betony, Baulme. The
sirupe of Violets, Water Lillies, Endive. The water of Sorrel, Buglosse,
Succory: when it is caused by gross and cold humors, those in the first place
shall be used; if by hot humors, the latter, and so purging medicines shall be
chosen.

Emptiers.
The shoulder vein of the same side shall be opened. The Electuary of manifold
infusions of Roses, Pillulae aureae, Assaieret. Diaph^, Rubarb, new Cassia; the
water of Endive, Water Lillies. Pillul. cocciae, Arabicae, de Agarico.
Diacatholicum Indum maiu^. Hiera Gal. Agaricus trochiscatus. Purgers must often
be renewed, when as it is caused by gross and cold humors.

Auerters.
A vein must be opened, Apophlegmatismes, of Pyrethrum, Masticke, and Pepper,
tie these in a fine linen cloth, and let them be chewed every day; Errhines of
Mustardseed, Pyrethrum, the juice of Maioram, with white Wine. A Gargarisme of
the decoction of Staechas flowers, Mustard seed, Origan, Calamint, Oxymel.
squilliticum: a sneezing powder must be made of Ginger, Pyrethrum, white Pepper.

Strengthners.
Diamuscum dulce, Triacle, conserve of Rosemary-flowers, of Staechas, a
decoction of Guaiacum wood, Honey, wherein white Hellebore, or Beauer-stone is
soked; and drop two drops into the ear. The juice of Rue mixed with Honey. The
decoction of Stachas, Origan, Maioram, Woormwood, wild Mints, the vapor of
these shall be drawn into the ear with a tunnell. The ears must also be
fomented with the vapor of Vinegar. Oil of Petroleum, bitter Almonds, of Nard,
the juice of an Onyon; one drop of these lukewarm must be dropped into the
ear morning and evening. Oil of Bay Berries, wherein some Aristolochia has
been dissolved. A natural bath, the Electuary of Diatrion sandal. Conserve of
Roses, Buglosse, oil of Water Lillies, Roses, Violets, bitter Almonds, the
white of an Egg, with Woman's milk, one or two drops must be put into the
ear. If this disease be caused by gross humors, we may use the former: if by
hot humors, the latter; but we must not exceed the quantity of two drops at one
time.

A more particular method serving for the cure of the difficulty of Hearing.
sir. Staechados, iii. Oxymellis squillitici, A Iulep.
i. the water of Betony, Hysop, Maioram, ana iii. Give of this iiii. in the
morning for the space of six or seven days.

Diaturbith with Rubarb, Electuarij Indimaioris, A purging potion.
ana iii. ss, sir. Staechados, i. water of Betony, iii.

Pillul. Cochiarum sine quibus esse nolo, ana i. ss, Pills.
Trochisci alhandal, gr. vi. with the sirup of Staechas, make hereof 7 pills.

Pillul. assaieret, sine quibus esse nolo, i. Cochiarum, Pills.
i. ss, sir. Staechados q. s. Give these after the first sleep.

of the best Mithridate, An Antidote.
i. of Triacle i. Give this after the pills.

of Staues-acre, bastard Pellitory, Mustard Seed. i. ss, An errhine
the juice of sweet Maioram, iii.

of bastard Pellitory, Mustard, Pepper, ana iiii. of Masticke, vi. An
apophlegmatisme.

of white Hellebore, gr. xii. of Ginger, A Stern^tatory.
bastard Pellitory, i. ss, powder these and mix them.

the leaves of Calamint, Origan, Maioram, flowers of Staechas, ana M i. of
bastard Pellitory, Mustard, i. ss, A Gargarisme.
boil these in water q. s. until the third part be consumed; add to the
strayning Oxymellis squillitici, ii. ss.

of Quinces, vi. of the best Cinnamon, i. ss, An Electuary.
of Annise Fennel and Coriander seeds ii. Electuarij anacardini, ii. ss, sir.
Staechados, q. s. use this after meat.

To drop into the ear.
the oil of bitter Almonds, Bays, Beauer-stone, ana ii. of Roses, i. of white
Hellebore, gr. i. of Wine-vineger ss, boil them together in an iron pan,
until the Vinegar be consumed, put one drop hereof into the ear, and stop
the holes with wool. Or this:

Another.
of the oil of Nard, bitter Almonds, ana i. of the juice of an Onyon, i. ss,
of Beauer-stone, i, Drop this into the ear.

Another.
of the oil of Almonds, Cammomile, Roses, ana ss, Panis porcini, i. ss, boil
these a while on the fire, and drop of the strayning into the ear: unto the
remainder, add Farinae Lini, A Cataplasme.
Faenugraeci, ana i. oil of bitter Almonds, fresh Butter, ana q. s.

Another.
of Onions, no iii. roast them under hot embers, beat them in a mortar, then
add of Saffron, ss, of fresh Butter q. s.

A Fomentation.
of Bay flowers, of Origan, Hysop, Maioram, ana M i. ss, of Wormwood M ii.
Mentastri, M ss, flowers of Staechas M i. ss, boil these in water q. s. until
the third part be consumed, then add a little Vinegar, wash the ear with a
sponge dipped herein, and let the vapor be conveyed to the instrument of
hearing, by some instrument for that purpose.

A liquor to be dropped into the ear.
the roots of Radish, iii. of white Hellebore, gr. ii. of Beauer-stone, bastard
Pellitory, ana ss, boil these a little in strong Wine, if the disease be
caused by a cold humor, one or two drops must be put into the ear with a
wooden stick: if it be caused by hot humors, drop the juice of Pomegranats,
wherein oil of Roses, Vinegar, and the juice of Lettuce have been mixed: also
the oil of Roses, wherein a little Vinegar has been boiled and consumed in
the boiling, put a little of this into the ear, which being done, the patient
must rest an hour or two upon his sound ear, that the virtue of the medicine
may be drawn to the inward parts; and then he must rest upon the other ear as
long, that the excrements may slide out the better. About six or seven hours
after, cleanse the patients ear from all the filth therein gathered together.
The white of an Egg with Woman's milk shall be dropped into the ear in an
hot cause, or else the water which runs out of a vine which is pruned in its
due season.

An Appendix, serving for the cure of the difficulty of hearing.
THe raw humors must be brought down with digestive medicines, and then
turned out of the body by pills, and other medicines, which we will endeavor to
effect twice in every week, then must the matter be fetched out of the ears
by Errhines, medicines provoking sneezings, and Gargarismes. This being done,
again the brain must be purged from their superfluous humors by pills, and
then such must be administered as dissolve the relics, and strengthen the
brain. All which we may effect by these and the former medicines, so that
vniuersalls and particulars be well sorted. Especial care ought to be had in
the putting of hot oil into the ears, lest that pain and exulceration do
follow. Therefore the safest way would be this, to mix a small quantity of
these with the oil of bitter Almonds. If there be a filthy ulcer in the ear,
somewhat must be applied inwardly that may cleanse the part affected. For which
purpose make a medicine of Honey and the juice of wild Cowcumbers, or the gall
of a Lamb. Then the ulcers shall be made sound by such as have a drying
virtue. For which purpose Tutia, the dross of iron, Pompholix, white lead, may
be boyld in wine, and one drop of the strayning shall be put into the patients
ear; unto this likewise one drop of Vinegar may be added. And as oils are
dangerous, and enemies to most ulcers, so are they especially obnoxious to the
ulcers of the ears: wherefore we must forbear the use of Oils, when we
perceive that there is an ulcer in the ears. We must begin here with mild
medicines at the first, and by degrees proceed unto stronger, and we will
rather apply outward medicines then inward; for in these there is less danger:
if one medicine can do the patient any good, this neither ought to be changed,
nor left of, until it has effected the cure. But if any shall be put into the
ear, the quantity shall be very small, otherwise they will run to the hearing
nerve, and unto os Petrosum, and by this means cause a greater dulnes of
hearing.

A method serving for the knowledge of HAEMORRHAGIA or bleeding at the nose.
HAemorrhagia in this place does signify bleeding at the nose, whether it does
come immediately from the nostrills, carried thither by the veins of the
palate, through which for the most part nature does expel the superfluous
blood in many; or else whether it comes from veins in the head farther off.
But in general it does signify any bleeding, whether it be of Nose, Buttocke,
or Stomach, or any other part of the body. Out of the Nose blood sometime does
gush out with so great force, that the patients for want of that blood which is
shed, fall into a swound, and in this kind it is always hurtful: whereas if
it moderatly does run out in the beginning of any Impostume, Plewrisie,
Quincy, Burning Fever, small pocks, and Fever, it is always for the best;
sometimes it does but drop out of the nose, sometimes it runs out
moderately, This bleeding is sometimes critical in other diseases, foreshewing
death, otherwhiles it is a joyful messenger of life.

The part affected.
The nostrills are here affected, but not always the essence of the nostrils;
for sometime they are affected by the consent of the stomach. The veins by
which this blood is cast out at the nose, run from the palate and mouth into
the nostrills, and sometime from the head. Haemorrhagia is therefore such an
affect appertaining unto too much excretion, or unto the expulsive, and
retentiue faculties actions hurt. This follows another disease, viz. the
opening of the mouth of the veins, or the division, and corrosion thereof.

The Signs.
If too much blood be shed, the color of the face is pale, and the body is of
a leaden color, the outward parts are cold, then follows a swounding,
sometimes death.

The Causes.
Oftentimes bleeding at the nose is caused by nature, which does by this means
expel the excrements, and that which is troublesome to the body. This happens
often in sharp diseases, when as there is a great quantity of corrupt matter,
and when it does boil up like new wine having no vent. Sometime it is caused
by the evil affection of the veins wherein the blood is contained; and the
blood runs out of the veins, first because the veins are open, which is
caused by such a plenty of blood, that the veins cannot contain it, and then
rushing violently to the mouth of the veins, make a passage; sometimes,
because the blood has some sharp quality in it, or else is some other way
putrified, vexing the mouth of the vein, at the length it opens them.
Sometimes the veins bleed, because they are divided either by a bursting,
wound, or bruise. Again, the veins bleed, because some gnawing humor has
got thereinto, or else because some strong outward medicine has been applied
to them; then may such things be applied as may cause an asker. Lastly, they
bleed, because the blood is too much fined by exercise, or some other cause and
the veins tunicles are thinner, and rarer, and so they bleed by way of
strayning. Here those are good which do thicken the veins, and blood, and do
purge waterish humors.

Prognostiques
If bleeding at the nose have continued long, swounding, weeaknes, and too much
cooling of the liver, Cachexia, or the dropsy is to be feared. Bleeding at the
nose with coldness of the outward parts, is mortal; if the patient by bleeding
be eased of pain, it is a good sign. If such as be newly taken with a
Fever, bleed on the fourth day it is suspicious; if it come after headaches in
the time of Crisis in Feauers, it is good; and if it be not immoderate, the
Fever shall need no other cure. If in bleeding, either doting or conuulsion
happen, this is a very bad sign: for a conuulsion by emptines is deadly: if
the nose bleed in suppression of terms, it may very well be permitted to
bleed awhile, for nature being hindered, does cast them to the upper parts,
which otherwise would have offended the lungs and liver. All superfluous
bleeding, in what part soever, does offend the liver. From whence Cachexia,
swounding, and the dropsy, sometimes death it self seizes on the patient.

A method serving for the cure of HAEMORRHAGIA or bleeding at the nose.
THe air must be somewhat cold, his meat must be such as does nourish well,
and easy of digestion, as Chickens roasted, or boiled; but let them be cold when
he does eat them; among Fruits, Quinces, Wardens; amongst herbs, the two
kinds of Endiues and Lettuces are good. His drink must be red thick wine, but
he must abstain from white and thin wine. In stead of wine likewise he may
drink water, wherein Cinnamon has been boiled; he must avoid all motion and
exercise of the body, and speak very little, and the part underneath the head
must be laid higher then his head: so that the head may hang downward. For by
this means it is driven into the contrary side of its former motion: He must
avoid all passions of the mind, especially anger.

Syrup of Myrtle, water lillies. Of Roses, Pomegranates, Preparers.
of the juice of Sorrel, Quinces, Poppy. The water of Sorrel, Plantane,
Purslane; these assuage the heat of the blood, sharpnes and biting thereof, and
also somewhat cool it, and by this means make it more unmeet to stir or
run up and down.

Let the Basilica, Auerters.
or Cephalica vein of the same side be opened, if the patient be not faint,
and by degrees be renewed twice or thrice in a day, especially if blood do
abound, and the disease be caused by the sharpnes hereof, and then no medicine
is better; for this does bring the blood back again: yet this shall not be
applied until a sufficient quantity of blood be gone. Painful ligatures of
the extreme parts must be used, cupping-glasses with scarification shall be
applied to the shoulders and stomach. Strong frictions of the arms and hands
downward. Bloud-suckers shall be applied behind the ears, or buttocks, if
the Hamroides cease which were wont to flow. The extreme parts must be dipped,
and washed in water, sudden fear and sudden casting water upon the patient,
is sometime present remedy: For the blood flies inward with the spirits. In
these consist all the hopes of the cure of this disease.

Sir. of manifold infusions of Roses; infusion of Rubarb. Emptiers.
A decoction of Rubarb, Mirabolanis, citrinis, Manna. A potion of the decoction
of Epithymon, Polipody, Seen, Mirabolanis Indis; the flowers of water lillies,
Violets, the seeds of Plantane, Melons, Quinces, sir. de Epithymo, Fumitory,
Agaricke. Seen, Myrobalani K^buli, and a vein must be opened as was before
prescribed if the bleeding at the nose be stenched, and it does appear
somewhat corrupt, we will use these purging medicines, after the use of such as
stop and turn away the blood, or else this should have been our first task,
because it was caused of sharp blood. If this blood be choleric, the former
medicines shall be used; if watery and melancholy, we will use the latter.

Stopers of the blood.
Trochisci de terra sigillata, drunk with the water of Plantane; or else lay
it upon the temples, with the white of an Egg, and juice of Plantane.
Trochisci de succino, de Spodia. Conserues of Roses, Violets, water lillies,
Quinces, whereto add Bole Armoniacke, Coral, Harts-horne burnt, the seeds of
Plantane. Sir. of Water Lillies, dry Roses, Quinces, Poppy, Lemmons, Sorrel,
Pomegranates, Myrtill, the waters of all these. A potion of Plantane water,
Purslane, Shepheards-purse, Caudae equinae, Bole Armoniacke, Terra sigillata. A
decoction of Lettuce, Malicoriae, Balaustijs gallis. Athanasia recens, Mycleta,
Philonium Romanum, with the juice of Plantane do procure sleep, and stop the
flux of blood. Opium, Poppy Camphire, the seed of House-leeke, and Lettuce do
harden and congeale the blood. The root of Equisetus beaten, and put in into
the nose; or the juice of Porrus, Nettle, Plantane, Caud^ equinae, Basilici,
shepherds purse Millefolij, Sanguinari^, dip a sponge in these, or in the best
Vinegar, and put it unto the nose; or the vapor of sharp Vinegar, received up
into the nostrill; for this purpose sprinkle some Vinegar upon a hot stone,
and let the patient hold his nose over. Irrhigations of the face and brow with
Rose Water, or cold water. Or wash the brow with a sponge dipped in Vinegar.
Moysten a sponge very well with Vinegar, and then daube it over with moist
pitch, and burn it in an earthen Vessel, until it does wax small like a
powder: this may either be blown into the nostrills, or else given in a moist
medicine. A nasale of Aloes, Frankincense, Bole armoniacke, the doung of an
ass burnt, the shells of Eggs, and threads of cloth burnt, dry Mints, Gyp^o,
old cheese, Sanguis Draconis, the juice of Polygonium, Plantane, the white of
an Egg, make pencils of the hairs of a Hare, and put them into the nostrills,
being first dipped in the aforesaid. Efcharotiea must be made of Caleanthum,
Tartar, Chalcitide, calce viua, whereunto some astringent medicines should be
aded, and so it will better stick. An ointment of the Oil of Roses, Violets,
water lillies, Vinegar, Cerato sandalino. A Cataplasme must be made of Bole
Armoniacke, Cauda Equina, Shepheards-pouch, Purslane, Terra sigillata,
Housleeke, Hematite, Rose Water, Vinegar, and white of an Egg. This must be
made for the brow and temples. These present remedies shall be applied to the
sides of the neck, to the brow and temples, and to the remote veins from
whence the blood principally issues; but first the blood must be turned back
again to its proper and peculiar place, and by no means use them at the
beginning of the Haemorrhagia, for there is danger of the bloods running into
the Head, Arteries, Lungs, or Ventricle: And so the p^tient be either stifled,
or assaulted by a conuulsion. Some of these formerly mentioned do stop the
blood running at the nose, by their astringent virtue: for they do thicken the
blood, and by that means hinder the speedy motion thereof. Others by a cold
property do the like; as Lettuce, Poppy, Opium. Others do glue to gether the
gaping orifice of the veins, as Frankincense, the whire of an Egg, Gum
Arabicke; some by a secret property they have, as the juice of Porrus mints.
Some do effect this by bringing a kind of scabbe upon the place, and by
cauterizing, as Arsnicke, Calx vina, Vitriolum. By these five kinds of
medicines, the running of blood out at the nose is stayed. Those medicines which
are astringent, and do cool very much, may be taken in at the mouth, or put up
into the nostrills, or else clothes dipped in them, may be laid to the neck,
brow, crown of the head and loins.

A more particular method serving for the cure of HAEMORRHAGIA, or bleeding at
the Nose.
A Iulep.
Sir. of Violets, Water Lillies, Myrtill, Quinces, Poppy, ana i. the water of
Plantane, Shepheards-pouch, ana iiii. of Sorrel, Roses, ana ii. ss, mix these
and give iiii. of it for the space of three days morning and evening.

A Potion.
of the roots and leaves of Plantane. M i. ss, of red Roses, Shepheards-pouch,
ana M i. the seeds of Lettuce, Purslane, Plantane, ana ii. boil these in
water, until the third part be consumed; then add to the strayning of the
syrup of Water Lillies, Quinces, Poppy, ana i. Give iiii of this with ss, of
the Trochiske de terra sigillata.

A Potion.
of the roots of Plantane, ii. Mirobal. Indorum, iii. white and light Agaricke,
ii. ss, Epithymi, Fumitory, ana M i. Polipodij quercini, sena Alex. ana iii. of
the best Rhubarb, ii. Sebestin, tamarindorum, ana ii. ss, boil these in water
q. s. until the third part be consumed, add to the strayning sir. rosacei
Laxatiui, iii.

A draught.
of water. iiii. of Vinegar, ii. of Sugar, Rosewater, ana i. of this make a
draught to be drunk at two several times.

A mixture.
of conserve of Water Lillies, Roses, ana i. Trochisc, de spodio, de terra
sigilla^a, Rosin, ana ii. ss, of Bole Armoniake, the seeds of Plantane, ana i.
Sacchari rosacei, i. ss, sir. of Poppy, Water Lillies, ana q. s.

A Powder.
of Boodstone, Corrall, Gummi Arab. assati, ana i. of red Roses, ss, rhabarb.
modice assati, i. Diatragacanthi frigidi, the weight of all these. Give ii. of
this with the sirupe of Quinces, i. of Plantane water, iii.

Athanasiae, Nicholai, ss, Sacchari rofacei, A mixture.
conserve of Roses, ana i.

of the water of Roses, Purslane, Plantane, Sorrel, An Epitheme.
Endive, ana iiii. of the seeds of Purslane, Sorrel, Endive, ana i, of the
trochiskes of Camphire, Sandal. citrinorum, ana ii. a little Vinegar, make an
Epitheme for the liver; for cold medicines being warily applied to the liver,
do soon stay the force of bleeding at the nose, if so be the blood did come
from the liver: as much may be said of the spleen.

of the roots and leaves of Plantane, A Fomentation.
of Shepheards-pouch, Polygonij, ana M iiii. boil these in water q. s. unto lb
^iii. add unto the strayning of the best Vinegar, lb i. ss, wash the palm of
the hand, and the soles of the feet, and the liver with a sponge dipped
therein, likewise wet clothes herein, and apply unto the veins of the throat,
the temples and forehead.

Trochisc. de carabe, i. of the root of the herb Horse-taile, ii. ss; Bole
Armoniacke, Sanguinis draconis, A Nassale.
ana ss, of Frankincense, i. ss, of Aloes; ii. ss. incorporate these in the
white of an Egg, make small pencils of the hair of a Hare. Dippe it in the
aforesaid, and put it into the nostrils. This must be used after that a vein
is opened, and after Cupping-glasses and ligatures of the extreme parts. For
otherwise it is to be feared, that the blood will run to the row of
arteries, or into the stomach, or into the inward parts of the head.

Alloes, ii. of Frankincense, iii. of Camphire, gr. v. Opij. (if necessity
require) gr. ii. Incorporate these with the white of an Egg, and after the
former manner put it into the nose: or the dust of the shell of an Egg shall
be blown into the nose.

of Horse-tayle, M ii. of Shepherds pouch, Plantane, ana M i. beat these, and
add unto them Bole Armoniacke, i. ss. of Rosewater and Vinegar a little, wrap
this up in a cloth and lay it to the temples.

A Cataplasme.
of the ashes of an Egge-shell, iii. the flowers and rinds of wild Pomegranats,
of Bole Armony, of Oak apples ana ss, seeds of white Poppy, ii. incorporate
these with a little Vinegar and the white of an Egg. A cataplasme: apply this
unto the brow, temples, and the veins of the throat.

of the Boodstone, Bole Armony, terrae sigillata, ana i. ss, of the juice of
of Horse-tayle, Purslane, Poligonii, of House-leekes, ana ss, the whits of two
Eggs, a little Rose Water, and Vinegar; apply this unto the brow and temples
and cods.

An unguent
of oil of Roses, Quinces, sirupe of Quinces, ana i. Bole Armony, the flowers
of wild Pomegranats, ana ss, of Pine apples, i. a little Wax and Vinegar, make
an ointment for the veins of the throat, forehead and temples: boil the
oils and iuyces together, until the juice be consumed.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the HAEMORRHAGIA, or bleeding at the Nose.
OPen a vein at the first: but if blood do run so fast out of the nose, that
it will be both dangerous, and needless to open the cubit vein, then
Cupping-glasses shall be set to the shoulder, and neck, and sides of the
patient: also Ligatures and Frictions shall be used: and by washing the feet
in hot water, the course of the blood will be turned another way: at the
length we will stop it from going further, and strengthen those parts from
which the blood did first of all come: and these we will apply unto the nose,
forehead, liver and spleen; neither medicines which are called Marcotici, or
Escharotici must be used, unless great necessity do require; but we will give
Arthanasia, ii. ss or else we will make a powder of Vitriolum, playstering
Mortar, Masticke, and snuff this up into the nose. In all fluxes of blood out
of the nose, moderate moystning medicines must be applied to the liver. But it
is best if an Epitheme be made for the liver of the seeds of Endive, Sorrel,
Sandalis, Rosewater, Succory; or to a Cerate of Sandals, some oil of
Water Lillies shall be added; and a soft Liniment shall be made hereof.

A method serving for the knowledge of CATARRHVS, or RHEVME.
CAtarrhus is a distillation commonly taken, and is a deflux of humors and
excrements from the head or brain into the other parts of the body: and
because the brain is of a cold and moist nature, and does want plenty of
nourishment, by reason of the largenes thereof: so likewise it does breed many
excremenes; and the slight distemper being cold and moist, will further it: for
first vapors sent from the lower parts, get up thither, and these being
thickened, by reason of the brains thinness, are entertained; and even as
these superfluous excrements are sent back again to some one or other part of
the body, so likewise does the disease alter its name, for such excrements
sometime enter into the inner receptacle of the brain, oftentimes in the first
ventricle (if so be that they do not offend much in quantity) and then they are
soonest purged by the palate. Sometime they are spread through diverse places of
the brain, when they flow too much, and then are they avoided partly at the
nose, partly at the palate, some at the ears, some at the eyes, and they do
often fall into the inward parts of the body, as stomach and lungs, whereof
come these diseases, viz. an impostume of the lungs, and Asthma, and they fall
into the thr^ate, or windpipe* whereof comes hoarsnes, sometime they do
lghit upon the stomach, and the nourishment that was but lately received, is
corrupted, the appetite, and concoction quite overthrown. Sometime they do
cause a lientary, when as they do fall into the bowels, whereof comes a laxe.
Sometime such excrements are gathered on the outside of the skull, under the
skin of the head, and that is often perceived in the crown, where the ends
of the veins creeping along the face and temples, do meet; for if these
vessels be laden with needless store of excrements, they do often unload
themselves in these places for the space of many days; whereas by degrees,
because of their thinness, they find some way out of the parts of the body,
yet it do softly thicken, by reason of the heat of the part wherein it is
harbored; from whence come the pains of the Sides, Loins, Arms,
Shoulder-blades, Eyes, Teeth, Shoulders, Kernels, Hips, Legs, and sundry
joints. But chiefly in this place we do treat of that flux which does fall
into the Lungs,

The part affected.
The brain is most affected, as may appear by the actions and faculties which
are offended; as also by those things, that are voyded at the mouth, nose, and
palate; and then it is a more continual disease, neither is any hurt of any
other part perceived, whereby it may be cherished, but while it is caused by
other parts of the body, it will the better be known by its proper signs;
this is an affection, which appertains unto immoderate excretion.

Signs.
If the excrements of the head fall into the Lungs, it does cause for the most
part hardness of breathing, and a great cough, and a certain tickling is felt
in the throat, and some portion of the humors fallen down, is cast up in
spittle, and in time faintnes of body, heaviness of the head; heat and thirst
comes withal, the urine for the most part is of a high color. If it do fall
into the throat, or windpipe, it does bring with it a cough and hoarsnes, and
those places are rough.

The Causes.
Sometime the hot distemper of the brain is the cause, which dissolueth, and
fineth humors in the brain, and does draw more vapors from the lower parts,
then it can concoct, and expel by breathing; that there is this distemper in
the brain, Age, region, season of the year, hot temperature, ared nose and
face, the parts of the head being hot, the temples and arteries beating very
much, a sharp or thin humor voyding at the mouth or the nose, Fever often
coming with it, and a loathing of meat, do all signify as much. But the
great weakness of the brain is oftener the cause of rheum, so is its cold and
moist distemper, for then nutriments conveyed to the brain, are not well
digested, whereby many super fluities are gathered, and store of excrement are
lodged in the brain. The signs of this constitutions are age, the season of
the year, diet cold temperature, the avoiding of phlegmy and gross humors at
the nose, and of those great plenty, also sleeping, distention, heaviness of the
head, and forehead, palenes of the face, loading obstructions in the nostrills.
His former diet was too moist and distemperd. This is caused by ill vapors
that filll the head; for vapors being thickened, are thrust down into the
lower parts. Surfeit likewise, and too much fullness* especially of wine,
increase this evil. It is also caused by too much sleep; also by reason of
the weakness of the digestive and expulsive faculty of the brain, whether it
were so from the patients birth, or by some long disease of the brain: for the
nutriment brought thither, is left raw, and is in the body, because of the
weakness of the expulsive faculty.

Prognostiques.
If the humor fall from the head to the nose, it is but a small grief, if
unto the throat, a worse, if to the lungs, worst of all; for the lungs are in
danger of being exulcerated, from whence comes a Consumption. Short rhewmes,
if they be let alone at the first, will at the length prove tedious; they are
not free from danger, who are very much troubled with rheum. It does threaten
Apoplexy, Phrensy, Blindness, Toothache, Consumption, Palsy, Deafnes,
squinancy, sudden death, Impostume of the Lungs, Bladder, Kidneys, Liver, eyes,
Pain and weakness of the stomach, the Sciatica, Gowt, Laxe, and Collicke; such
who have a cold and weak brain, are most subject to rheum, also rheum
accompanied with the pain of the head, is hardly to be cured. The winter
season is very obnoxious to this disease, because of the uncertainty of the
weather.

A method serving for the cure of CATARRHVS or RHEVME.
THe air must be moderately hot, rayny weather and northern and sowtherne
blasts must be avoided. His meat must be easy of digestion, and such as may
breed good blood, viz. rear Eggs, the flesh of Hens, Pullets, Capons
Patridges, Veale; but he must eat moderately of these, and he must be more
sparing of his diet at supper then dinner. After meat give him some Quinces,
for it does hinder the rising of the vapors to the head. Amongst Fruits,
Pruines, Raisins, and sweet Almonds, are good: his drink must be water and
wine, or else honyed water, or else water wherein Cinnamon and Licorice were
boiled: he must drink but a little of this, and sometime he must endure
thirst. His sleep must be moderate, and not in the day time, his head must be
so covered, that neither too much cold, or too much heat offend it; both heat
and cold cause this disease; his body must daily be emptied of the excrements
either by art or nature: too much motion of the body and perturbations of the
mind must be avoided.

Sirupe of Violets, Licorice, I^iuba, dry Roses, Poppy, Perparers.
water lillies. A decoction of the four common cold seeds, the flowers of
Wood-towell, and white Poppy, water of Violets, Succory, Roses, Barley boiled
in water, Mel rosatum, Oxymel simp. Squillit. Compositum. sir. of Betony,
Staechas, Maiden-haire, Hyssop, Licorice, horehound. A decoction of the Roots
of Licorice, Fennel, Acorus, cyperus, Cinnamon, Betony, Hyssop, Maioram,
Maiden-haire, Sage, Rosemary, Buglosse, Serpill^m, flowers of Stachas, Nutmeg,
and Figs. The water of Mayden-haire, Hyssop, Scabious, Sage, Betony, and
Adiantum; the former of these must be used, when the humor is caused by heat,
the latter, when by a cold.

The shoulder or median vein shall be opened, Emptiers.
if there be any danger of a Pleurisy, Fever, suffocation, or squinancy, or if
there be plenty of blood, and the strength of the patient will permit.
Elictuarium de succo rosarum, Diaprunum scammoniacum, Diaphanicum, Pillul.
Aureae, Aggregat. Assaieret, Mastichinae, Cochia, de agarico, de sarcocolla.
Agaric. trochisc. cassia, rubarb. Polipodium. Sirupe of manifold infusion of
Roses. Elect. Indum, Diacath. a strong Clyster is good, if there be great
plenty of rheum, which does threaten suffocation, make it of the decoction of
flowers of Staechas, Maioram, Sage, Calamint, Origan, Mallows, Barley, Hiera
picra, Mel rosatum, and Oil of Violets. We must here forbear strong purging
medicines, lest we should cause the surcharging matter to flow.

Emptiers.
A vein must be opened: the former Clyster must be used: also medicines that
do euacuate. Cupping-glasses must be fastened to the Arms, Shoulders, and
Buttocks. A sweat must be caused with the decoction of Salsa parilla. Frictions
of the extreme parts, but especially of the head and feet; also continual
motion of those parts; for by these means the humor offending falls down:
painful ligatures, a sneeze of hellebore, Castoreum, and Pepper. Yet this is
not good at the first; for hereby the decoction of the humors is hindered.
Apophlegmatisms of bastard Pellitory, Pepper, Hyssop, Masticke, the rinds of
the Roots of Capers, Cubebs, Raysins. A gargarisme of Maioram, Hyssop, and
Origan; but if the humors run unto the breast or Lungs, or if it be thin
and moves very much, gargarismes are dangerous; Nasalls of the juice of
flower-de-luce, Beet, Sow-bread, bastard Pellitory, seeds of Nigella, in a cold
matter; but in hot, the juice of Violets in Barley-water. Lotions of the Legs
and Arms. The nose must be often cleansed by blowing; for hereby thick and
thin humors are more safely purged then by spittle; a cautery must be made
in the coronall seame, the head being first shaued, or else behind the ear,
and the sore shall be long kept open; for which purpose hot Cabbage leaves
and Swines grease shall be laid upon it. These auerting and local medicines
purging the brain, shall not be applied, until the matter be well digested
and emptied; otherwise the rheumaticke matter should only be stirred up.

Stayers of the rheum.
Philonium Mesue with the decoction of Olibanum, rob. nucum, Conserve of
ancient Roses, Saccharum violatum, Dianucum, Diacodium, Diapapauer.
Diatragarcantum frigidum, and calidum. Pills of Hounds-tongue, a loch of
coleworts: a loch of Poppy, bole armony, the juice of Licorice, a trochiske of
Foale-foot, Masticke; sir. of Violets, Poppy, Licorice, iuleb of Violets. A
decoction of Plantane, Purslane, Barley, white Poppy, Roses, Bole Armony, Gum
of the Juniper tree, whereunto add Diacodium. Pills of dry Roses, seeds of
Poppy, Camphire, terra sigillata, they must be held in the mouth. Spike held
in the mouth at night time is good. Cummin and Nigella fried and tied in linen
cloth, hereof make an odor: a fume with Nigella only made into powder, and
burnt. An ointment of the oil of Roses. An Emplayster for the head being first
shaued, of red earth, Roses, Plantane, Bole Armony; unless great pains urge,
we will not use these medicines, until the humors be purged and turned away.
But if the humors run too fast unto the Lungs, so that it does threaten a
troublesome cough, or a long waking, or dreams, or danger of choking, or
excoriation by reason of the humors sharpness, we will immediately use
these medicines that do hinder the matter going any further, not waiting
until the humors be purged and turned aside; neither can it be expected
that a thin rheum falling upon the Lungs, in such plenty and with so great
force, can be fetched out by purging medicines, or else be turned aside: for
purgers and auerters do rather increase the motion of humors. At that time a
vein shall be opened, and Cupping-glasses applied to the shoulder-blades.
Therefore if great pains do follow the rhumes, such medicines as may thicken
the blood, and hinder the rhumes, shall be given, though they hinder spitting,
else there would be danger of choking.

Diamuscum dulce et amarum, diambra, Triacle, Strengthners.
Mithridate not too ancient, Pliarisarioticum. Conserve of Sage, Betony,
Rosemary, Acorus, Orange-pilles preserved, Nutmeg, Cubebs, Nigella Romana, the
roots of Cyperus, Cloves, Mace, Staechas, Gallia moschata, Lignum aloes,
Ladanum. A sweet ball of Cloves, Gallia moschata, Nutmeg, Storax, Calaminth,
Ladanum, Cubebs, Tragacanth. water of Maioram. Make a cap of the leaves of
Bays, Origan, Sage, Betony, Maioram, seeds of Nigella, Cammomile, Mellilot,
Stachas, Frankincense, Masticke, Cinnamon, Mace, Nutmegge, Cloves, red Roses:
wash the head, with the decoction of the former things, in Malmesey. Make a
perfume of Cloves, Cinnamon, Aloes, Rosemary, Sage, Bay-leaues, Maioram,
Masticke, Frankincense, Gallia moschata, Musk. A Quilt with Salt, Millet,
Branne, Sage, Maioram: an ointment for the head being shaued, with the oil of
Rue and Dill: for the breast, oil of Lillies, Cammomile, sweet Almonds, Lini,
fresh butter. Frictions and Foments of the head, with a rough linen cloth hot,
which shall be perfumed with the vapors of Frankincense, Masticke, Storax, and
Ladanum. A cauterie shall be made in the hinder part of the head, of Leaven,
and Cantharides, if these former medicines cannot prevail.

A more particular method serving for the cure of CATARRHVS, or RHEVME.
A Clyster.
of Betony, Maioram, Sage, Rue, ana M i. ss, flowers of Rosemary, Staechas,
Centory the less, Cammomile, ana M i. of Origan, Calamint, ana M ss, of
Branne, M ii, boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss. Add to the strayning
Electuarij Elescopi, i. Hierae picrae simp. i. Diaturbith, cum rhabarb. iii.
ss, Mellis rosati, i. oil of Rue, iii. of Salt, i.

A Iulep.
Mellis rosacei, Oxymel. simp. sir. Staechados, Licorice, ana i. water of
Rosemary, Betony, ana iiii. of Hysop, ii. mix these.

Pills.
Pillul. de Agarico, ss, Cochiarum, Faetidarum, ana i. Diagridij, gr. iii. sir.
of Violets, q. s. make hereof 7. or 8. pills.

Diaturbith cum rhabarb. v. Electuarij Iudi, A draught.
Diacatholic. ana i. sir. Staechados, ss, water of Maioram, Betony, ana i. ss.

of Maioram, Nigella, Nutmeg, i. ss, A sneezing powder.
bastard pellitory, white Hellebore, ana i.

of the juice of Brassica, Beat, ana i ss, A Nasale.
juice of Cyclamen, ss, of white Pepper, Nigellae, ana i. snuff this up at the
nose.

seeds of Staues-acre, Mustard, bastard Pellitory, A Masticatory.
ana i, ss, Acori conditi, of Cubebs, Mace, ana i. Nigellae Romanae, of
Raysins, Masticke, ana i. ss, of Honey, q. s. mix these and put them into a
fine cloth.

of Mustard Seed, of Pepper, A Gargarisme.
ii. roots of bastard Pellitory, i. Ginger, ss, boil these in water q. s.
until the third part be consumed. This does bring back the rheum running to
the lungs.

sir. de rosis siccis, iii. of Roses, Myrtle, A Iulep.
ana i. of the water of Violets, Plantane, Hysop, ana iii.

of red Roses, M i. seeds of white Poppy, Olibani, Another.
ana i. ss. boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. add to the strayning of the
sirupe of Poppy, iii. of Licorice, i.

of the conserve of old Roses, i. Diacodij, ss, A Nasale.
Diatragacanthi frigidi, iii. sir. of Roses, q. s.

Olibani, of Masticke, ana ss, of the pulp of Quinces, A draught.
i. ss, Let him take ii. hereof when he gos to bed, and after it drink one
draught of wine.

of Bole Armoniacke, of red Earth, of Masticke, A mixture.
ana ii. the juice of Licorice, ss, conserve of Roses, ii.

Diacodij, ss, sirupe of Poppy, i. water of Betony, A draught.
iii.

Diacodij, vi. sir. of Poppy, ii. of Bole Armoniacke ii. of Camphire, i. Let
him take one spoonefull hereof in his mouth.

of the seeds of white Poppy, of Lettuce, ana iiii. amyli, Diatragacanthi
frigidi, ana i. Gummi arabici, tragacanthi, Bole Armoniacke, ana ii. Opij i.
ss, Sacchari rosati, juice of Licorice, ana i. ss, mix these, and make a lump
hereof with the juice of Quinces, and water wherein Gum tragacanth has been
infused. Let the patient hold a little of this in the mouth: this hinders the
flux of the rhume.

A Gargarisme.
of the rinds of Pomegranats, ss, of Knap-weed, M ii. the roots of Plantane,
Dane-wort, ana M i. of Pine apples, Frankincense, Mastick, ana i. of Roses, M
i. the seeds of Purslane, ii, boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss, add to
the strayning of the sirupe of Myrtle, Staechados, Diaemori, ana i.

A Nasale.
of Role Armony, Sanguinis draconis, Frankincense, ana i. of Storax, Masticke,
ana ss, boil these in lb ss of the water of Honey, put some of the strayning
into the nose.

A Cap.
of Frankincense, Olibanum, ana i. ss. of red Roses, ii. the seeds of white
Poppy, ss, Sandaracae, Masticke, ana ii. with a little wine, make pills, that
must be burnt to procure a smoking. Let the patient hold the cap that he is
to wear over these, and having well smoaked it, he must put it upon his head.

An Electuary.
of the conserve of Rosemary, Betony, Sage, ana vi. Sp. Diamusci dulcis, iiii.
of ancient Triacle, ii. Diambrae, i. Nutmeg, i. ss, sir. Stoechados q. s.

Sy. Diamusci dulcis, Lozenges.
Diambrae, ana ii. ss. of the best Sugar dissolved in Rosemary and Betony water
q. s. make hereof an Electuary in Lozenges.

A Powder.
of the roots of Aristolochia rot. bastard Pellitory, Spike, ana ss, of Aloes,
Frankincense, Cloves, ana ii. of Masticke, i. ss. Make a powder hereof, and
cast this upon the fire, and receive the smoke of this as was showed before.

A Quilt.
of the flowers of Betony, Roses, Staechas, Cammomile, Mellilot, M i. of
Frankincense, Masticke, Nutmeg, Mace, Cloves, ana i. ss, the leaves of Bays,
Origan, ana M. ss. make a Quilt for the coronall seame.

of Branne, Millet, A Cap.
ana M i. of Salt beaten very small i. ss, fry these in a pan, make a little
cap of this, and lay it unto the coronall seame* this does strengthen the
brain, and dries up the humors.

Nigelloe Romanae fried, ss, roots of Cyperus i. ss, A Powder.
flowers of Staechas, Roses, M ss, Nutmeg, Cloves, ana iii. cast this upon the
hinder part of the patients head, when he does go to bed.

Nigelloe fried, i. of Mustard seed fried, Frankincense, An Emplayster.
ana v. of Masticke, iii. of Pigeons-dung, Barley flower* ana i. Oxymellis
squillit. q. s. apply this to the coronall seame.

An Appendix, serving for the cure of CATARRHVS or RHEVME.
THe body shall be first emptied by a gentle Clyster, and the humors made
subject to nature; then we will purge the body of these loading humors. The
head shall be purged by Errhins, Apophlegmatismes, and Masticatories; actual
and potentiall cauteries shall be made in the hinder part of the head, and when
the blisters arise, they shall be opened, that the watery humors may run out; for
which purpose lay Cabage leaves upon the broken blisters. And then such are good
that do stay the flux of the humors, which may be used at the first, if there
be any danger of choking by the vehemence of the Rheum. After all these, such
shall be appointed that may strengthen the brain, and consume the relics,
which shall be effected both by outward and inward medicines. There is danger
in delay, therefore pills shall be given at the first, to prevent danger of
suffocation. If the Rheum run unto the nose, an iron must be het red hot and
some Vinegar besprinkled thereon, whereto the powder of red Roses might be
added; and the fume must be received into the Nostrills.

A method serving for the knowledge of ANGINA, or SQVINANCY.
THe Squinancy is an inflammation of the throat, or of the highest parts of the
Gullet, hindering breathing and swallowing, when as the fault is neither in the
breast nor lungs. This disease does threaten present danger by strangling,
because the upper part of the Winde-pipe or Gullet is cloased up, whereby a man
is deprived both of breath and sustenance. This disease does usually come
suddenly, for the most part it is also caused by a flux.

The part affected.
The inner muscles of the throat, are often affected, and then the patient is in
great danger; these signs go along with it, viz. vehement pain in the
throat, sometimes a very strong fever. When the patient breathes, he does
hold his face upward, also there is a defect in his voice. No sign of heat or
swelling does appear either in mouth or throat, or neck, but great
straightness is felt in the throat, they do breathe with their mouths open,
and are refreshed with cold air. Sometime they thrust out their tongues, their
eyes are red, and stick out of their head; the drink that they take, runs
out at their Noses, in brief, they are sundry ways disquieted. Sometimes the
outward muscles of the throat are affected, and this of all other is the
milder kind of Squinancy: for then the pain about the throat is not so
great, neither does the patient breathe with such difficulty. But if the
throat and the place where the Wind-pipes, and Gullets extreme parts do
meet, be affected, then the patient breathes with more ease. Moreover, heat,
swelling, and pain is more felt in the throat, and sometime these may be
plainly discerned if the tongue be kept down; this is with less danger then
the former; sometime both inward and outward Muscels are affected, then the
pain is more vehement.

The Signs.
They breathe with difficulty, besides, the pain is sharp* and the face and
neck is red. They swallow with pain all their meat, and that which they
drink, does run out at the nose, oftentimes the patient has a Fever, and
desires to draw fresh air. Sometime when the disease is very great, they
thrust out their tongues.

The Causes.
For the most part it is caused by blood, which is carried thither from the
iugular veins, for in these veins there is plenty of blood. The pulse will be
full, and wavering; Oftentimes it is caused by their former diet, which was
such as did generate much blood. A temperate spring, hot and moist also went
before. If it be caused by choleric blood, a sharp ague, and great burning,
hardness of breathing, and swallowing does concur, yet there is less
straightnes: there is a bitterness of mouth; diet, age, temperament, region, all
these concur, because they do generate choleric blood. If it be caused by
a flux or cold humors, it is then a bastard squinancy. Then his mouth is very
moist and slymy, the Fever either comes not at all, or else it is very gentle,
the pain is less, the swelling not so hard, neither is his face and other
parts very red; those things went before, that did breed phlegmy blood. This
disease does always take its beginning of fluxes, which come thither from the
head and iugular parts.

Prognostickes.
If the inflammation be in the inward muscles, within three or four days it
will kill the patient; and that squin^ncy is most dangerous whenas no
inflammation does appear; when the pain is great, the Fever vehement, and
the patients tongue is thrust out, when the passage is so stopped, that he
cannot swallow, and when the drink runs out at the nose; when the eyes are
turned like unto them that are strangled, when they stick out of the head,
also when his spittle is foamy, the lips look black, and he strives to leap
out of his bed, and when his sight, hearing and wit is so dull, that he
understands not what is done about him, he dies by a swound and strangling: yet
there is some hope, when rednes and a tumor do appear, and as these accidents
are diminished, so is the disease more mild, and the stronger these accidents
are, the greater is the danger. It is no good sign, if the tumors are
suddenly gone without any manifest cause: if there be pain in the sides,
numnesse of the whole body, and feeblenes, death is certainly near at hand.
and although the patient do think himself well, yet he is taken away
suddenly by a suffocation, or else it is turned into an impostume.

A method serving for the cure of ANGINA or SQVINANCY.
THe air must be bright, temperate; and free from winds, his meat must be
liquid, and soft, as rear Eggs, Furmenty, the broth of Pullets, Hens. For the
three first days his fare must be slender, he must shun those things that
may heat his blood, viz. Pepper and other spices. His drink must be ptisan
with Sugar, or the broth of a Chicken, any honied water: but he must abstain
from wine, he must no way exercise himself, and speak very little; his
sleep must be shorter then ordinarily it was wont to be, and sometimes they
that stand by, must awake him out of it: for by too much sleep this disease
does become worse; for then the humors do increase in the part affected: this
head must be meanly covered, but by no means rubbed in the beginning of the
disease. His belly must be kept loose by art or nature. Perturbations of the
mind must be avoided.

At the beginning of the squinancy a vein must be opend on that side the pain
is; Emptiers.
when he does perceive difficulty of breathing or swallowing, even until he
does swound, if there be great store of blood in the body, and the patients
strength is able to endure it, otherwise the blood shall be taken away at
sundry times. A woman with child shall be thus dealt with, if her strength be not
too much decayed; the Cephalica vein shall be first opened, and then the vein
under the tongue, when the humor leaves running: but if this be opened at the
first, inflammation will be increased, because the matter is drawn to the
part affected. In great fulness the Saphena vein shall be first opened, and
whilst the vein under the tongue is opening, the tongue shall be turned up to
the palate of the mouth. Electuarium Eloscopi; sir. of the manifold infusions
of Roses, Diacatholicum, Hiera picra, Pilluloe Aureae, de Agarico. Cassia,
manna, Tamarindi. The matter of the disease must presently be fetched out,
especially if it be choleric; for that swells the tumor: for this cause, not
exppecting digestion, it must presently be euacuated. For this disease
threatens danger. Also we must abstain from strong purging medicines, when
the disease is but newly begun, for they will stir up the matter, therefore
for this cause it shall be permitted to run unto the part affected.

Auerters.
A vein shall be opened as was formerly perscribed; and cupping-glasses shall be
first applied to the lower parts, then unto the upper. Bloud-suckers may be
fastened to those places. The Feet and Hands must be washed with hot water;
also painful ligatures of the extreme parts must be used, as also strong
frictions of those parts. A strong Clyster shall be then, if the patient have a
Fever, and a vein shall not be opened, first the excrements must be brought
down by a slight Clyster, even on the first day, although the patients belly
were loose before: the use of Hiera piera is much commended for this intent.

Repellers.
A gargarisme of the decoction of Plantane, Roses, of the rind and flowers of
Pomegranats, Lettuce, Lintells, Rosewater, the juice of sour Pomegranats,
Diamoro, Diacodio, sir. of the juice of Sorrel, Pomegranates, Roses. Sirrup of
Poppy, the juice of Poppy. Diacodium, Diamorum, sir. of the juice of Sorrel,
Pomegrantes. The juice, of Lettuce, Ros^, Plantane, Pomegranates, Nightshade,
Mulbery; Sorrel. Water of Roses with the decoction of Sumach and Vinegar.
Repelling ointments of the Oil of Roses must be applied outwardly to the part
affected. In the beginning of the disease gargarismes may be used. He shall
hold it so long in his mouth, until it be hot, and shall wash the inward
part of his throat as far as may be, it is good for this purpose, viz. that
the humors run not too fast unto the part affected; the ways by this means
being made straighter, and the substance of the parts strengthened, we may not
so freely use the former repelling ointment, nor any other outward repelling
medicine, except it were in the beginning of the disease; for it is to be
feared, that it will strike the matter of the disease inward. Nevertheless the
places round about, and especially the upper parts shall be anointed therewith.

Strengthners.
A gargarisme of the decoction of Figs, Licorice, flowers of Cammomill,
Mellilote, Hyssop, Betony, Fengreeke, dogs tooth, Raisins, Diamor^, albo graco,
Mellerosate sir. of Roses, Oxymelle squillit. A Gargarisme of water wherein a
small quantity of white bread is boyld, and th^n strain it. White Dogs-turd
and young Swallows burnt, and mixed with Honey, and scattered upon the affected
places of the throat. Let him drink out of a Wolves throat: a thread burnt to
ashes until it be white, shall be laid unto the part affected: an ointment
of the oil of Cammomile, Lillies, sweet Almonds, wherewith the forepart, and
hinder part of the neck shall be anointed, and then covered with fat wool. A
Cataplasme of the flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, leaves of Mallows, roots of
Althaea, B^rly flower, Linseed meal, Fengreeke, Dogs-turd, a Swallows nest,
with the dust thereof, oil of Lillies, Lini, Camomile, sweet Almonds; an
emplaister of Mellilot, and Mucilag^. The matter of these after the first day
shall be abated, even as the disease does increase; in stead of which, some
resolving medicines shall be administered, which are best if they be outwardly
applied; for it is the best course to draw the matter outward. If the cure of
the Squinancy be wrought by resolving medicines, presently all the simptomes
following this disease, are without any more trouble assuaged and taken away.
On the contrary, accidents do increase, viz. the pain of the Fever, and
difficulty of swallowing.

A more particular method serving for the cure of ANGINA, or SQVINANCY.
the seeds of Fennel, Parsley, ana v. of Sage, Betony, A Clyster.
ana M i. flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M i. ss, white and light
Agaricke, ss, Pulpacolocynth. i. boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. add to
the strayning of new Cassia, of red Sugar ana i. oil of Li^m, Violets, ana i.
ss, of Salt, i.

A draught.
of new Cassia, ss, Diaphaeniconis. iii. water of Scabious iii. Give this the
next day after the opening of a vein.

sirupe of Scabious, iii. Mellis rosacei, i. ss, water of Scabious, VVoodbine,
ana v. drink this at three times.

Diaturbith cum rhabarb. v. Diacath, i. ss, Electuary of the juice of Roses, A
draught.
ss, sir. of Violets, Staechados, ana ss. the water of Betony, iii.

Another.
of the sirupe of manifold infusion of Roses, ii. Sp. Diaturbith, cum rhabarb.
ss. Water of Betony, iii.

A Potion.
sirupe of Violets, ii. Diacodij, sirupe of Licorice, ana ss, the water of
Scabious and Violets, ana ii.

A Gargarisme.
of Hysop, Knap-weed, ana M i. of scraped Licorice, ii. of the rinds of
Pomegranats, ss, boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. add to the strayning of
burnt Allome, i. ss, Mellis rosati, i. ss.

of the rinds of Prmegranats, ss, flowers of Roses, M i. Sumach, of the yellow
that grows in the middle of the Rose, A Gargarisme.
Plantane, Barberries, ana i. ss, of burnt Allome, i. of the flowers of
Pomegranats, i. boil these in water q. s. unto lb i, add unto the strayning
sirupe of Myrtle, i. Diamori, vi. he may hold this in his mouth until it be
hot.

Another.
of the water of Plantane, Roses, Wood-bine, ana ii. ss, Diamori, i. sir.
Acetosi, simp. Oxymellis simp. ana ss.

A Potion.
of the decoction of the yellow that grows in Roses, Roses, the flowers of
Pomegranats, Pomegranats, Sumach, Plantane, Nightshade, Oake-apples, lb i. of
Rosewater, iii. of Vinegar, ii. of the finest Sugar, ii. ss, hereof also a
Gargarisme may be made.

of the aforesaid liquor, A Potion.
viii. bruise Poppy-seeds and put them therein, strain them out and give the
patient this.

of the flowers of Pomegranats, A Powder.
ii. the seeds of Roses, Plantane, the seeds of Sumach, Barberries, ana i. of
Gum Tragacanth. ii. salis Ammoniaci, Camphire, ana i. put a little of this
into the throat, also of these, pills may be made, one or two whereof may be
kept under the tongue: also with the water of Roses, O^ymelle simp. Vinegar,
and Diamoro, a Gargarisme may be made.

sir, of Violets, i. ss, Diamori, i. Dianucum, A Loche.
loch of Poppy, ana ss, Sacchari violati, iii. dippe a Licorice stick in this,
when the disease does first trouble the patient.

oil of Lillies, Camomile, ana ss, of the fat of a Goat ii. a little Wax:
anoint the neck herewith, An Unguent.
and cover it with wool.

V;nguent Dialthaeae, i. ss, oil of Cammomile, Another.
sweet Almonds ana i. oil of Violets, fat of a Hen, ana ss, use this as the
former.

of the flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, A Gargarisme.
ana M i. leaves of Origan, Betony, Hysop, ana M ss. of Licorice, i, seeds of
Linus, vi. Fengreeke, i. boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss, add to the
strayning syrup of Roses. iiii.

oil of sweet Almonds, fresh Butter, A Linament.
ana iii. of Wax q. s.

of the flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M ^, A Cataplasme.
roots of Lillies, wild Mallows, ana i. Fengreeke, and Linseed, ana vi. boil
these until they be soft, then bake them, adding first unto them a little
Beane-flower, and flower of Barley, ana vi. Butter^, oil of Lillies ana q. s.

A Cataplasme.
of the flowers of Cammomile, ana M ii. ss, of Hysop, M i. of the flowers of
Fengreeke, Barley, ana i. Lini, ss, leaves of Mallows, M ii. Albi graeci, i.
roots of Alth^^, i. ss, of Figs, no x. oil of Lillies, Cammomile, fat of a
Hen, ana q. s. this may be used when the disease does begin to increase.

A Gargarisme.
of red Roses, M i. of Barley, M i. ss, of Licorice, iii^ of Figs, no vi. boil
these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss, add to the strayning Mellis rosacei. i. ss.

Another.
of the water of Wood-bine, of Roses, ana iiii. ss, Diamori, i. Oxymellis simp.
Mellis rosati, ana vi.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the ANGINA or SQVINANCY.
ME^es must be used that the impostume increase not, for ^en it is come to its
full ripeness, it does choke many men* for this cause at the very first we
must apply the best medicines: then the belly must be emptied by a gentle
clyster, afterward by a stronger. Then shall a vein be opened without any
delay, for this is a sovereign remedy against this disease. The next day after
the vein is opened; if there be plenty of humors, a gentle purge shall be
given, neither in this case the concoction of the humors should be expected.
And if the patient be not able to receive any medicine in at the mouth, then
shall a stronger clyster be made. At the beginning of the disease we must
endeavor to drive back the humors from the part affected, rather by medicines
inwardly taken, then outwardly and applied; yet outward in stead of repelling
medicines: dippe new shorn Wool in the oil of Cammomile, and lay it on the
affected part, and the more the disease increases, the less use there will
be of repelling medicines. After the third day such medicines as do resolve
shall be applied, which may dissipat the matter that was cast upon the part
affected, viz. Dianucum, Diamoru^, a decoction of Licorice or Figs. Then ^ so
shall such things be prescribed as may mitigat the pain, for great pain draws
the humors to that place where the pain is. For this purpose milk without any
thing else is very good. In the mean time we will auert the humors by
Ligatures, Cupping-glasses, Foments, Frictions, and such other instruments.
Then a vein under the tongue may be opened, and the matter of the disease be
subject unto nature: if by these remedies we cannot dissolve the matter, but
that it will rather turn into corrupt blood, such things must be given as may
generate pure blood, and unto such, bastard Pellitory, Mustard seed must be
added, if the impostume be broken, and the matter does run, This likewise
shall be cleansed by a Gargarisme made of Hydromel. Lastly, the ulcer shall be
consolidated by such medicines as can cloze it up.

A method serving for the knowledge of the COVGH.
A Cough is a violent breathing out, whereby plenty of breath speedily breaking
forth, endeauours by its force to discharge sharp excrements, which do molest
the lungs, and hinder the passages, or which do any other way offend the body.
This motion is caused by nature, which does force the instruments of breathing
by some violent course, from whence the Cough is caused, and yet so gentle,
that although a man do cough often, yet may it be stopped from coming out.
It is often cured by heat, which is stirred up in the instruments of breath,
by holding of the breath which runs through the narrow passages. The beginning
of the Cough comes for the most part from the lungs, whereby the muskles of the
breast are stirred up, and the chest is crushed; by which means all things that
are in the way, are expelled, whenas the breath breaks out so strongly. The
lungs have this passion following it, even as sneezing follows cold in the
brain; and to bring this motion into act, first the lungs become wider, then
again they are shrunk; the midriffe also is an help to this motion.

The part affected.
The lungs are affected; and the cause of this is either, in and from it self,
sometime the cause is in some other part, as midriffe or stomach, sometime the
liver. For when the lungs feel the other parts to be offended, presently they
do bestirre themselves for the expelling of that which was noxious and hurtful^
it is a sufficient argument to prove that the lungs are affected, when as the
breathing is offended. The cough is an accident appertaining to the hurt of the
lungs: for neither the breast in the pleurisy, nor the liver can any ways beget
a cough, unless also the lungs by their means are hurt. Sometimes a cough
follows the stopping of the passages through which breath is moved.

Signs.
The signs of this disease are manifest: for this cough is so strong, that
maugre man's force he cannot forbear coughing; and it happens sometimes that
there is a pain in the chest. This is the best way to purge the body of
excrements, by reason of the seats of those parts which serve for breathing.
Oftentimes there is a kind of tickling in the inward part of the mouth.

The Causes.
It is often caused by humor which falls from the head into the windpipe and
lungs, which if it do run abundantly and with great force, the patient does
breathe with great difficulty. There is a kind of loading pain in the breast,
and back, whereto the lungs are fastened by fylmes, but these symptoms will
be light, when as the excrements that flow from the brain are few. If the
disti^ation be fresh, both the sides of the palate are tickled, and the
throat is gald, and fretted with the sharpnes of humors, and often a cough
comes withal, whereby very little is ^^st up, and that little is thin. But
if these humors be thin, and often run up and down, then they do delude
nature, which is forced to stir up a cough, and though the patient cough
strongly, yet does he uoyd very little by spetting. Those men are deceived,
that think the cough to be then caused, rather by a dry distemper then
humors, because that by often coughing they avoid nothing, supposing that
there is no surcharging matter but this, as it does happen when the matter is
very thin. In like manner it is when the matter is slymy, and glutinous, so
that it cannot be avoided. Wherefore we shall stand in need of such medicines
as are refining, when the matter is gross and slymy, which is in the breast and
lungs; otherwise we shall have need of such medicines as will thicken the
humors. In both causes the surcharging matter deludes nature, by his thicknes
and thinness whereby there comes great feeblenes of strength: for weak
strength takes great pains in avoiding the matter that is within, that the
breath may have a passage to and from the heart, and at the length they cannot
prevail. Sometime the humors are mixed, which come thither from the head, or
are detayned in those places, which is very frequent in plewrisies, consumption
and inflammation of the lungs and the cough is the symptom of these aforesaid
diseases, as may be perceived by their proper signs. Sometime it is caused by
worms, hurting the stomach, or by a cold and dry distemper of the air, and
then the cough is small, and very little is avoided by spetting. Sometime this
is a symptom of the liver, stomach or spleen, to wit inflammation or hardness
of those parts, whereof arises a dry cough, whereby nothing is avoided.

Prognostiques.
If the cough hinder sleeping, it is an ill sign, also a continual and,
vehement cough with distillation, is accounted very bad, because by this there
is some danger of a consumption: sometime also it makes a rupture in the breast,
and causes spetting of blood. A cough with much ease, and quick expulsion, is
without danger; if the contrary happens, it is dangerous. Also a cough caused
by an ulcer; or imposthume of the breathing parts, is most dangerous; and that
cough is dangerous, which was once moist, and is suddenly made dry, a loading
pain still remaining in the breast, for it threatens exulceration of the lungs.
A continual cough is caused by an old obstruction, or corruption of the lungs;
not by rheumes: for when these stay, the cough in like manner stays.

A method serving for the cure of the COVGH.
THe air must be temperate, and inclining rather to drines. His meat must be
easy of digestion, and the quantity of meat and drink must be moderate.
Roasted veale, Pullets, Hens, Hares, Birds of mountains are good. Amongst
fruits, Raysins, sweet Almonds, Figs, and Dates, are permited. The patient must
avoid such things as are sharp, salt, and bitter; with his bread annise and
Fennel seeds may be mixed; for his drink Barley-water, Hydromel. His exercise
must be moderate before meat. long and day sleeps are hurtful. His belly
must be kept loose by art or nature. He must avoid wrath, fear, and other
perturbations of the mind.

Preparers.
Sirupe of Hyssop, Hore-hound, Licorice, and Mayden-haire, sir. of Calamint,
Staechados is good against an old cough; Oxymel. Compositum, Squilliticum, sir.
Acetosus, Mel rosatum. A decoction of Figs, Raysins, Licorcie, Maidens-haire,
Hyssop, Hore-hound. The water of Scabious, Hore-hound, Maiden-haire, Hyssop,
Fennel. Sirupe of Violets, Poppy, Iuiubinus, of water-lilles, Violets, Myrtle.
Barley water also is very good. Those medicines which are^t in the first place,
are extenuating, cutting, and wiping medicines, and may be used if the cough be
caused by gross, cold, and slymy humors; if by a hot and thin humor,
these in the second place shall be used: for thin matter, if it be made thick,
will be sooner voyded up. They shall rather be given by themselves, and again
he shall rather lick them up, then drink them, for else they will not be
carried so directly to the lungs.

Diaturbith cum rhabarb. Hiera, Di^colocynth. Emptiers.
Electuarium Indum maius, Diaphanicum. Electuarium rosatum, Hiera picra.
Pillula Cocciae, A^lephang. Aurea, Assai^ret, de Sarcocolla, de Agarico,
Mastic^ina. Agaricus Trochiscatus, Manna, Cassia. A decoction of the Roots of
Fennel, seeds of Annise, Small^ge, Nettles, Licorice, Hyssop, Horehound,
flower-de-luce, Dates, Mayden-haire, Scabious, Elicampany, Raysins, Agaricke,
Sal gemmae* Ginger, Diacath. Electuario Indo, Melle rosao. A Vomit. Although
Auicenna would not have purging medicines used, because there is no direct way
through which the medicine should be conveyed to the lungs; yet purging
medicines are very good, because they do purge the head, from whence this
mat^e^ did run into the lungs. Lastly, if the lower parts be purged of the
corruption, the head will sooner unload it self of the superfluities therein
contained.

The Cephalica vein shall be opened, Auerters.
whether the matter be hot or cold if the body, be full* though the flux of
humors be so troublesome, that the breast, and lungs have no liberty to stir;
otherwise if cold matter abound, we may forbear opening a vein. Clysters must
be made stronger or gentler as occasion shall serve. Errhines must be made of
Honey, juice of Maioram, Beat, Ginger. A cautery is also good, if the disease be
violent. This cautery must be made either on the shoulder, hinder part of the
head or shoulder-blades.

Sirupe of Licorice, juice of Licorice, Prouokers of Spettle.
Diatragacanthum. Lohoch sanum, of a Fox lights, lohoch of Pines. Lohoch de
pillulis bechicis, Diatragacantho, juice of Licorice, sir. of Violets, Saccharo
violaceo rosaceo, dry Roses, and Myrrh; Diapenidium sine Sp. Diaireos,
Nicholai; juice of Licorice, Elicampane, Flower-de-luce: an ointment for the
breast, of the oil of Linus, Flower-de-luce, fresh butter, oil of sweet
Almonds, Mucilage of Linus, Fengreeke, Saffron.

Strengthners.
Triacle, Mithridate drunk in Wine twice every week, Diaireos Solomoni^, Lohoc
sanum, de poino. Diaireos simplex, Diamuscum dulce, Diatragacanth. calidum,
Diacalamenthum, Diapenidium, eum speciebus: conserve of Maydenhayre, Betony,
Hysop; Baulme, Loch ad Asthma: a decoction of the wood Guaiacum. An ointment
for the breast of the oil of Dill, Cammomile, sweet Almonds, Flower-de-luce,
Butter, Saffron, Goose or Hens grease. An ointment, of oil wherein the roots
of Elecampane, Flower-de-luce, Hysop, the seeds of Linus, Fengreeke were
boiled. A Cucusa of Roses, Cloves, Mace, Nigella Romana, Cyperus roots,
Orange-pills, Ladanum, Storax, and Calamint.

A more particular method serving for the cure of the COVGH.
the roots of Elicampane, Angelica, ana vi. of cleansed Barley, A Clyster.
M ii. of Horehound, Hysop, leaves of Nettles, ana M i. of white and light
Agaricke, iiii. flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M i. seeds of Annise,
Fennel, ana i. boil these in water q. s. unto lb i ss. add to the strayning
Diaturb. cum rhabarb, vi. oil of Linus, Rue, sweet Almonds, ana i.

A Iulep.
sirupe of Hysope, Licorice, ana i. ss, syrup Stoechados, ss, water of
Scabious, Hysop, Horehound, ana iiii. Give iii. for the space of four or five
days, in the morning.

of the roots of Licorice, i. of Scabious, Hysop, A Sirupe.
Colts foot, Mayden-haire, ana M i. of Raysins, M ii. of Dammaske Pruines no
x. of the best Figs, no vi. of Dates no iii. boil these in water q. s. until
the third part be consumed, add unto the strayning sir. of Licorice. iii.
Diaireos simp. ss, of the finest Sugar, iii.

syrup Iuiubini, ii, of Licorice, Mellis rosati, A Iulep.
ana i. of the best Sugar, vi. water of Horehound, Violets, ana v.

of the roots of Elecampane, i. ss, of cleansed Barley, A Potion.
M ii. of Horehound, Hysop, Betony, ana M i. of Scabious, M ss, of Licorice, i.
seeds of Annise, vi. of Raysins the stones being taken out M i. of Figs, no x,
boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss, of Sugar q. s.

Oxymellis squillit. i. ss, sir. of Licorice, i, A draught.
of the former decoction, iii.

of the roots of Fennel, Parsley, Dragunteae, A Potion.
ana i. of the roots of Elecampane, Flower-de-luce, ana iii. Mayden-haire,
Hysop, Horehound, ana M i. ss, seeds of Annise, iii. of Raysins, i. ss, of
white and light Agaricke, ss, of Ginger, i. Salis gemmae, ss, seriae Alex. vi.
boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss, add to the strayning, sir. of
Licorice, iii.

Diaturb. cum rhabarb. Electuarij Indi, A draught.
ana iii. sir. of Licorice, of Horehound, ana, ss, of the decoction of
Agaricke, Hysop, Fennel, iii.

Pillul. de agarico, aureae cocciae, ana i. Rhab. electi, ss, Pills.
sir. Staechados q. s. make hereof 7 or 8 pills, and let him take of them about
the middle of the night, and the next morning take of great triacle i. with the
water of Draguntea, iii.

syrup of Hysop, de Iuiubis, ana ss, adianth^, i. A Loc^
Lohoch sani, of Pine, ana v. Sachari violati, iii. mix these.

Mellis rosati colati, Oxymellis simp. Liquorice, Another.
ana i. sir. of Violets, ss. of fine Sugar, iii. Diatragacanthi frigidi, ii.

A Gargarisme.
of the flowers and rinds of Pomegranats, ana iii. of Roses, M i ss, Iuiubarum
sebesten, ana ss, boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss, add to the
strayning syrup of Poppy, ii, Myrtle, ss, mix these.

A draught.
Diacodij, ii. of Frankincense, i. ss, mix these, and give ss, thereof with
iii. of the decoction of Barley, sir. of dry Roses, i.

Pills.
Diatragacanthi frigidi, i. ss, pills of Hounds-tongue ss, Diacodij, iii. Bole
Armony, juice of Licorice, ana i. ss, Amyli, sir. of Roses, Poppy ana q. s.
hold one of these in the mouth.

of red Roses, M ss, Sandalorum citrinorum, Masticke, Frankincense, A Perfume.
ana ii. ss, Labdani, Storax, ana i. ss, morning and evening the patient must
receive some of this in his cap.

A Potion.
sir. of Poppy, i. ss, of Roses, Myrtle, ana i. of the water of Violets, iiii.
of the decoction of Barley, Raysins, the 4. greater cold seeds, vi. mix these,
in a hot matter take of this.

An Ointment.
of the oil of Violets, i. ss, of sweet Almonds, i. oil of Flower-de-luce,
May butter, ana ss, of Saffron, ss. of Wax, q, s. anoint the breast herewith,
also shave the head, and anoint it with the oil of Cammomile, Roses, Dill.

of the best Mithridate. Triacle of Andromachus, ana i. ss, A Potion.
of the decoction of Licorice, roots of Elecampane, Mayden-hayre, Hysop, ana
iiii. sirupe of Licorice q. s. for an old Cough, this is good.

Pills.
of Myrrh, iii, Sagapeni* i. ss, of Honey and Aqua vitae, q. s, each pill must
be i:

An Electuary.
of the roots of preserved Dragant, ii. roots of Aristolochia rot. i. seeds of
Linus, Saffron, Frankincense, Masticke ana i. ss, sir. of Licorice q. s.

A Suffumigation.
Diasulphuris misu^, i. i must be cast upon the coals that it may smoke, by
this the relics, o^ the offending matter may be taken away.

of dry Roses, M i. ss, flowers of Cammomile, M ii. ss, A Quilt.
of fried Branne, M i. for the same purpose as the former was.

of the seeds of Cresses scorched, i. Pigeons-dung, An Emplayster.
i. ss, of Cypress nuts, v. with the water of the decoction of Cypress and
Staues-acre, make an emplayster for the head, this does comfort the brain, and
takes away superfluous humors.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the COVGH.
A Cough comes by a matter which does stop the passage of the lungs, whereto
also some flux is joined, whereby it is distinguished from Asthma. First we
must make the superfluous humors obedient to nature: when we have effected
this, then they must be turned out by purging medicines, and turn that matter
aside that is running to the lungs, with Clysters, opening of veins,
cauteries, bathings both of hands and feet. Then we may use such medicines as
stay the matter falling from the head unto the lungs: if this accident concur
(yet it is not necessary that this must always cause a cough.) Last of al,
such medicines as bring the matter out that is in the lungs, must be
prescribed. But if a cough be caused by a plewrisie, or inflammation of the
lungs, or a suppuration, or bursting some vein in the lungs, that it cannot
well be cured, unless these diseases be first cured. And therefore unless the
cough does very much pain the patient, the cure of those parts shall be first
sought after. How this shall be effected, has appeared The decoction of
Barley with a great quantity of Sug^r is very good, if the cough be caused by
tickling in the throat. Likewise that a cough may be stayed, some
stupefactiues must be mixed with detergent medicines. of the juice of Licorice
ii. ss Farinae amili i ss, of S^ffron, Myrrh. i ss Opij gr. iiii, of Storax,
Calamint ana iii, sir. of Violets, q s. make Pills hereof; when the patient
goes to bed, give the patient i. Or else Diacodij i. But when the matter is
riper, and thinner, a decoction of Figs, Raysins, Licorice, Hysop, Violets,
seeds of Quinces, roots of wild Mallows. Then oil of Violets, i. ss
Mucilaginum seminum Lini, Psyllij, ana ss, of Wax q. s. an vngnt for the breast.

A method serving for the knowledge of ASTHMA, or shortness of breathing.
ASthma is a thick or fast breathing without a fever, such as is common unto
them that run. There be three kinds of shortness of breath, for when it
does trouble us so mildly, that there is no noise of panting, and is without a
Fever, it is called Dispnaea, Pursinesse. But when the patient cannot breathe
without a noise and panting, it is called Asthma. But if it so distresseth the
patient, that he cannot breathe unless he hold his neck straight up, it is
called Orthopnaea, or straightness of breathing. The patient is as it were
choked by this latter, if he do lie down. For the passages of breath in the
Lungs, the Windpipe, and all the inner parts become straighter, and narrower
then when they sit upright, because the whole breast sinks as it were to the
backe-bone. These three kinds are all contained under a thick and quick
breathing, which is caused by gross and tough humors stuffed within the lappets
of the lungs. We do not here speak of that difficulty of breathing which is
caused by weakness of body, and strength, for though all the breasts muscles do
then move, yet it is done very softly, for if the strength be deficient, the
patient neither breathes thick, neither is there great widenes, and the breath
does rather go and come through the nose. And this is a manifest sign whereby
we may know that the strength is decayed, when the gristles of the nose are
shrunk by drawing breath. Neither do we here treat of that shortness of
breathing which is caused by the great heat of heart and lungs, although the
breath be necessarily hot, great, frequent, and swift. So in a plurisy, or
squinancy there is both thick and quick breathing, and all these kinds, as
they do require a different manner of cure, so they cannot be brought under
Asthma, even as that shortness of breathing which is caused by the greatness of
the spleen, or by plenty of water contained in the belly, and the reason why
by these shortness of breath is caused, is this, because the midriffe is crushed.

The part affected.
The wind-pipes branches, scattered into the lungs substance are here
affected, for being made narrower by this disease, they are sooner offended by
humors falling down into them, by which means a greater straightnes is
caused, whereby the quantity of air which is drawn in, is not answerable to
the widning greatness, although the breast be much widened; by this means they
are forced to breathe thick and quick, because a small quantity of breath is
drawn in again: but the contrary happens, when as the wind-pipes, and
branches belonging thereto are no way offended. This shortness of breath which
we do here treat of, is an accident which does follow the offended action of
a voluntary faculty, viz. breathing, which is weak, and depraved. This
accident fallowes a dissease incident to the passages of breathing, viz.
straightnes and stopping of the passages through which air is drawn.

Signs.
Great and thick breathing without a Fever, sometime with panting and a
noise, which does happen unto them rather lying then, sitting^ the breast is
heavy, they do feel a straightnes and shrinkings. They cough often, but void
nothing. This disease sometimes is grown so far upon the patient, that they
are forced to breathe with their neck straight upwards,, that they may save
themselves from choking. Palenes of face grows in time, and their
shouldersake. These accidents go and come again at certanie seasons.

The Causes.
The fume of quicke-siluer and the air of mines from whence metals are dug,
do cause this disease, for by these vapors, the lungs are too much dried;
distempered diet, grossenes of body, whether it be procured by idleness, or is
natural, causes short windines. But for the most part it is caused by gross
and slymy phlegm, which does stick in the windpipes passages, or comes
thither from some other place; at which time shortness of breathing is caused*
for the instruments of breathing, by reason of superfluities generated in them,
have the beginning, and cause of this disease in themselves; for these
superfluities by heat are changed into phlegm, like unto glass or mortar. It
is sometime caused by a raw bunch growing in the lungs, near unto the
windpipe, or its branches; and these men, when they do exercise themselves in
the time of their health, are shortwinded, and yet spet very little; this
shortwindines comes upon them suddenly, and without a kind of wheesing, or
rattling. Sometimes it is caused by the breasts narrownes, or Conformation and
evil shaping.

Prognostics.
Asthma in old men is never cured, and hardly in young men. Asthma by a
dislocation of the joints of the backebones, is never or hardly cured, unless
they be set in their places again. This affect is often sharp, and by distances
of time goes and comes again, and by his most vehement fi^s does sometime
strangle the patient, which then especially does happen, whenas some ^heume
does fall from the head upon the lungs being before straightned; but especially
this happe^s, if the air be cold and moist, or if by many crudities, the
matter be moistened, and spread abroad; for these concurring in an old Asthma,
the fits are more dangerous; for hereby the stopping is doubled; but a clear
air, sober life, rest of body cooles this disease. He that has a straight
breast, and little lungs, by nature is continually shortwinded. A swounding with
softnes of pulse, unequal, inordinate, and slow, is the worst. A kind of
trembling breathing is dangerous, especially if the shoulders and
shoulder-blades with the muscles between the ribs, by breathing out and
receiving breath in, be lifted up, and fall down again, but especially if the
strength does begin to fail.

A method serving for the cure of ASTHMA, or short breathing.
THe air must be hot and dry; his meat Hens, Patridges, Chickens, birds of
mountayns: he must forbear eating of such meats as may breed gross and slymy
matter. Amongst Pot-hearbs: Fennel, Thime, Hyssop, Calamint may be allowed.
His drink must be small wine or honyed water, wherein Hyssop, or Hore-hound
have been boiled; his exercise must be little, as walking a little before
meat, the lower parts must be rubbed. Sleep in the day time must be avoided,
and in the night it must be moderate. All perturbations of the mind must be
aoyded.

Sirupe of Maiden hair, Horehound, Licorice, Hyssop, Preparers.
of the two Roots of Violets, Calamint, Staechas, Mel rosatum. Oxymel simp.
Composi^um and squillit. Acetum squillit. A decoction of the roots of
Elecampane, Epithymon, Aristolochia, rot. Barley, Linseed, Fengreek, Quinces,
Nettles, Fennel, Annise, Maiden-haire, Hyssop, Hore-hound, Scabious, Betony,
Raysins, Figs, Dates, Barley water with Sugar. The water of Hore-hound, Betony,
Hyssop, Barley, Fennel, Violets. A decoction o Guai^^um wood. Very hot things
here are not very good, because they do consume that which is thin, and
leave that behind which is gross; and because the disease is long, and will
scarce be cured by medicines, therefore they must often be changed, for seeing
there is no sense of accustomed things, at the last, nature will not care for
the continual use of them. To these before mentioned syrup of Poppy, Quinces,
Bole Armony must be added, if we do intend to stay the rhume.

Emptiers.
Agaricus trochiscatus, diaturbith cum rhabarb. Diaphaenicum, Diacath.
Electuarium Indum maius. Hiera colocynth. Hiera simplex and composita, Pillulae
de hieracum Agarico, Pillulae m^stichinae, Aggregatiuae, Assai^ret, Cocciae,
Alephanginae, Aromaticae, Agaricus, Cassia, Colocynthis. Vomit also shall be
caused, for that is better then a clyster, because it abides nearer the lungs,
and emptieth the stomach of phlegm. If clysters be used, make them of the
pectorall decoction of Cassia, Hiera picra, Diaphaeniconis. A vein shall be
opened if the body do abound with blood. Or if the months, and Hemroides be
stayed, otherwise this labor shall be spared. In this disease pills are best,
because they draw the offending matter from the remote parts: purging medicines
in time of the fit must not be used. For it is to be feared, that the matter
being stirred up too violently, should run unto the lungs; also when the
fit is past, purging medicines shall be very seldom used, because the
matter that stops the passages, is gross and vicious. But the matter shall
first be made fit for expelling, before purging medicines be used.

Auerters.
Nasals shall be made of Nigella Romana, Cubebs, Nutmegs, the juice of Maioram,
Beete, Honyed water, Wine. A Masticatory. The feet must be washed in the
decoction of the flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, Betony, Sage, Maioram, leaves
of Bays, of Rosemary. Vesicatory medicines shall be applied to the coronal
seame, if the disease be increased by rhume. Frictions and Ligatures of the
extreme parts must be used, especially if there be any danger of suffocation.
When the disease does begin to increase, the breast shall be well rubd with a
coorse cloth, that the passges of those parts might be opened, and the virtue
of the medicines may be better received into the parts affected.
Cupping-glasses shall be laid to the shoulders, if there be danger of
suffocation without scarification, or when the patient does breathe very short;
also Cupping-glasses shall be laid unto the reins, unto that place whereon some
portion of the lungs does rest: this must be done in the morning very often.

Sirupe of Licorice, de Iuiubis, Hyssop, Hore-hound. Diahyssopus, Diapenidion,
loch sanum, of Cabages, of Pine, Prouokerts of spettle.
Diairis, Diatragacanthum, with the Oil of Annise; conserve of Elecampane, the
broth of an old cock with the sir. of Mayden-haire. The lungs of a Fox dried,
sirupe of Licorice. Ericinus Syluestris. Millepeda, certain creatures which
lie under watery vessels. Squilla, Licorice, Brassica, Allium, Hysop,
Elecampany, Aristolochia rot. The Root of serpentaria laid in hot Embers, with
the sir. of Licorice, loch of the lungs of a Fox, of Pine, Raisins, dry figs,
Linseed, Iuiuba, Scabious, Licorice. A decoction of figs, Hyssop, Fengreeke,
Licorice, Raisins, Honey, Saffron. An ointment for the breast of the Oil of
Linus, of sweet Almonds, Dill, Rue, flower-de-luce, Lillies, Cammomill, fresh
Butter, Hens grease, the mucilage of Fengreeke, Althea, with Saffron, and the
Roots of flower-de-luce. The ointment of Agrippa. A Cataplasme of
Barley-flower, figs, flower-de-luce, Honey and Raisins. The humors shall be
emptied out of the passages and spongy matter of the lungs by these present
remedies, rather then by purg^ng and vomiting medicines, and we will the rather
use these, because the humors do abound in the body. Also with these we will
endeavor to open the pores of the breast with gentle frictions, and then anoint
the breast with these ointments, and afterward use Cataplasmes.

Triacle with old white wine, Alex. Diaireos simplex, Digesters.
Mi^hridate, Diamuscum dulce and amarum, Plirisarcotieum, loch ad Asthma, Loche
squilla. a decoction of Wood Guaiacum, Melicratum; powder of Beauer stone. A
suffumigation with Brimstone, Frankincense, Masticke, Juniper, Turpentine: an
ointment of the oil of Rue, Flower-de-luce, Dill, roots of Flower-de-luce,
Elecampane, seeds of Linus, Hens grease.

A more particular method serving for the cure of short windynesse.
of the roots of Aristolochia rot. Flower-de-luce, ana ss, of Centory the
less, Hyssop, Calamint, ana M i. of white and light Agaricke, A Clyster.
v. boil these in water q. s. until the third part be consumed, add to the
strayning, Sp. hierae diacolocynth. i. ss, Diaturbith rhab. v. oil of Lillies,
Cammomile, Rue ana i. of Salt, i.

of Licorice, Horehound, ana ss, of Hyssop, i. ss, Oxymellis squillit. i. of
the water of Horehound, A Iulep.
Hysop, Colts-foote, Scabious, ana iiii. Give of this iiii. in the morning,
after which he must take one morsel of Diaireos simp.

A Sirupe.
of the roots of Elecampane, Flower-de-luce, ana ii. of Hyssop, Coltsfoot, ana
M ii. ss, of scraped Licorice, i, ss seeds of Annise, i. of Raysins the stones
being taken out iiii. of the seeds of Fengreeke i. flowers of Violets, Thyme,
ana M i. of Figs, no vi. boil these in water q. s. until the third part be
consumed; add hereto a little Honey, whereof a sirupe must be made, and he
must take half a spoonefull hereof in his mouth.

Oxymellis squillitici, i. drink this with the former decoction.

A Potion.
Elecampane, Coltsfoot, Hysop, Mayden-haire, Horehound, ana Mi. of scraped
Licorice, i. seeds of Annise, ss, Let the patient take in the morning, iii. of
this decoction, if the disease will give any ease or respit to the patient,
with i, ss, of the former sirupe, afterward when the former decoction is
boiled, senae Alex. i. of white and light Agaricke. iii. seeds of Carthamus,
ss, must be added, whereof a purging potion shall be made, which may serve for
two or three times.

of Agaricke made into a trochiske, Pills.
Hierae diacolocynth. ana i. ss, Pillularum Elephanginarum, i, Oxymellis
squillitici q. s. make hereof pills no 8. and they must be given after the
first sleep.

Pillul. cochiarum, ii. Pillul. de Agarico, Pills.
ii. Rhabarb, ss.

Diapheniconis, Cassiae, ana ss, Bolus.
Agaricke made in a trochiske, ss, of the finest Sugar q. s.

of the roots of Radish, ii. of Betony, i, A Vomit.
Seminis nastur^ij, Atriplicis, ana ii. boil these in water q. s. until the
third part be consumed, unto v. of this strayning, add Oxymellis squillitici
i. ss, Succi cepae domestic^ ss. Give this after dinner, and the patient must
walk after it: also a vomit may be made with the decoction of a Radish root
and white Hellebore.

Conserve of Violet, roots of Elecampane, ana vi. conserve of Rosemary flowers,
ss, Sp. Diaireos Salomonis, A Lohoch.
Diatragacanthi frigidi, ana ii. ss, sir. of Violets, Mayden-haire, ana q. s.

syrup of Hyssop, of Horehound, A Lohoch.
ana i. lohoch ^ scylla, of a Woolfes lungs, ana ss, the roots of Elecampane,
ii. juice of Licorice, Sugar Candy, ana i. ss.

sir. of Hyssop, of Horehound, Violets, A draught.
ana i. Oxymel. simp. i. ss. take one spoonefull hereof with a draught of
Barley water.

sirupe of Licorice, ss, Oxymellis simp. i. ss, Lohoch of the lungs of a Fox,
vi. of Gum Ammoniacke ss.

A mixture.
of the roots of Elecampane preserved, Dragant, ana ss, Lohoch of the Lungs of
a Fox, Lohoc sani, ana v. roots of flower-de-luce, ii. sir. of Hysop q. s.
mix these, and the patient must take hereof very often.

An Electuary.
of the roots of Elecampane, Gentianae, Lungs of a Fox ana ii. Diaireos iiii.
Mellis squillitici, q. s. give i. hereof unto the patient in the decoction of
Scabious, Hysop, Maydens-hayre.

A Powder.
of Licorice scraped, ii. ss, of Hysop, i. of Saffron, i. the roots of
Colts-foote, i. ss, of Mace, ii. season the meat with this powder,

An Electuary.
Lohoch of the lungs of a Fox, i. aurea Alex. of the best Mithridate, ana i.
Squillae assae, i. conserve of the roots of Elecampane, ss, give twice in a
week ii. hereof in white Wine.

Another.
preserved roots of Elecampane, ii. preserved roots of Flower-de-luce, i.
Licorice, i. ss, juice of Hysop, i. of Pepper, seeds of Nettles, iiii, of
Raysins, the stones being taken out, of bitter Almonds* ana ss, sirupe of Hysop
q. s.

Pills.
of Bay berries, vi. roots of Dragant, i. Bole Armony, ii. juice of Licorice, i
ss, sirupe of Hysop, q. s. Let the patient take 3 or 4 of these when he goes
to bed.

A Suffumigation.
of Frankincense, Masticke, ana ^i. ss, of Brimstone, ii. ss, of Juniper, ii.
of Storax, i. of Turpentine q. s. when there is any occasion for the use of
this, cast a piece of this lump upon live coals, and the smoke must be
conveyed unto the mouth by a pipe, also a cap must be smoaked herewith, and put
upon the patients head; this does dry the superfluous humidity.

An Ointment.
the oil of Cammomile, ana i ss, of Dill, vi. of sweet Almonds, iii. Sp.
Diaireos, ss, roots of Elicampane, and Dragant, ana i. of Wax and Vinegar a
little.

of oil white Lillies, sweet Almonds, Lini, ana ss, An Ointment.
oil of Bays, Cammomile, ana iii. of fresh Butter, Hens and Ducks grease, ana
iii. juice of Hysop, Elecampane, ana ii. roots of Dragant, ss, of Saffron ss,
of Wax q. s. an ointment for the breast.

of the roots of Flower-de-luce, Elecampane, A Cataplasme.
ana ss, Farinae hordeaceae, Oleaceae, seeds of Linus, ana i. of Figs, no x. of
Rosin, Turpentine, ana i. ss, Mellis despumati, q. s.

An Appendix, serving for the cure of ASTHMA, or short windynesse.
FIrst the belly must be purged by a convenient clyster, the use of these is
approved to be good for this disease. And then if the disease will permit, the
humors that offend and press too much upon the lungs, shall be made obedient
unto nature. Then we must turn aside the humors that are running unto the
breast, with Errhines, Sneezing medicines, Apophlegmatismes, Cupping-glasses,
one shall be placed upon the back near unto the heart, if the matter be
windy. Also the matter shall be brought back with Frictions, warm Baths,
wherein the thighs shall be bathed. At the length we will administer such
things as will bring out the corrupt matter lurking in the lungs. Therefore
such as do procure spettle, amongst which, such may be added that will
dissipate the relics, and strengthen the lungs. But a care ought to be had
that such medicines be not given that heat and dry too much. For else the
humors would with more difficulty remain. For seeing the humors are gross and
viscous, and remain longer in the lungs, if then the humor be exposed to
heat, it would be as it were baked, and so wax hard; therefore they that heat
and moisten moderately, shall be mixed with cutting medicines, abstergings,
and allayers of pain. Again medicines too cold must be avoided as well as too
hot, unless that there be danger of suffocation, and exulceration by rhewme.
And here, as in other daily diseases, the medicines shall be changed, because
too much use of one sort of medicines does but dull the patient.

A method serving for the knowledge of the PLEVRISY.
A Pleurisy is an inflammation of the thin and small skin which clotheth the
ribs on the inner side, called in Latin Pleura, from whence the disease does
take its name: whereby it appears that every pain of the side is not the
Pleurisy, for there be many pains of the side; yet in this place we treat of
that pain that does follow a sharp disease by the inflammation of that thin
skin: for if the inflammation be in the outward Muscles, or if the pain be
great, because of windines, this is a bastard Pleurisy, then are they without a
Fever, yet feel a pain in the breast, which only by touching is very much
exasperated; nevertheless this is not so constant as the other, but will be
mitigated if such things be applied as will disperse windines.

The part affected.
The part affected, as was declared, is a thin small skin, and the signs
hereof besides difficulty of breathing, and a vehement cough, there is likewise
a kind of pricking pain, which plainly does demonstrate, that the membranes,
and some other tender parts are affected.

Signs.
There is a pricking pain very troublesome which does spread it self over the
sides and breast; for this dilatation by crushing, stretching, and violently
moving the breast, does augment the pain. Sometime the pain spreads it self
even unto the short ribs, sometimes to the channel bone of the throat,
necessity does compel him to breathe short and thick, yet it is small in
regard of that pain which does hinder the instruments of breathing to be lift
up, and yet this is necssary by reason of great inflammation, whereby he is
forced to double his breath, that by this means that heat might be refreshed,
which before was ouerheated. Also there is a continual Fever, because the
inflammation does border upon the heart. The pulse is thick, not too great, hard
and unequal, and by that means rough and like unto a saw. A cough also
comes withal, at the first day, and then nothing is voyded at the length
spittle comes up colored according to the nature of the excrements, and it is
also moister. Then he begins to void greater store, and sometimes it is red,
and bloody, sometime yellow, at the length when the impostume is ripe, the
spettle is martry: the patient finds greater ease when he lies on the sick
side, then on the other. But the patient must rather lie on his back, then on
that side, for if he lie on that side, the pain is increased; because the
matter is more spread abroad by reason of their crushing: but if he turn
himself upon his sound side, the filme affected is more stretched, and the
humors bend toward the sound part. This pain for the most part is most
irksome toward night. Sometime this disease is at an end, if the matter by
sweating fall upon the lungs, for then it will be driven out with a cough,
which is most to be desired. Sometimes it gets through the pores, but this is
but seldom. Sometimes the matter is ripened and turned into corrupt blood, and
when the impostume is opened, unless it be avoided by cough, the patient
within 40. days does spet corrupt blood: but when the matter does begin to be
corrupted, pain and feauers are increased, he breathes more hardly, he auoyds
little or nothing by cough, a great rednes breaks out in his cheek,
watchfulnes and thirst do much oppress him; when the matter is ripe, pain and
Feauers are slackned, he coughs more, and does cast up little. But when the
impostume is ready to break, pain and Fever again increase, he breathes
with more difficulty, his strength fayles, and he quakes and trembles with
cold: but if at that time the patient is not weak, and his spettle is good,
the best is to be hoped, and the greater that the Fever pain and hardness of
breathing is, then the impostume will sooner break, if these symptoms be
milder, the longer it will be before it does break. We say that it is but the
beginning of the disease, when he spets little, and that is undigested: but if
it does appear reddish, then is the disease past the beginning: when it is
changed from rednes to white or leaden color, and is voyded in great store,
and the symptoms increase, the mischief does then increase, but spettle
equally white, and the symptoms slackned, signify that the state is come.
When spettle with other symptoms are abated, then the declination of the
disease is expected. And sometime after the matter is digested, it is conveyed
by veins to Chili^ and the guts, and so is voyded by a stool, or else it is
conveyed from thence to the urine pipes, and so it goes away with the urine.
Sometime it is conveyed to the throat, brains, ears, and sinews, from whence
impostumes of the throat and ears, phrensy and palsy are generated.
Sometimes it falls down into the joints and flanks; when the pain rather
tends to the outward parts, the pain is duller, not pricking, and it is a
bastard plurisy, and all the simptomes are milder. Also the pain does grow
greater by crushing; lying on the sound side is less troublesome; his pulse is
neither stretched nor hard, unequal or thick, he is free from a Fever. Yet
sometime outrageous pains are stirred up by windines, and bring a true plurisy,
also there is pain in the side when the liver is inflamed, but it is not
pricking; and the cough caused by the inflammation of the liver, is ever dry and
little.

The Causes.
The cause for the most part is blood, running from the hollow veyns into the
ribs thin veins; and sometimes it is simply good, which is signified by red
spettle, the season of the year, youth, diet, beeding much blood, hot and
moist temperament, and temperate region. Sometime it is caused by phlegmy
blood, and then the disease is of longer continuance, and the spettle is
frothy, and white. The season of the year which is Autumn, the cold
constitution, and region of the air, do signify this, as also diet generating
phlegmy blood; sometimes cold does draw the blood out of the veins, or too
much heat will do as much, too much drinking of cold water, a fall, the
ouer-loading with a burden, sudden cold after a sweat; sometime the blood is
choleric, and then a sharper disease is caused. Also suppression of the
Hemroids or monthly terms will cause a plurisy.

Prognostiques.
The Plurisy is dangerous unto old men, women with child, and such as have
been sick twice or thrice of it. It does vex the patient more in the night
then day. Whosoever is sick of a plurise, and are not cleansed in xiiij days,
they turn to suppuration. In that plurisy wherein somewhat is avoided by
spettle, and it does then cease, the breast being pained, and heavy: in these
there is great danger; for this is a crude disease, and does either kill the
patient presently, or else it will stick by their sides a long time. Spettle
bloody and yellow is bad; but much bloody at the first is not dangerous; for
all spettle, the more humors are mixed with it, the greater the danger is. In
a plurisy, if the pulse be little, very swift and hard, does presage death; and
seeing that the disease is known by its proper symptoms, and the greatness of
the disease is weighed by the greatness of the symptoms, therefore we say, a
plurisy will be mild enough, if pain, difficulty of breathing, and the Fever do
not much molest them, as also if any colored spettle be voyded by cough, and if
lying on both sides be suffered with ease; in like manner the contrary will
prove dangerous, It does kill by choking, or too much pain, or by some other
great symptoms, or by the translation of the matter into the lungs, whereby
the consumption of them is caused, and also ulcers.

A method serving for the cure of the PLVRISY.
THe air must be temperate, and somewhat inclining to heat. His meat of easy
digestion, viz. Hens broth, Ptisan, Almond milk. In the beginning of the
disease, a little nourishment is sufficient, afterward greater plenty may be
permitted. Raysins, Almonds, sweet apples are good amongst Pot-hearbs Endive is
good. His drink must be Ptisan, the decoction of Cinnamon, Licorice, flowers of
Violets, he may not drink wine until the disease be slaked, rest of body, and
longer sleep then usual, may be permitted, and the belly must be kept loose.

Auerters.
A vein must be opened, and if necessity require, at midnight. For a sharp
Fever, difficulty of breathing, and extremity of pain do threaten death. When
the patient is somewhat amended, the Basilica vein shall be opened; and if that
do not appear, the median opposite to that side that is affected: for this
draws back, euacuates, and diuerts the matter another way: if strength do
fail, and the body be not full of blood, the blood shall be taken away at sundry
times gentle Clysters shall be given, if the belly be bound, or in stead of them
a suppositor. Ligatures, frictions, and hto fomentation of the limbs.
Cupping-glasses shall be fastened to the ribs, and flanks, then unto the
shoulders, for old men and children this is better then opening of a vein,
unless the patient, be strong. If a vein do not appear, blood-suckers shall be
laid unto the patient, and their tails shall be cut off, that they may draw the
more blood.

Sirupe of Violets, Iuiubes* Mayden-haire, Preparers.
whereunto some Saccharum violacum must be added, for this is good to cause
spetting. Sir. of Licorice with barley-water, water with Sugar, whereto a
little Cinnamon may be added. Water of Endive, and sodde Barley. A decoction of
Barley, Violets, Licorice, Iuiubes Sebesten, Cardius benedictus; and if it
shall be used for the slaking of thirst, the former sirupes shall be mixed: it
is also good to cleanse the body, and dissolve corrupted matter.

Diaprunum, Ienitiuum, Diacatholicum, Diaphaenicum, Emptiers.
Sir. Rosarum laxatinus, agaricke with a pectorall decoction; Rhubarbe with
Manna. and sir. of Licorice; new Cassia. A Clysters is better then a purge: the
Clyster must be made of the common decoction, Oil of Violets, Cammomill,
Cassia. If any other matter beside blood do offend, it must be cast out by a
convenient medicine. Yet here care ought to be had, that the purging medicines
(if any be administered) be not too strong; especially if we can guess by any
signs, that the matter runs. Also such medicines as are mixed with hellebore
and scammony, must be forbidden: for too many by these and such other strong
medicines, have been deprived of life, the strength being by them weakened, for
by these purging medicine the blood is more stirred up. If the disease be
caused by rheum, or if, the pain tends unto the short ribs, or lies in the
bowels and stomach, and other near adjoining parts, we may easily perceive
that the humors be at a stand, which cause this disease, and then these parts
must be emptied by a Clyster, or some other convenient medicine; nevertheless
a medicine that turns away the humors; shall not be used until 7. days be
expired; for hereby we may hinder spetting, which by all means must be
provoked. Neither at the end of 7. days we will admit of that medici^ if the
body be much abated, and the Fever vehement; for it will more consume the
body, then it can any other way do good.

Prouokers of spettle.
Sir. of Iuiubes, Licorice, Violets, with twice as much Barley-water, shall be
given until the fourth day, then the quantity of the sir. of Violets shall be
lessened, and the sir. of Licorice increased. Sir. of Iuiuba* Saccharum.
Violacrum, Candum. White Pills, Diapenidium, Diatraga^canthum frigidum, with
Iubeb of Violets, whereto a little Di^ireos Salomonis shall be added. Lohoch de
Pino, Lohoch sanum. A decoction of Figs, Barley, Violets, Iuiuba, Licorice, and
after the third day some sirupe of Licorice shall be added. Diabuglossatum
shall be mixed with the former, because it does comfort the heart. An ointment of
the Oil of Violets shall be prescribed against the fourth day, wherewith the
breast shall be anointed, then the Oil of sweet Almonds, Lillies, Camomill,
shall be added; or else only the Oil of sweet Almonds may be used. At the
length, unto the former the powder of flower-de-luce, or Hyssop shall be added.
From such medicines as bind too much, we must abstain, and in stead of them,
we may use such as do digest and loosen the hard parts. The best for this
purpose is the Oil of Violets; and besides, this qualifies the sharpnes of the
heat, but we will vary these medicines, according unto the variety of time.

Digesters.
Diahyssopus, the former prouokers of spettle. A fomentation of white wine,
wherein are boiled the flowers of Cammomill, Mellilote; the roots of wild
Mallows, Linseed, Fengreeke, Bran, Dill, Hyssop, leaves of Violets, garden
Mallows. Fill a bladder half full of this decoction: being rightly applied, it
is good against windines. If this disease were caused by blood, it will rather
increase the disease then diminish it. Wherefore in the beginning it must be
used with caution, afterward more freely. The ointment of Dialthaea, whereunto
the powder of Flower-de-luce must be added. An ointment of the oil of
Cammomile, Hens fat, oil of sweet Almonds, Violets, the root of
Flower-de-luce. The leaves of Cabage dried against the fire, and laid upon the
side, but first butter must be laid upon the place. Make a Cataplasme or
Emplayster of oil of sweet Almonds, Lillies, Linseede, and Cammomile, the
mucilage of Linseed, Fengreeke, wild and garden Mallows, amongst which the
powder of Mustardseed may be added, as also of Cresses, make this soft, and
apply it hot unto the side, and when it is cold, it must be removed.

A more particular method serving for the cure of the PLVRISY.
of cleansed Barley, M i. leaves of Mallows, Mercury, A Clyster.
Violets, ana M i. ss of Damask Pruines, no xii. boil these in water q. s.
unto lb i. ss, add unto the strayning of new Cassia, of course Sugar, ana i.
oil of Violets, Lini, ana i. ss, the yolke of an Egg: administer this every
other day.

sir. de Iuiubis, Licorice, ana i. ss, sir. of Violets, A Iulep.
i. water of Colts-foote, v. of the decoction of Barley, Figs, Maydenhaire vi.

sir. of Violets, Licorice, Acetosi compositi, ana i. water of Scabious,
Coltsfoote, a decoction of cleansed Barley, Another.
ana iiii.

of cleansed Barley, M iii. of Raysins, ii. of scraped Licorice, i. of Hyssop,
Colts-foote, ana M i. seeds of Annise, A Ptisan.
Linus, Melons, ana i. flowers of Woodrowell, p i. boil these in water q. s.
unto lb ii. add to the strayning sir. viola^i, iiii.

A Lohoch.
sir* of Violets, Licorice, Oxymellis simp. ana ss, Diatragacanthi frigidi,
Sugar Candy, ana iii.

A draught.
of Cassia, Diacath. ana ss. of the common decoction q. s. Give this in the
morning.

Another.
of Cassia, vi. Diapruni s^lutiui, ii. Rhabarb. electi ss, sir. of Violets, i.
of the decoction of Barley, iii.

Another.
of white and light Agaricke, ii. Rhabarb. electi, ii. ss, of Spike. gr. xii.
infuse these in v. of flesh broth, add unto the strayning Diacath. iii. sirupe
of Violets i.

Sacchari violati, i. manus Christi, vi. Sugarcandy, ss Sp. Diatragacanthi
frigidi, A Loch.
ii. ss, sirupe of Violets q. s. lick this up with the ^ongue, or else the
patient may hold Sugarcandy, and Saccharum violaceum in his mouth, or else
Diapenidian.

A Lohoch.
sir. de Iuiubis, Violets, Licorice, ana i. of Maydenhayre,, ss, Sugarcandy, vi.

Another.
sir. of Licorice, Hysop, Acetosi simp. ana i. Oxymellis squillit. vi. this may
be used, if the spettle be so thick that it cannot be voyded. Also give flesh
broth where in a little Sugar must be put: for this is good likewise for the
same purpose.

Another.
Diaireos simp. Pillularum bechicarum, ana ss, Diatragacanthi frigidi, iii.
Sugar Candy, juice of Licorice, ana ii. ss, sirupe of Violets, q. s. dip a
Licorice stick herein, and lick up the mixture from the stick.

An Ointment.
oil of Violets, sweet Almonds, ana i. a little Wax, and Saffron when it is
fit time to resolve the matter, the roots of white Lillies, Hyssop, and oil of
Cammomile may be added.

A Liniment.
Vnguenti pectoralis, oil of Linus, sweet Almonds, and Capons grease, ana ii.
oil of Cammomile, iii. of Saffron gr. ii. of Wax q. s.

An Ointment.
oil of Violets, i. of sweet Almonds, ss, dip a linen cloth in these, and
anoint the affected part herewith, then bind the cloth upon the place.

of oil of sweet Almonds, Lillies, Keirini, A Liniment.
vnguenti dialthaeae. ana ss, of Capons grease, fresh Butter, ana ii. of
Vinegar and Wax, a little quantity.

of the roots of Lillies, flowers of Cammomile, A Fomentation.
Mellilot, red Roses, leaves of Mallows, Scabious, ana M i. of Branne, Linseed,
Fengreeke, ana M i. ss, boil these in water q. s. dippe a sponge in it and
wash the affected side herewith, but first a linen cloth must be put upon the
place, that it be not too much moystned.

of the oil of Violets, sweet Almonds, ana ss, An Ointment.
of Cammomile, May butter, Vnguenti dialthaea, ana i. oil of Dill, Lillies,
ana iii. roots of Flower-de-luce, i. of Wax, a little quantity.

of the roots of Flower-de-luce, Elecampane, ana i. roots of Althaea vi. of
Thyme, Colts-foote, Sage, Betony, A Iulep.
Hyssop, ana M ss, boil these in water q. s. until the third part be
consumed, add to the strayning, Melli^ despumati q. s.

of the seeds of Cummin, i. Rosemary, Hyssop, A Bag.
Origan* ana M i. of fried Salt, M i ss, of fried Branne, M ii. sprinkle white
Wine upon these in the frying. Put these in a bag and lay them unto the
affected side, and when it does begin to wax cold, wette it again in hot
Wine, and so apply it again: After this keep it warm by applying hot clothes
thereto, for it must neither be laid cold unto the side, neither should it
remain long cold when it is upon the side.

of Mallows, A Cataplasme.
water-Mallows, ana M i. flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, Mugwort, ana M ss, of
Hyssop, p ii. of Wormwood, p i. roots of Althaea, ss. Boil these in water q.
s. unto a thickness, beat it in a mortar and add of Barley flower, i. ss, of
the flower of Linseed, i. of Capons grease, fresh Butter, ss, oil of Cammomile
q. s.

Another.
the roots of Alth^^, i. flowers of Cammomile, Dill, ana M i. of Barley flower,
Linseed, Fengreeke, ana i. seeds of Annise ss, boil these in water q. s. unto
a softnes, bruise them well in a mortar together, and add of the oil of
Cammomile q. s.

A Sirupe.
sirupe of Violets, i. of Poppy, ss, of the decoction of Barley iii. Give this
in the night time, if the patient cannot sleep well: make also an ointment for
the brow and temples, with the oil of Violets and Poplar.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the PLVRISY.
FIrst the belly must be euacuated by a clyster, after this a vein shall be
opened, for this does hinder the diseases perfection. Then again gentler
Clysters, Cupping-glasses, Frictions, Ligatures, Suppositers, shall be used
for the turning away the matter from the affected part, and the diseases
perfection be hindered. And if plenty of matter do surcharge the body, or if
it rage much, or if it be not as yet come to the part affected, nevertheless
does rage, and the pain inclines unto the lower parts of the breast; some
gentle purge shall be given even before digestion, that the diseases increase
may be stopped, and also its perfection which by all means must be sought;
then the matter of the Plurisie that sweats into the lungs, shall be made
obedient unto nature, by such medicines as provoke spetting. If by those means
formerly recited, corruption of the matter cannot be hindered, such medicines
must be prescribed as may bring down snot. viz. The decoction of Figs, Dates,
Barley, Lilly roots, Mallows, seeds of Cresses, Linseed, Fengreeke,
Mustardseed, Licorice, Raysins. Also a Fomentation may be made of the
decoction of Mallows, Althaea, seeds of Fengreeke, Linus, Quinces, Figs, A
cataplasme with Mallosw, Althaea, Linseed, Fengreeke, Quinces, Dates, Figs,
Butter, Honey, Hens, Duckes, and Swines grease. After we have perceived by the
agues pains asswaging, and by increase of heaviness about the place affected,
that the matter is ripe, then he shall endeavor to cough much, and shall lie on
his sick side rather then on his sound, and then the lower part of his throat
shall be tickled with a feather, to provoke vomiting, and yet he must not vomit.
When the impostume is broken, the patient may drink honyed or sugard water,
Barley water with sirupe of Hyssop. To cleanse the body, the part affected
shall be washed with the decoction of Hyssop, or Calamint. The breast shall be
anointed with the Oil of Cammomill, Lillies, and powder of flower-de-luce, the
broth of an old Capon, wherein Hyssop, and Mayden-haire are boiled, shall be
given. Then the patient may drink goats milk, and such things as shall be
spoken of in the next chapter. If it be a bastard plurisy, then shall they be
prescribed that do mildly resolve, for which purpose receive of the flowers of
Cammomill, M i ss. Leaves of rue, Dill, Violets, Mallows, ana M i. Let them
boil in water, until the third part be consumed: dip a sponge in the hot
liquor, and lay it to the pained side with a hot cloth between, that heat may
the longer be kept; this shall often be renewed, continuing the first course
still. If there be no fulness of body, and if the matter causing pain be windy,
and does consist of small quantity of humors, and thin, a bag shall be laid
to the side, wherein salt, Milium, and branne shall be put; Or else a cataplasme
of the flowers of Cammomill, Mellilote, ana Mi. of the leaves of rue, Maioram,
wild Pennyroyall, ana p i, seeds of annise ii, Bay Berries iij, Boil these
moderately, beaten the all together in a mortar, and add as much Honey, as is
sufficient. Make also an emplaister of the Oil of Cammomill of Pitch; also
Cupping-glasses are good to fetch out the matter of the disease.

A method serving for the knowledge of the disease, which is commonly called,
Spetting of blood.
SPetting of blood is any voyding of the blood at the mouth: this affect is
oftentimes the cause of most evil and long diseases. Blood is voyded from many
places of the body, as shall appear by that which follows; and here care ought
to be had in observing whether the patient was wont to bleed at the nose or
no, for from thence it does fall into the stomach and throat, and sometime
into the lungs, but for the most part it does turn and harden into a clod: if
then one spet blood, and yet did not bleed at the nose formerly, the^ it does
come from some inferior part, which shall be known by peculiar signs.

The part affected.
Blood is often voyded from the gummes, and mouth it self, and then the spittle
is of a bloody color, and very little is voyded out, and that without cough;
if it do come from the throat, or weazell-pipe, then it is voyded by hemming,
not by cough, and the continuated parts of those places do appear loosened if
the tongue be thrust down. But if it did come from the head, a pain of the
head with heaviness went before, and a noise in the ears, the forehead veins
rise, they have a kind of sense of heat and blood in the mouth, and a tickling
is felt in the palate: if it does run into the throat from whence by often
hemming it is cast out, oftentimes, the patient has a desire to cough and
cannot. But if the blood does come from the lungs, then is the blood foamy, and
then it is voyded by frequen^ coughing, and without pain, and at sundry times.
And as often as blood is voyded, because some great vein is burst, then plenty
of blood is cast up, no cause except that known, it is as it were cast up by
vomit, and whole basins full are voyded; but if the blood be cast up, because
some vein in the lungs is gnawne, which is often caused by a sharp humor
falling down, then is it shed by degrees a little now and then, unless some
great vein be^ eat asunder: for then it runs out in great abundance, and
this is most dangerous: For then comes a dry cough, the spettle is mattery or
bloodish, of an ill color and sent: which is never without a fever, sometimes
some part of the lungs being rotted is voyded up by cough, and this is the
surest sign of the lungs exulceration. Sometime blood is spet out only by
opening a vein, as may happen, if the diet be too hot and moist, and hen at
the first it is voyded up in a small quantity, and is both thin and red; but
if it be voyded from the breast, then it is not foamy blood, but black and
thick: sometimes it is mixed with matter, and comes up with a stronger and
frequent cough, because it must neede^ be drawn up to the lungs before it can
be driven out at the windepipe, and it is voyded in small quantity, and not
without pain of the breast. If it comes from the windpipe principally, it is
voyded with some pain, and little blood, and this is red and hot with a little
cough. If it come from the stomach, it will be voyded without coughing, or
vomiting, neither will there be any great quantity hereof, because the veins
in the stomach are but small. But if it be brought from the liver, spleen, or
belly, a loading pain does disturb the parts, and the blood is avoided by
vomit, and the other parts do bestow a greater quantity upon the stomach, it
will be of a darkish color inclining unto the blackenesse, it will also be
clotted, if it be voyded from the spleen, therefore before any peculiar remedy
is set down, every one of these peculiar manners of avoiding blood must be
marked. Spitting of blood is an accident appertaining to any thing issuing out,
which is changed in kind besides nature.

The Signs.
The signs of this affect and of the part affected appear by that which was
said before.

The Cause.
It is often caused by fulness, and by a great quantity of blood which does
offend the body, and some peculiar parts of the body more particulary; for
hereby the vessels mouths are opend; the signs of this is a good habit of
body, immoderate use of hot nutriments, and wine, suppression of terms, and
then there is no pain, but rather a lightsomnes of the body, which before was
dull; and then also there is but a small quantity hereof, and it is not very
foamy or red. Women without any danger of consumption have been eased by this
shedding of blood in the suppression of their terms. Oftentimes a vein in
the lungs is burst by a fall, or labor, or some loud outcries, from hence
blood issues out: sometimes it does happen by corrosion of the vessels, and
the blood is then voyded by little quantities, and at sundry times; a sharp
rheum went before this. If the blood be mattery, it is a sure sign that
somewhat is putrified in the lungs, as if some part of the vein or arteries in
the lungs be voyded. But it is certain that some part of the lungs are eaten
away.

Prognostiques.
If the lungs be vlcerated, there is danger, for then there is danger of
suppuration, and of a consumption; for by the reason of continual motion, the
lungs cannot be hardened: also in spongy substances blood will sooner stick,
and will with great difficulty be cast out, whereby a greater sharpnes is
caused, which does exulcerate the lungs, also hereby the breathing is hindered,
the heat in the body is increased, and the body consumed. When a vein in the
lungs is opend or burst, yet there is some hope, if the substance of the lungs
be sound: yet a consumption signifies danger, if the blood which comes out of
the rupture of a vein falling upon the lungs, be there detained, by which
means the lungs are inflamed and putrified; for at the length the substance of
the lungs will be corupted, and exulcerated. Also there is danger when either
a great vein be opened or broke; for then the heart may be suffocated; for
sometime such plenty of blood has been voyded from thence, that has filled
whole basins. Spetting of blood if it be caused by a corrosion of the lungs,
is incurable. If it come from the breast, there is less danger. And when
spetting of blood does succeed spetting of matter, this is a sign that the
lungs are exulcerated. Spetting of blood, if it does continue long, will at the
length be turned into a consumption. They which spett blood whilst they lie on
their sick side, do it more pleasantly. Yet spetting of blood is not always
dangerous, for by this means an impostume of either liver or spleen, is cured.

A method serving for the cure of spetting blood.
THe air ought to be somewhat inclining unto cold and dry, and the patient
must avoid the sunshine and a bright fire; his meat must be such as does
cool, dry, and bind, and they ought to be of a slymy substance if it be
caused a burst of any of the veins of the lungs, viz. Milk, Feet of Calves,
Hogs, or Kids, the gelly of fishes. Also the flesh of Hens, Pigeons, Cunnies,
Fawnes, Partridges, Feasants, Larkes, fishes that lie in stony places, and
fresh water Crabs. Also the patient must eat sparingly. He may drink wine
and water mixed together. Sometimes he may be permitted to drink red wine,
if that strength should begin to fail: and also goats milk is good for the
patien^. He must shun all exercise, and give himself wholly unto rest. He
must breathe very gently: For violent breathing is offensive. He must not
sleep in the day time, and at night his sleep must be moderate. His belly
must be kept loose by art or nature. Preturbation of the mind must be avoided
but especially anger.

Preparers.
Sirupe of the juice of Sorrel. Sir. of Violets, Roses. Sir, of Myrtle,
Quinces, juice of Pomegranates, Omphacini, water of Sorrel, Roses,
Nightshade, Plantane, Purslane. These do mitigate the pain of the body, and
by their astringent faculty do hinder the flux of blood.

Emptiers.
Rhabarb. with the water of Plantane, Mirab^lan^ Citrini, Chebuli, Cassia,
Turbith with Ginger. These purge the phlegmy humors mixed with blood, as also
sharp choleric humors, by which sometimes the veins are burst, or else
gnawne asunder, and by consequent it does also purge spettle of blood.

Auerters.
The inner or median vein shall be opened twice or thrice in a day, and if the
blood be pure, the lesser quantity shall be taken away. On the contrary, if
the disease has but newly seized upon the patient, or if the vessels be full,
and but a little blood voyded, and the patient also be free from an ulcer,
greater store shall be taken away. But a vein shall be opend on that side wherein
we shall think the disease to be, whether the effusion of blood be caused by
opening of a vein, or rapture. If it be caused by the suppression of monthly
terms, the vein of the ankle-bone shall be opened. Cupping-glasses shall be
fastened to the Buttockes, Hips, Flanks, short ribs, and region of the liver.
Painful frictions of extreme parts, and ligatures somewhat above the knee or
ankle, as also the Arms, and Elbows. Also those parts shall be washed with hoter
water; for heat does as well draw causeas pain. Blood-suckers must be laid to
the breast, the hemroides must be provoked, and the terms brought down.
Whether the vein be opened or burst, especial care ought to be had, that
present remedies be sought for the turning away the current of blood.

Trochise^ de terra sigillata with the water of Plantane, Stanchers of blood.
de spodi^ with the sirupe of Quinces, Athanasia, Phylonium, Persicum Romanum.
Sir. of Pomegranats, Myrtle, Quinces, Roses. Saccharum rosatum, Conserve of old
Roses. Diacydonium, Hearts horn burnt, white Corrall burnt, Terra Le^nia,
Sigillata, seeds of Quinces, Myrtle, Bole-armony, the rind and flowers of
Pomegranates, juice of Gooseberries. Masticke, Tragacanthum, Gum Arabike.
Plantane and Purslane are very good against this disease. Knotgrasse, the
decoction of Barley with the sirupe of Roses, Quinces, dry Roses, sacchareum
rosatum, Wine wherein Sage has bin stieped, also Purslane chewed,
Diatragacanthum frigidum. Loch e lapide hamatite, Bole-armony, the flowers and
rinds of Pomegranates, Myrtles, Masticke, Aragacanth, Coral, Gum Arabicke,
Harts-horne burnt, Amylum, terra Le^nia, Conserve of Roses, Diatragacanthum
frigidum, sir. of Violets. A fomentation with the water of Scabious and wine,
Oil of Roses, Quinces, Myrtle. An ointment of the Oil of Quinces, Myrtle,
Roses, sweet Almonds, Cammomill^ all these stanch blood by their astringent
virtue, and assuage choler, and if they be used, they will consolidate (...)
ulcer, and thicken the thin rheum. They shall be some while continued,
although the flux be stayed; for otherwise i^ will quickly come again. They
must all be administered very cold. Also some things must be added that have
very thin^ parts, because the force of the other is not so piercing. Medicines
too much astringent and cooling, must be avoided, because they drive the blood
into the lungs, whereby the lungs are putrified, and ulcers are bredde in the
lungs. But before the use of auerters we will not use these outwardly, for it
is to be feared, that they will drive the blood into the lungs, from whence
comes great fulness, and swelling of the internal veins.

Oxymel simp. Compositum, Squillit. Oxycratum, Correctors of acciden^
or water so mixed with Vinegar that it may be drunk; at the first it is very
good, if clods of congealed blood stick upon the lungs. Diacurcuma, Triacle
with water of Scabious, the seed of a Hare, Stag, or Kid, is a sovereign
medicine, Mummia, juice of Sage cum Saccharo rosato, water of Sorrel, Sage,
and Scabious. Triacle of one year old, Philonium Romanum cum succo polygonij,
sir. of Poppy, Violets, seeds of white Poppy, the rind of the roots of
Mandrake. Flesh-broth that is strayned. Diarrhedon abbatis. Aromaticum rosatum*
The former of these do increase the hardening of blood coming out: the latter
does help the cough, and procures sleep. If they be duly administered, they
do restore the strength.

A more particular method for the cure of the bleeding at the mouth.
A Iulep.
sir. of Myrtle, Purslane, Quinces, Violets, ana i. of Bole Armony, Bloodstone
burnt, ana i. ss, of the water of Purslane, Plantane, shepherds pouch, ana
iiii. mix these, and give it unto the patient.

A Potion.
of cleansed barley, dry Roses, ana M ii. seeds of Plantane, i. boil these in
water q. s. until the third part be consumed: unto iiii. of the strayning,
add Sacchari rosacei, ss, sirupe of dry Roses, i. the patient may drink of
this very often.

A Iulep.
of the sirupe of Poppy, of dry Roses, ana i. ss, of Quinces, i. the water of
Shepherds pouch, Plantane, Violets, ana iiii.

A draught.
of the roots and leaves of Plantane, ana M i. of scraped Licorice, ii. Rhabarb
electi i. ss, boil these in water q. s. until the third part be consumed,
take of the strayning, iiii, and add of new Cassia, sirupe of Violets, ana i.

A Potion.
of the juice of Plantane, Purslane, Shepheards-pouch, millefolij, ana i. ss,
sir. of Violets, i. of Myrtle ss, Bole Armony, Bloodstone, ana ss.

Sacchari rosacei, ss, juice of Plantane, Sage, ana i. ss, Bole Armony,
Philonij Romans of new Triacle, ana ss, Another.
mix these, and in stead of these the patient may drink Triacle, if this
Triacle be old a little Opium shall be added.

of the roots of Plantane, i. ss, of Purslane, Poligonij, A Syrup.
ana M i. of the fruit of Bramble not ripe, sour Grapes, ana i. ss, of the
flowers of Pomegranats, ss, of scraped Licorice, i. boil these in water q. s.
until the third part be consumed; add to the strayning of the finest Sugar,
q. s. boil it again unto the consistence of a sirupe, whereof the patient may
take ii. with the juice of Plantane and Purslane.

Diatragacanthi frigidi, Sacchari rosacei. ana i. ss, Rob. berberorum, ss,
Pills of Hounds-tongue, ii. sir. of Violets, ii. ss, lick this up with the
tongue, and use it often.

Sacchari rosacei, i. Terrae sigillata, Bole Armony, A powder.
Mummiae, red Roses, Rhab. tosti ana i. ss, the powder of Foxes lungs dried,
Cinnamon, Bloodstone, ana i. seeds of Plantane, Poppy, Roses, ana ss, drink i.
hereof in water wherein hot iron has been put.

of Bramble berries not ripe, and dried, ii. Harts-horne burnt, ii. ss, Bole
Armony, seeds of Plantane, Another.
ana i. Troch. de Carabe, i. ss. of Frankincense, Myrrh, Masticke, ana, i. of
Licorice, i. Give of this i. in red Wine.

Troch. de terra sigillata, ii. de Carabe i ss, Pills.
of Hounds-toung i. with the sirupe of Violets, make Pills. Give hereof in the
morning i.

of dry Roses M i. of the fruit of Su^ach, Myrtle, An Epithime.
Hypocistidos, ana i. Sandalorum rub^rorum, the rind of Pomegranats, ana iii.
boil these in a sharp Wine, until the third part be consumed: wash the
breast herewith.

An Ointment.
oil of Roses, Quinces, ana v, Bole Armony. i. Troch. de carabe, ss, of the
flowers of Pomegranats, i. for the breast.

A Cataplasme.
of Barley flower, Lentiles, Radicum simphiti, ana i. of the flowers of
Pomegranates, ss, of the leaves of Bloodwort, Purslane, Plantane, ana M i.
boil these in sharp wine, then add of Frankincense, Alome, i ss, Bole
Armony, ii. ss of red Coral, i. oil of Roses, Myrtle, ana q. s.

An Emplayster.
of Masticke, Frankincense, ana i. Bole Armony, iii. ss, Mummiae, ss, of Pitch
and Wax q. s.

An Appendix serving for the cure of spetting blood.
THe internal vein shall be opened, and those things which were formerly
mentioned must be observed. Then the motion of the blood may be turned away
with Cupping-glasses, Ligatures, Blood-suckers, and Frictions. Then medicines
may be applied that do stanch blood; but the best remedies are given in
potions, rather then in local medicines: After these, such must be given as
glutinate, and congeale the parts separated, especially if the flux be caused
by the bursting of the sinew in the lungs, before the lungs be corrupted. For
then the cure will ask more labor, and besides it will be difficultly cured.
Water mixed with Vinegar is a known and approved medicine for this disease,
for it does cool and thicken the blood, and so hinder the flux; and yet it
must not be drunk alone, because it causes coughing, therefore such things
shall be mixed with it as do hinder coughing; stupefactiue medicines shall not
be used at the first; but when we have used slighter remedies in vain, and
still the disease persists, then we shall have need of them. If it may be
discerned, that blood is fallen from the head unto the lungs, astringent
medicines shall not inwardly be given.

A method serving for the knowledge of PALPITATIO, or Panting of the heart.
PAlpitatio is an immoderate rising and falling of the heart, troublesome, and
beside nature stirred up by the expulsive faculty, which strives to expel that
which is hurtful. The heart naturally does move, and of it self: but here
though the heart does move, and of it self, yet this motion is unnatural,
stirred up by expulsion, by which motion the heart in a manner does quake and
tremble, sometimes extending it self, and then shrinking together again, that
it might be free^e from such hurtful vapors as are offensive unto the heart.
This affect took the name from the part affected and the accidents that follow
the disease. It does differ from Cardiaca passio, for this is an effect of the
mouth of the stomach, and not of the heart, whereof we now speak.

The part affected.
Is the heart with the membranes enclosing it, which either is primarily, or
immediately has the cause in it self, or else it is affected by the stomach,
womb, bowels, spleen, liver, or some other parts, which happens, because ill
humors and vapors lurking in them get into the heart: at the length, it is
known either by the hurt of the parts now present, or else that were affected
before the hearts panting. This panting of the heart is an accident, which does
appertain unto the depraved motion of the heart, because it is moved
unnaturally herein.

Signs.
He breathes little and seldom, the pulse does beat unequally, the heart as
if it were struck, trembles and pants, and so violently, that the physician
may perceive it at the first, if he but lay his hand upon the hearts region,
and can easily discern that motion from the natural motion of the heart. The
arteries of the whole body, especially they by the throat, beat very
strongly; and in some there is such a trembling of the heart, that the clothes
which shield the breast from outward injuries, are perceived by the standers by
to rise and fall, even as the heart does, and sometimes they hear a manifest
noise.

The Causes.
It is often caused by windy, fumy, malign and gross vapors and spirits for
the most part enclosed within the filmes of the heart, and sometime within the
hearts corners, which are either generated therein, or else are conveyed
thither from some of the parts formerly recited. Sometime it is caused by
watery and putrified humors, like unto urine, from whence an ill smell is
sent, which has so filled the filmes, that the heart cannot freely widen it
self. This disease is sometimes caused by anger, venerie, surfeits, windy
meats, frequent bathings, and violent labor; and the heart is freed from it by
rest. For when it beats, there is a striving to expel that which is hurtful.
The disease may likewise be caused by some watery, blood, or fleshy tumor in
the filmes. Also the hot or cold distemper of the heart is the cause of this
disease, sometimes sudden euacuation, and breeding of child bring this
inconvenience.

Prognostiques.
Though some have been free from this symptom by opening a vein, and slender
diet, and help of medicines, yet very many of them are troubled with it again
after some few months, and are brought unto their graves hereby, before they
are come to perfect age: but some of them being taken with a sharp Fever,
others with a sounding, have departed this life; so great is the danger of this
disease, that it will kill the patient on a sudden, if it does often come upon
him This disease has some affinity with swounding* for it does usually go
before it, and sometime turns into it. It is also incident to those whose
spleen is swollen with black and dreggish blood they also that are troubled
with the hypocondriall melancholy, are usually troubled with this disease.

A method serving for the cure of the panting of the heart.
THe air must be somewhat hot and dry, and have a pleasant savor. He may
eat Chickens, Partridges, Capons, Hens, Veale, and these may be seasoned with
Cloves, Pepper, Cinnamon, Fennel, Hyssop, wild Betony, whether they be sodde or
roasted. Among Pothearbs, wild Betony, Hyssop, Maioram, Borage, Fennel, Sauory,
Baulme, Penny-royall, are good. He may drink wine mixed with water, wherein
Borage, or Baulme is boiled: his exercise must be moderate, as also his sleep.
The excrement of the body must be avoided in due season. He must not be any way
disturbed in mind, either by anger or sadness, and besides ouer-ioying is not
good.

Sir. Acetosus simplex and Compositus de duabus Radicibus, Preparers.
of Buglosse, Sir. Byzantinus, of Licorice, of Hore-hound. Mel rosaceum. Oxymel
simplex, compositum and Squilliticum. Sir. of Hyssop, de duabus et quinque
radicibus. Water of Betony, Hore-hound, Scabious. A decoction of Betony,
Annise, Fennel, Galingale, Baulme, Hore-hound, Scabious, rock Fennel,
Cloves, Mace. Sir. de Epithymo, of Hops, Sweet Apples. sir. of Fumitory, the
juice of Borage, the water of Buglosse, Scolopendriae, Borage, Fumitory,
Baulme, and Fennel. sir. of Violets, A^tosus simplex. sir. of succhory with
rhab. Of the juice of Almonds; of the juice of Sorrel. The water of Lectuce,
Violets, Buglosse, Roses, Succhory. The former may be used, if it be caused by
gross and phlegmy matter. The latter may be used, if it be caused by
melancholy. The third shall be used, if it be caused by heat.

Emptiers.
Agaricus Trechiscatus, Electuarium Indum, Diaphaenicum, Mirobalani Kebuli.
Pills of Agricke. Diacath. confectio hamech, Diasena, Pillulae Indae, de lapide
Lazuli, Aureae Aggregatiua, sine quibus esse no lo. Hiera simplex. Mirobalani
Indi, Sena, Epithymon. Sir. of manifold infusion of Roses. Myrobalani citrini.
Rhabarb. If the body be full, or that there be any danger of an impostume, or of
it be caused by the suppression of Hemrods or monthly terms, or by many
watery humors enclosed in the films of the heart, the Bafilica vein shall be
opened in the right arm; for so the patient may be freed of the disease. If
the disease be caused by melancholy, or melancholy vapors, a vein shall be
opened in the left arm. But if the cause of the disease do come from the lower
parts, the ankle vein shall be opened. The later medicines shall given, if the
disease be caused by hot humors, if by cold and phlegmy humors, those in the
first place, if by melancholy humors, they that are in the middle. These
purging medicines shall be used, if the body be ill iuyced; and if necessity
require, they may be used before the preparing medicines. And when it is caused
by malign humors conveyed from the other parts, or else there bredde, or when
much matter runs suddenly to the heart, then we must prepare humors, and
empty them again with stronger Clysters.

Auerters.
The anckle vein shall be opened, Clysters, Cupping-glasses, painful ligatures
in the time of the fit; frictions with sweet linen clothes.

Strengthners.
Diambra, Confectio de granis Tinctoriis. Diarrh^d. Abbatis, Aromaticum
Rosatum, Triacle with Buglosse water. The great Conserve of our description is
very good. Mithridate, confectio de ligno Aloes, electuarium de Hyacyntho, de
Gemmis, sp. laetificantis Gal. Diacynnamomum, Diamuscum dulce, Dianisum,
Diabuglossatum, Diaboraginatum, Diamargaritum calidum, Plirisarcoticum.
Hippocras, juice of Buglosse, the rinds and seeds of preserved Citrines,
Zedoaria, Doronicum. Musk, Ambre, Cloves, Nutmeg, Galingale, the Roses of
Jerusalem, Cinnamon, Mace, Mints, Rosemary. Thin plates of gold often heat,
and then quenched in strong wine. an epithem of borage water, Baulme, Maioram,
sp. Diambrae Diamuscum dulce, wood of Aloes, Orange seeds, Mace, Cinnamon,
Cloves, Nutmeg, Vinum aromaticum. Diarrhod. abbatis, Diamargaritum frigidum,
diatrion sandal. Sir. of the juice of Pomegranates, Sorrel, e floribus
Persiae. the juice of Goose-berries, Camphire, Sandali, prepared Coriander,
juice of Pomegranates, Limmons, Apples, Quinces. An epitheme of the flowers of
water lillies, Roses. A bag of the same: whereunto add Musk, Amber, and
Buglosse flowers. A Pomander of the same; whereunto add wax and Labanum. An
ointment of the Oil of Lillies, sweet Almonds, Spike, Saffron, Lignum aloes,
Mace, Alipta moschata, and wax. Baulme, Buglosse, Borage, Coral, Margarita,
an Emerauld, Hyacinth, gold, Harte-horne, Unicorn horn, Iuory, the bone of
the heart of a Heart. They in the first place shall be used, if the diseases
cause shall be a cold distemper; if the disease be caused by a hot distemper,
they in the middle: for both these distempers, Baulme, Carduus benedictus, and
Buglosse, and they in the last place may be used.

A more particular method serving for the cure of the panting of the heart.
of the Roots of Angelica, iii ss, of Buglosse, i ss. of Maioram, Baulme,
Hyssop, ana M i ss. seeds of annise, A Clyster.
Fennel, ana iiij. Carduus benedictus, i. ss. of the rinds of Oranges, and
Limons, ana i. flowers of Carduus benedictus, M. ss. Senae Alex. i. rhab. ii
ss. Myrobal. citrinorum, Ind^rum, ana i. ss. of Cloves, ss. boil these in
flesh broth unto lb i, add unto the strayning of the Oil of sweet Almonds, of
Lillies, ana i ss. Of the powder of Di^sena. i.

A Iulep.
of the sirupe of sweet Apples, i. ss, of Buglosse, of the rinds of Oranges,
Oxymel. squillit. ana i. waters of Buglosse, Borage, Carduus benedictus, ana
iiii* make hereof three draughts for one morning.

A Sirupe.
of the juice of Borage, Apples, Quinces, Sorrel, flowers of Persia,
Pomegranats, ana ii. of fine Sugar, q. s. Give i. ss, hereof with iiii. of the
water of Carduus Benedictus.

A Potion.
of the roots of Fennel, Parsley, ana i. of Wormeseed, iii. of Rosemary, Mints,
ana M i. Florum cordialium, M ss. seeds of Carduus benedictus, i. of Annise, i
ss. of white and light Agaricke, ii. of Ginger, i. ss, Polypodij quercini, vi.
senae Alex. i. boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss. add to the strayning,
Diaturb. cum rhabarb. vi. sir. of the juice of Sorrel, iii. Give hereof iiii.
in the morning.

Pills.
Pillul. cochiarum, Agarici trochiscati, Pillul. de Rhab. ana i. Trochiscorum
alhandal, gr. iiii. sirupe of Pomegranats, q. s. make hereof 7. or 8. pills,
and give of them after the first sleep.

A Potion.
of the roots of Angelica, Galingale, ana ii. seeds of Annise, i. ss, Carduus
benedictus, i. Rhab. electi, i. ss, infuse these in water of Carduus
benedictus, Fumitory, Buglosse q. s. and put them upon hot embers for the space
of 24. hours: then strain them forth very hard, and add unto the strayning,
sir. of manifold iufusion of Roses, iii. Diacath. vii. drink this at two times.

A draught.
Confect. hamech, Electuarij Indi maioris, ana iii. ss, corticum myrabol.
chebulerum, i. ss, sir. de Epithymo, Byzantiis, ana ss, water of Card^ui
benedictus, Borage, ana ii, Give this 6 hours before dinner.

of the best Mithridate, i. of roots of Angelica, Triacle of Andro. ana i.
roots of Wormeseede, Another.
ss, of Hypocras, iiii. Give this the next morning after the patient is purged.

Another.
the roots of Angelica, i. of Cloves, i. of Cinnamon, ii, ss, infuse these in
strong Wine for somefew hours, add to the strayning of the best Sugar q s.
drink a draught of this at supper and dinner time.

Sp. Aromaticirofati, Diacinnammomi, ana ss, Lozenges.
Sp. Diamasci dulcis, Diambra, ana ii. Dianisi of the best Sugar dissolved in
Borage and Buglosse water, ana q. s.

Conserve of Buglosse, Violets, ana ss, Sp. Diamusco dulcis, old Triacle,
electuarij de gemmis, Diarrhod, abbatis, An Electuary.
ana i. ss, Dianisi, i. of Cynamon, i. Sacchari rosacei, i. sir. of the rinds
of Citrines q. s.

of sweet wine, iiii. dissolve herein of Musk, A Nassall.
gr. iiii. of Amber, ss, put a little of it into the nose.

of the water of Sorrel, Moioram, Rosemary, Borage, An Epithime.
Buglosse, Baulme ana iiii. of strong wine, iii. Sp. Electuarij de gemmis,
Diamasci dulcis, Di ambrae, ana i. ss, Sandalorum, i. wood of Aloes, Mace,
Doronisi, Saffron, ana ss, of Musk gr. ii. some few drops of Vinegar, wash the
region of the heart herewith.

of the flowers of Baulme, dried red Roses, Lauender, A Quilt.
Rosemary, Buglosse, Borage Maioram, ana M ss. Bay leaves, no iii. Sandal.
citrinorum, Cloves, Mace, Orange-pills, Cinnamon, wood of Alloes, the bone in
the heart of a Heart, Gallioe muschatae, ana ii, of Amber, Musk, ana gr. i. sew
all these in a bag, which must be made in the form of a pyramid; when the
patient must use it, moysten it with Rosewater, the water of Buglosse, and
sweet wine, appply ^his unto the region of the heart, to conserve the strength
therein contained.

the oil of Nard, Lillies, Baulme, ana ss, of Roses, iii. seeds of Sorrel,
Nutmeg, Cloves, Doronicum, Worme-seed, An Ointment.
Mace, ana i. ss, of Saffron, gr. iii. of Wax q. s. anoint the heart herewith
after the use of the Epitheme.

the oil of white Lillies, i. oil of Tiles, i. roots of Angelica, i. Aqua
vita, and Wax q, s. anoint the whole length of the backe-bone herewith, and
rub it in with hands well warmed.

An Appendix serving for the cure of panting of the heart.
FIrst, a vein shall be opened, if the strength will permit, and if the
disease be caused by mixed humors or vapors, as commonly it does happen; then
if the body be evil iuyced, humors must be made obedient to nature, and then
expelled, but strong purgations must be here avoided. Then the offending
matter must be brought down, which may be effected by Clysters,
Cupping-glasses, and Frictions. Afterward the heart must be strengthened, and
the distemper amended. If the disease be caused by Worms, kill them, or
expel them as shall hereafter be declared. If by moisture in the hearts case,
he must use such meats as will breed good blood. If it be caused by the
stomach, twice in every week he must take Hierae picrae Gal. i. ss before
supper. If it be caused by consent of an other member, the parts affected must
first be cured, then those medicines must be administered which do strengthen
the heart and brain.

A method serving for the knowledge of SYNCOPE or SWOVNDING.
SYncope is a sudden failing of the strength, and it comes near unto death,
because it is the beginning of natures dissolution; faintness of heart goes
before swounding, which is called in Latin Lypothymia, with which faintness
there is no sweat, but the extreme parts of the body wax cold with a sudden
failing of strength; and then either the spirits are dissolved, or by some
other means hurt, but the vital spirit is not altogether dissolved. But
beside the animal faculties, sometimes the heart, and the vital faculties are
hurt, the heart cannot be primarily said to be hurt, although the other
forces and faculties of the body are hurt hereby. For all the parts of the body
do sympathize with the heart, and by the hearts peculiar temper, or distemper,
do perform, or else fail in their actions.

The part affected.
Here the heart is affected, as may appear by the sudden failing of all the
strength of the body, and smalnes, and weakness of the pulse, and coldness of the
extreme parts. It is an accident belonging to the action of all the faculties
hurt, and chiefly the vital faculties. The heart sometimes is affected by it
self, when as no other affect went before, nor any sign of any other affected
part could be discerned; which does happen either in regard of the grear
distemper thereof, or else by reason of some venomous humors; sometime by an
inflammation or tumor raised by some humor, and then for the most part they
die suddenly therewith; sometime it is caused by the consent of some other
part, as the stomach; and then it is called the stomachs swounding: the like
may be said of all the other parts.

The Signs.
The patients face looks as though he were dead, because the blood flies
inward: the extreme parts of the body, by reason of faintnes, and loosnes of
the body, do wax cold; their sweat is ill sauoured by reason of the
dissolution of the solid parts. Anxiety of mind suddenly arises and disturbs
them; and then the heart fayles them, insomuch that the body being fast
asleep, is deprived both of sense and motion, and not one part has so much
force, as to perform any action. Visions appear before their eyes, when the
fit does seize on them: they are suddenly speechless, and their breath is
almost stopped their eylids fall, their pulse is thin, obscure, and almost
extinct.

The Causes.
It is caused by great watching, anger, sadness, anxiety of mind great fear
sharp pain, sharp and long Feauers. Too much emptines of the body by
fasting, sweating, laboring, vomiting, emptying the belly by stools, or sudden
euacuation of water in a dropsy; for hereby immoderate euacuations, and
resolutions of the spirits are caused, by which means the heart cannot but be
greatly overthrown. Also it is caused by plenty of gross, raw, putrified,
sharp and biting humors; the latter of these do pinch and bite the stomachs
mouth; and the former does stop the spirits ways, so that their passage is
intercepted. Neither may it seem strange that the spirits can be intercepted;
for great plenty of humors is contained in the lungs pipes, so that the
patient cannot draw breath. Sometimes it is caused by the corruption of the
air without us, and venomous humors within us; also inflammation, or many
things which may corrupt and alter the temperature of the heart, stomach, or
spirits, and by that means cause a swounding, because the whole life, and
strength of the body does consist in the perfect constitution of those parts.
The spirits being after the former manner hurt, do hurt likewise the other
principal parts, and all appertaining thereto, and by that means vitiate a
good and wholesome temper, whereby a swounding very dangerous, and sometime
mortal, follows, and that for the most part with great sweat. And this
accident does as it were inwrapt the best of the parts a dying. Also those
forces do suddenly fail, which had dependence on the spirits, and solid parts
temper. In conclusion, either the want of spirits, or their alteration and
corruption, or the destruction of the solid parts temper, also long and sharp
diseases, do cause swounding.

Prognostiques.
If when they are in a swound, the head does fall upon the shoulders, and they
neither breathe neither does their pulse beat, and the face appears green,
or of a leaden hiew, and if a sneezing medicine will no whit prevail, present
death is at hand. They who often and suddenly swound, are in danger to die
suddenly, when the causes of swounding are not strong; they often cause but a
quaking; if very strong, then a swounding; and if they grow stronger and
stronger, they kill the patient. A swounding procured by the affections of the
mind, is not mortal, if the strength do not fail. And even as swounding
caused by the brains distemper, is more dangerous then that which is caused by
the distemper of the liver; in like manner, if it be caused by the distemper of
the heart, it is more dangerous then if it were caused by the brains, or
stomachs distemper.

A method serving for the cure of SYNCOPE or SWOVNDING.
THe air must be temperate, for hot or cold air does offend: his chamber
must be somewhat lightsome; and his meat easy of digestion, as flesh-broth
and ptisan; his drink must be small wine, and Barley-water with a little
Oxymel in the beginning of the disease for some few days: honied water may be
given, wherein one or two handfuls of Hyssop have been boiled. Exercise and
motion must be avoided, and rest permitted. His sleep must be no longer then
usually it was wont to be. If swounding be caused by great pain, or labor,
too much hunger, or of sore accidents of mind, he may sleep longer. But a care
ought to be had that a Physicion stand by, and observe the patient in his
sleeping and waking; for if while he wake, his pulse, color of his face, and
breathing be better or settled, his sleep shall be broken: but those
accidents being better while he sleeps, he may continue sleeping; all
perturbation of the mind must be avoided, and he should give himself unto
mirth.

Syrup of Orange-peels, Preparers.
sir. Byzantinus. sir. of the juice of Pomegranates; sir. of Apples, Oxymel.
simplex and Compositum. Oxy. saccharum Acetosus simplex. sirupes of Violets,
Lemmons, Roses, Peaches, Quinces, the iuce of Endive. de acetositate Citri, de
pemis. Water of Borage, Buglosse, Violets, Roses, Sorrel. In a cold cause the
former shall be used, in hot the latter.

Emptiers.
If swounding be caused by plenty of blood, a vein shall be opened. Manna,
Agaricke, Cassia, Diaphaenicum, rhab. Pillul. Alephang. Tamarind. A gentle
clyster. A vomit with hot water, sir. Acetoso sinplici, common Oil: when it
is caused of slymy phlegm, or rotten humors enclosed in the stomach, or when
there is suspicion of poison, the vomit shall be given the second time. Strong
purgers are not here fit, neither is opening a vein.

Auerters.
A vein shall be opened. Frictions as well in the time of the fit, as out of it,
from the shoulder downward with a rough linen cloth, and also the backe-bone
shall be so handled. The tongue shall be rubd with Mithridate, and Triacle*
Ligatures of the Arms and Legs, that the spirits thereby may be called to the
outward parts, which before had taken sanctuary, even the heart.
Cupping-glasses, iniections of cold water, or Rose Water upon the face, whereto
some Vinegar shall be added, by this means also the spirits will come unto the
outward parts. But this shall not be used, if the disease be caused by loosnes
of the belly, or by a cold cause: loud outcries and roarings must be made
about the patient; sneezing medicines shall be administered, if it be caused by a
suffocation; or if it be caused by crushing of the Mouth, Nose, Fingers, and
Hands. Frictions and Ligatures shall not be used, if it be caused by too much
euacuation: for then it is to be feared, that those spirits, which remain
about the heart, would be brought out, and so dissolved. To these therefore
rest is good, and at certain times a draught of strong wine is good.

Strengthners.
Diamuscum dulce, Diambra, Triacle, Mithridate. Electuarium de Gemmis,
aromaticum Rosatum, diatrium pipereon. Oil of Chinamon, extracted by Cgimicall
art. sir. of Orange pills, strong wine. An epitheme for the heart of Cloves,
S^ffron, Cinnamon, Musk, Lignum aloes, Amber, Orange pills, the water of
Rosemary, Roses, Melissae, Maioram, and sweet wine. An ointment of the Oils of
Cammomill, Dill, white Lillies, the backe-bone and limbs shall be anointed
herewith. An odor of the wood Aloes, Orange-peels, Citrangle flowers, Amber,
Musk, Vinegar, the waters of Roses, Maioram, and Melissae. A quilt of Cloves,
Cinnamon, Lignum aloes, Orange-peeles, dry Roses, Saffron, Musk, flower of
Rosemary, Maioram, Melissae, Serpilli. An emplaister of Barley-flowers, the
fruit of Palm Trees, Masticke; Aloes, Saffron, Wine. Syrup of Lemmons,
Saccharum rosarum, Violarum, Diamargaritum frigidum, Diatrion sandali, Conserve
of Buglosse, Oxysaccharum, Diabuglossatum. A potion of the decoction of
Wormwood. An epitheme for the heart; of the wood Aloes, sp. sandalorum,
Saffron, the bone of the heart of a heart, Orange-peels, Musk, red Corrall,
water of Roses, Sorrel, Borage, Melissae, strong wine: a quilt of the wood
Aloes, Sandalis Amber, Saffron, Orange-peeles, flowers of Roses, Violets,
Borage, Water Lillies, Melissophylli. An odor ex sandal. Orange-peels,
Red-corrall, Vinegar, Musk, the waters of Water Lillies, Roses, Myrtle. If the
disease be caused by a cold matter, they in the first may be given; if by a
hot matter, they in the latter place are good. But epithemes and unctions shall
not be used under the left teate.

A more particular method serving for the cure of SINCOPE or SWOVNDING.
of the Roots of Angelica, A Clyster.
Orange-peels ana vi. leaves of Maioram, Sorrel, Melissae, ana M i. flowers of
Woodrowell, p i. of white and light agaricke iij, rab. ii, boil these in water
q. s. unto lb i. add to the strayning, Diacath. vii, Oils of Roses, Lillies
ana i ss. of Malmsey iiij.

sir. of Orange-peels, Mellis rosati Colati, A Iulep.
sir. Byzantini, ana i. waters of Borage, Melissa, ana iiij, of sweet wine iij.

sir. Ac^tosi i ss, A vomit.
of hot water vi. mix these for a vomit.

A draught.
Diaphaenic. vi. Cassia, v. the water of Borage, iii.

A Potion.
of the roots of Fennel, Parsely, ana i. of the roots of Angelica, iii, leaves
of Melissa, the flowers of Borage, and Buglosse, ana M i. Orange pills, i.
seeds of Annise, Licorice, ana v. of white and light Agaricke, ii. of Ginger,
ss, rhab. i. of Nutmeg, Cinnamon, ana ii. boil these in water q. s. unto lb i.
add to the strayning sirupe Byzantini, ii. of Orange pills, i. Diaphaenic. vii.

A draught.
Diaphaenic. ss, Agaricitrochiscati. ss, rhab. Electi. i. of the decoction of
the roots of Angelica, Maioram, Mellissa, Orange pills, Nutmeg, iiii.

Another.
of Mithridate, i. of Triacle Andromachus, ss, sirupe of Orange pills, ss,
water of Carduus benedictus, Melissa, Angelica, ana iii. Give this the next day
after the patient is purged. It is good also when as poison is suspected to
lurk in the body.

Bolus.
of Cassia, vi. Rhab. electi. Agarici trochiscati, ana ii. of Cinnamon, gr. xii.
sir. of Mints q. s.

Pills.
Pillul. alephanginarum, ii. Agarici trochiscati, i. Rhab. electi. ss, sir. of
the juice of Sorrel q. s. make 7. or 8. pills hereof.

An Electuary.
Diambrae, Diamusci dulcis, ana ii. Sp. latificantis Gal. i. Aromatici rosati.
Gal. iiii. sir. of Mints q. s. hereof the patient may take i. with iiii. of
sweet wine, six hours before dinner.

A powder.
Sp. latificantis Gal. electuarij de gemmis, ana i. ss, Aromatici rosati,
Cinnamon, Nutmeg, ana i. Orange pills, i. ss, of Cloves, gr. xii. Give this with
broth, or any other nutriments.

A draught.
of Orange pills, i. of Nutmeg, i. ss, of Cloves, Cinnamon, ana i. infuse these
for the space of 24, hours in Malmsey* lb i. then strain it forth, and add
to the strayning of the finest Sugar q. s. drink one draught hereof at dinner
and supper.

Sp. Diamusci dulcis, ss, Plirisarcotici, Lozenges.
i. Electuarij de gemmis, Cloves, Orange pills, ana ss, of the finest Sugar,
dissolved in the water of Mints q. s. Give of these often in one day.

of Orange-pills, Cinnamon, Nutmeg, ana i. of Masticke, Cloves, ana ss, of the
best Mithridate, i. ss, An Electuary.
Electuarij de gemmis, ii. Conserve of Buglosse i, conserve of
Rosemary-flowers, ss, syrup of sweet Apples q. s.

of Cloves, Cinnamon, ana, ii. of the bone of the heart of a Heart, i.
Orange-peels, Ligni Aloes, An Epitheme.
ana i. of Roses, M i. Sp. Electuarij laetificantis Gal. ii. of Musk, Saffron,
ana gr. iii. of sweet Wine, vi. the waters of Baulme, Carduus benedictus,
Maioram, Buglosse, Malmsey, ana iiii. make of these an Epitheme for the region
of the heart.

Oil of Cammomile, white Lillies ana iii. Electuarii de gemmis, Orange-peels,
ana ss, Cinnamon water i.ss, A Ointment.
a little quantity of Wax, and use it about the region of the heart.

Ligni aloes, Cinnamon, Cloves, Orange-peeles, A Quilt.
ana i. of Saffron, gr. xii. flowers of Roses, ii. of Rosemary, Baulme,
Maioram, ana ss, after the heart has been anointed with the former ointment,
then this shall be applied to the same place. It must be laid hot thereto,
and sometimes be moystned with strong wine.

oils of Nutmeg, Masticke, Lillies, An Ointment.
ana iii. of Cammomile, ss. of Cinnamon, Cloves, ana ss, anoint the backebone
herewith.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the SYNCOPE or SWOVNDING.
IF swounding be caused by humors stopping the passages, a gentle Clyster shall
be first given, and the humors shall be then made obedient unto nature, when
the strength is somewhat restored; and then they shall be brought forth by a
gentle purge, but such purging medicines as do resolve the vital spirits,
shall not be administered. Then auerting medicines shall be used, and in the
mean time the heart shall be strengthened by inward and outward medicines. If
swounding be caused by too much euacuation of blood, let him rest in his bed,
and in the time of the fit some Rosewater, or else river water shall be cast in
his face, by which means he may be stirred up: also in the fit the fingers
shall be wrung, to cause pain, and sneezing medicines be given for the same
purpose. His mouth and nose must be stopped, that the breath may be kept in,
for finding no way out, they do return in again, and so stir up the vital
spirits. If it be caused by a long disease, because the spirits are consumed,
things that nourish much, shall be given; if from venomous vapors generated in
the body, the great conserve of our description is good: for this helps all
such diseases that are caused by ill vapors bred in the body: also it is an
excellent antidote against al Feauers intermittent and rouing, against worms,
or conuulsions. For this does destroy the feminaries of this disease, and does
preserve the vital spirits, and radical moistnes, or the life's subject: also
it is accounted for a very good remedy to prevent diseases. If the stomach,
too much oppressed by sharp humors, shall cause swounding, an ointment shall be
made for the stomach, of the Oil of Roses, Quinces, Myrtle. If after a
purging medicine, a swounding happens, give to the patient of new Triacle iiij,
if the Triacle be old, add thereto opij gr. ii. of strong wine iij: the
patient must drink this off at one time. If the disease be caused by
suffocation of the matrix, odours shall not be applied to the nose, otherwise
it may be lawful.

A method serving for the knowledge of CHOLERA, or Choler.
CHoler is an immoderate perturbation of the stomach and bowels, wherein
malign humors break forth upward and downward: this disease is often so
vehement, that it does deprive a man of life within the space of a day or two,
even without a Fever; or else in few days the substance of the body being
consumed by vomits, and stools; for excrements ofentimes come down with such
force, that the spirits are also expelled with the humors: from whence thirst,
faintings of the heart, and a languishing of the strength, at the length
sweating, and death succeeds. This name is given to the disease, from the
matter and efficient cause hereof.

The part affected.
The upper and lower part of the stomach is affected primarily; for the bowels
are affected by the stomachs disburdening it self through them. The signs
which make known that these parts are affected, are vomit and euacuation,
pain in the bowels, a great wringing in the mouth of the stomach, and a
distention caused by windines. It is an accident that appertains unto the hurt
of the action of the expulsive faculty.

The Signs.
Choleric, sour and stinking geere is voyded upward and downward for the
space of many hours, as though the patient had drunk great store of such
stuff: and first more liquid, and less malign stuff is expelled, then
grosser and more colored; for sometimes it does appear of citrine color,
then green, sometimes black. At the first this disease is slight enough, but
at the last, a pain and straightnes is felt in the stomach, and upper bowels,
with a troublesome sweat over the whole body, whereby the patient is faint,
his pulse is thick, quick, and little, and at the last falls quite away. When
the disease does increase, the muscles of the Legs, Hands, and Arms, are
conuulsed, and it is an accident, most proper unto this disease, and the rather
if that the disease does increase. At the length death does seize upon the
patient, with swounding, and cold sweat,

The Causes.
It is caused for the most part by choler, whereof great store is gathered
together in all the body, or in the galls bladder, or in the liver, mesentary,
or bowels, or in some part of the whole body, which in time is stained with
some malign and venomous humor, which, if it be cast upon the stomach by
the surcharged part, by reason of the abundance thereof, is very offensive unto
nature, and again, the malign quality, and the fretting of the mouth of the
stomach is troublesome unto nature, wherefore it is driven to and fro in the
body, and at the length is voyded as was before specified. This disease is
likewise caused by naughty and corrupt nutriments, or other humors putrified
with choler in the body.

Prognostiques.
This is a sharp disease, and the strength in a short time is very much
dissolved, for which cause present remedy is requisite. This is a dangerous
disease unto old men, though it does but seldom seize on them; then is the
danger greatest, when the patient does sweat, and vomit, or when he is
troubled with swounding, and that which is vomited forth, has an evil smell:
for when either that which is voyded by vomit or stool has no good savor,
and when the pulses fail with the strength; and the extreme parts are cold,
then the disease is mortail; yet there is some hope* if the vomit be stayed,
and the patient sleep well. This evil sometimes turns into heat of urine,
the matter being driven down into the bladder.

A method serving for the cure of CHOLERA, or CHOLER.
THe air must be somewhat cold, and bright; for humors and spirits are
disquieted by heat, and great light. He may eat re^e Eggs, Hens, Hares,
Pigeons, Larks, Partridges, Turtles, and Fawnes. If he be strong* a little
quantity of meat must suffice him, and it would be better if he could forbear
eating for the space of two days. He may drink strong wine, but it must also
be thin, that it may pierce the better; in this wine also thin plates of gold
should be quenched. The disease has been assuaged by this only remedy. In
the beginning of the disease he must drink but little, but he must wash his
mouth with the juice of Pomegranates and Quinces. Rest of the body must be
procured; and if he have a desire to vomit, he must use such things as may
cause a gentle vomit; he must sleep only in the night season; passions of the
mind, as anger, sadness, and thoughts must be shunned.

A Clyster of common Oil, the water of Barley, Violets, Emptiers.
red Sugar, the yeolke of an egg; when the Clyster has done working, the
patient may drink a good draught of Barley-waters these must be often
reiterated, that the sharp and biting matter may be qualified. A vomit with
hot water of Barley, Oxymel simp. or the sirupe of the juice of Sorrel, or the
decoction of Radish with Sugard water, wherein Cummin, and Niter have been
boiled. He may drink great store of this, for so the retentiue faculty being
surcharged with too great a burden, stirs up the expulsive. The patient may
put his finger into his mouth, or dippe a feather in oil, and thrust it down
his throat, that he may with the more speed and ease vomit. Before any other
medicine be given, he shall use this often, and take hereof a great quantity.
If the diseases cause be cold, then Cinnamon may be used; if hot, then Sugar.
Sir. rosati laxatinui, Pillulae de Hiera picra, Pillula aromaticae in a cold
cause. Cassia fistula, Aloes, Manna, rhab. Decoction of Myrobal. If the
offending matter may be brought down to the lower parts, Clysters or other
purging medicines may be used; for hereby nature is easily helped. But vomit
must be furthered whilst the patient has a propension that way, and yet
cannot freely vomit. But strong vomits and looseness must be eschewed, for
hereby the stomach may be too much weakened; and again if the humors be apt
enough of themselves to be voyded by vomit, then vomiting must be hindered,
and the corrupt matter shall rather be euacuated, and voyded at the lower
parts.

Auerters.
Painful Ligatures of the hips and elbows, as also strong Frictions of those
parts, and afterward gentler. Cupping-glasses shall be fastened to the back,
shoulders, blade-bone, and the middle region between the navel and stomach:
sometime they may be applied to the region of the liver, and spleen, but they
must not remain thereon long, lest they stir up too much pain. Also sweats
shall be caused, if strengh do remain. A bath of hot water is also good, if the
strength will permit, and when the concoction is perfect; but he must not
remain long in it, least his strength be overthrown. If the matter be not
too malign, these medicines may be used, especially if he go too often to the
stool.

Syrup of dry Roses, of the juice of Pomegranats, Strengthners.
Lemmons, Quinces, Oranges, Aquamensalis of our description. Rosata nouella,
Daicodium, Troch. de Olibano. Orange-rinds preserved, the pulse of Quinces
without the seeds, conserve of Roses, the juice of Crabs, three-leaued grass,
either applied outwardly, or else taken inwardly: and if they be laid unto the
stomach, a double linen cloth must be laid upon them. A cup of cold water:
and he must drink of other drink sparingly. Strong red wine may be permitted,
but water wherein steel has been quenched, shall be mixed therewith. A
Clyster of the decoction of the heads of white Poppy, to which Amylum must be
added. This hinders the motion of the humors, and does provoke sleep. Cold
water must be suddenly cast upon the face of the patient, and this will hinder
voluntary vomiting: or else if we perceive the patient inclining to vomiting,
astringent fomentations shall be used, for these will quickly work. An
ointment of the Oil of Myrtle, Violets, Roses, Quinces, Wormwood, Mints,
Mastike, Narde, flowers of Pomegranates, Hypocistide, red Roses, bole Armony,
Sanguine Draconis, Frankincense, Sandals, Masticke, Acacia, Corrall, Rh^^
obsaniorum; a cataplasme of the former matters; a dropax of Pitch, and Oil of
Quinces, hinder vomiting. Ceratum stomachicum Gal. is good for the same
purpose, in a cold cause. Emplastrum diaphaenicum, with crummes of bread,
Emplastrum Mesuae for the stomach, Mastichinum. These do bind the common
passages, and do thicken the humors, and strengthen the stomach and bowels,
that the humors run not too fast thither. We must not use these, before the
humors are corrupted, or else are voyded by stool or vomit, unless there be
danger of swounding, or conuulsion. For although the voyding of them be good,
yet if it does outstrip a mean, it is not without danger, because by too much
casting down of the strength, death does presently attend, and seize on the
patient. Local medicines in this disease are best, for they that are taken
inward, the belly being troubled, are presently cast out, but when the disease
is somewhat slackned, then medicines taken inward are preualent: in conclusion
first of all the belly may be kept loose, but the vomiting must be stopped,
until it does appear that the humors are well expelled.

Correctors of accidents.
Red wine, austere and fragrant; also strong wine that is allayed with water, is
good, sirupe of Quince, an emplayster of Roses, sandalis, Quinces, Vinegar,
this must be applied to the stomach. An ointment of the oils of Lillies, sweet
Almonds, Flower-de-luce, Violets, Mans-fat, Beauer-stone. A Fomentation of the
shrunk parts, with the same oils, or else a Liniment consisting of hot oils,
may be laid about the shrunk parts. A bath also of the same oils is good for
the conuulsed parts. A decoction of Lettuce, Gourd, Endive, Cowcumber, common
water boiled, whereunto sir. of Quinces, dry Roses, Oranges must be added.
Sirupe of Pomegranats, Quinces; also the iuyces of these, sir. of Roses, a
Clyster with water, wherein Endive, Lettuce, the heads of white Poppy, and
Amylum have been boiled. They in the first place hinder the hicket, they in
the middle help the conuulsion, they in the last place quench thirst, and
procure sleep.

A more particular method serving for the cure of CHOLERA, or CHOLER.
A Clyster.
of cleansed Barley, M ii. ss. leaves of Violets, Centory the less, Wormwood,
Mints, flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M i. of white and light Agaricke,
ana ii. rhab. electi, i. ss, Polypodij queroini, iii. boil these in water q.
s. unto lb i. add to the strayning, of the oil of Rue, Cammomile, ana i. ss,
of strong wine, iii. Diacath. iii.

A Vomit.
sir. Acetosi simp. ii. of the decoction of Barley, Radish, Figs, vi. The
patient must take this off lukewarm, and if he vomit with great pain, nature
shall be helped by a purging medicine.

Rhab. electi. i. sirupe of Mints, i, Spike, A draught.
gr. iii. water of Mints, iii.

Electuary of the juice of Roses, Rhab. electi, ana i, ss, Another.
of Spike, gr. iii. sirupe of Succory with Rhab. ss, water of Woormwood, iii.
this must be given, if it may be discerned that the corrupt humor is fallen
down, and the best way to bring them downward, is by Clysters.

leaves of Violets, M i. of Roses, M ss, seeds of Purslane, A Potion.
Plantane, ana i. flowers and rinds of Pomegranats, seeds of Barberies, ana ii.
ss, Mirabol. citrinorum, i. of the best Cinnamon, i. ss. Boil these in water q.
s. unto lb i. add unto iiii. of the strayning, Rhab. electi, ss, sirupe of
Roses, ss.

sirupe of Quinces, Roses, ana i. ss, of Myrtle, A Sirupe.
i. Cinnamon, Nutmeg, ana ss, give hereof two spoonefuls at a time, he may use
it very often, especially when the belly is loosned by too much moystnesse.

sirupe de Agresta, Mints, ana i. ss, Another.
juice of Pomegranats, i. he must take i. hereof with iii. of Cinnamon water,
twice or thrice in a day.

Sacchari rosati, Conserve of old Roses, ana i. ss, An Electuary.
pulpe of Quinces, i. of red Corrall, ii, ss, the rinds of preserved Oranges,
ss, Harts-horne burnt, Bole Armony, ana i. ss sir. of the juice of sour
Orange, of the sir. wherein Mirabol. Citrini have been conserved q. s. this
may be used, when the humors are somewhat voyded.

leaves of Wormwood, dry Mints, A Fomentation.
ana M i. of red Roses, Cammomile, ana M ii. ss, flowers and rinds of
Pomegranats, ana ii. seeds of Myrtle, i. Sandalorum Rubrorum, ii. boil these
in a sufficient quantity of Wine, until the third part be consumed, and wash
the stomach herewith.

the oils of Myrtle, Quinces, Roses, ana ss, An Ointment.
of Wormwood, Mints, ana ii. ss, seeds of Roses, Bole Armony, Frankincense, ana
i. anoint the stomach herewith morning and evening: this does strengthen the
stomach by its astringent power.

An Ointment.
Cerati stomachici Mesuae, i. ss, of Masticke, Frankincense, ana i. of red
Corrall, Gallingale, Sandali albi, red Roses, ana i. the flowers of
Pomegranats, dry Mints, Wormwood, ana ss. oil of Nard, Masticke, Roses, ana q.
s. dippe a cloth in these, and apply it to the stomach.

A powder.
of Wormwood, Spike, Mints, Nard, ana ss, of red Roses, Cammomile, ana i. of
Frankincense, i. ss, of Bole Armony, ss, sprinkle this powde^ upon the
stomach, after it has been anointed with the former ointment.

An Emplayster.
of Mint, Trifolij, Wormwood, ana M i. ss, red Roses, M i. of Cinnamon, Mace,
ana ss, Troch. de Olibano, i. of bread tosted, and sopped in strong Wine, and
some Vinegar ii. or else dissolve Masticke, with the white of an Egg: add
unto these, crummes of white bread, which are macerated in strong Wine, and a
little Vinegar.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the CHOLERIC PASSION.
IN the beginning of the disease, when as it may be discerned, that the
offending humor is falling down into the lower parts, and that the strength
does begin to fail, a convenient purging medicine shall be given, whereunto
such things shall be added, as may mitigate the sharpness of the humors,
namely Cassia fistula, Manna, Rhab. If the patient do not vomit freely, some
broth of a Chicken shall be given unto him, or else Barley-water, or hot water
wherein Annise and Cummine-seeds have been boiled: hereunto a small quantity
of the sir. of acetosus simp. must be added. Unto the former vomiting
medicines Oils must not by any means be added, because they do loosen the
strength of the bowels and stomach: care ought to be had that vomiting, and
going unto the stool be not at one and the same time, because it is dangerous
to void the matter two manner of ways. Therefore if the patient be troubled
with vomit, the matter shall be drawn downwards by a Clyster. But when the
matter is almost euacuated, which may easily be done in 24 hours, then such
things must be used, as may turn the humors into the stomach; this may be
effected by a Clyster, wherein such things shall be put, that do lessen the
sharpnes of the humors. Ligatures and frictions, and other means formerly
specified will effect the like; at the length the flux of the humors may be
stopped by astringent medicines, and the bowels and stomach may therewith be
strengthened, and because grievous accidents do follow this disease, especially
care ought to be had of the cure hereof, that it may be done with speed, and
with a direct method; otherwise swounding, and failing of strength are like to
ensue.

A method serving for the knowledge of SINGVLTVS, or HICKET.
SIngultus, or hicket, is a violent and vehement motion of the stomach,
whereby it does endeavor to expel such things as do rest in the tunicles and
in the body, and also such as do stick fast thereto. But nature labors not by
this conuulsiue motion to drive out those things which are containd in the
hollownes of the stomach; for these are rather avoided by vomit; and though it
be of the same kind as vomit is, yet by the hicket the stomach is more
violently moved then by vomit, because they that lie hid in the body, are with
more difficulty driven out, then those that roue in the empty rooms of the
body; for humors stuffed within the tunicles of the stomach, disturbing the
body with heat, coldness, or biting, do rather cause a desire to vomit then a
yexing, so that they do not bite too vehemently. But a hicket is rather stird
up then vomit, when the humors bite strongly.

The part affected.
Sometimes the mouth of the stomach, sometimes the whole stomach, and it is
an accident which appertains unto the hurt of the action of the retentiue and
expulsive faculty. Sometimes it is caused only by the default of the stomach,
sometime by the default of the liver, as it happens in the inflammation of the
liver. In burning Feauers the whole body is in fault.

The Signs.
It comes often, and then for the most part by fits, that even as the cough
does with a swounding, so this disease may void offending humors. The cause of
the swounding in these diseases, is the straightnes of the passage of the air,
which is contained in the stomach.

Causes.
It is often caused by fulness and superfluous muoisture, for thereby they are
either loaded, or in a manner shrunk together, which will appear by signs of
fulness. Sometime it is caused by sharp biting humors, whose malign quality
does in a manner prick the stomach: this is known by their former diet: and
if they cast this humor up by vomit, they are freed hereof. It is also caused
by too much cooling the mouth of the stomach; for seeing the body is sinewy,
it is so thickened by cold, that such humors as get into them, cannot so easily
get out again: hereby fulness is caused, and from thence yexing: and pernicious
vapors being derived to the mouth of the stomach, do disturb a man with a
vehement hicket; as burning and pestilent agues can testify Also inflammation of
the liver, stomach, and bowels do breed this disease, Sometimes it comes by
corruption of food in the belly, or neighboring part, when as it does beget a
biting quality, sometimes it is caused by slymy phlegm fastened to the tunicles
of the stomach. Sometime by too much empitnes, and drynes, as it does happen
in great heats, and long feauers, which do pine away the body. It is also
caused by too frequent going to stool. It is also caused by too much emptines
of blood, as happens in the immoderate flux of monthly terms, as also in the
bloody flix, or by great wounds or immoderate vomitings, or long fasting. Those
then that went before, will tell us whether the hicket come by emptines, or no.

Prognostiques.
When the hicket is caused by fulness, if a sneezing come withal, the patient
will soon be rid thereof: a hicket coming upon such that are troubled with
wringing in the guts, commonly called in Latin Iliaca passio, is an evil
sign. If a hicket follow doting, swounding, or conuulsion, it is mortal. Also
if it follows an inflammation of the Liver, Brain, Womb, or or a great wound,
it is dangerous; and for the most part it does threaten death. Also in sharp
diseases, burning, and pestilentiall Feauers, it is deadly: and if it be
caused by too much emptines, it is always an evil sign; it is also bad, if
it come upon a vomit; because it does threaten inflammation of the stomach, and
brain. If doting or conuulsion do follow the hicket, it is dangerous, if not
mortal.

A method serving for the cure of SINGVLTVS, or HICKET.
A Temperate air is best; but if it comes by cold humors, as it does commonly,
his air must be hot and dry, his meat must be such as may heat and dry,
and therefore may be saw^ed with Ginger, Cloves, Nutmeg, Pepper, and Galingale;
a little quantity of strong wine may be permitted.

Preparers.
Sirupe de duabus radicibus, of Staechas, Oxysaccharum simplex. Oxymel simplex,
Squilliticum, Mel rosatum, Mellicratum, made with Hyssop, Acetum squilliticum.
A decoction of the Roots of Asarum, Galingale, Elecampane, Hyssop, Hore-hound,
Calamint, Smallage, Penny-royall, and Cummin seed. Syrup of Epithymon, of
Thyme; sir. of Apples, Fumitary, water of Fumitary, Hops, Scolopendria. Sir. of
Violets, Roses. sir. Acetosus simplex, of the juice of Endive. The waters of
Barley, Violets, Carduus benedictus, Endive and hot water. If the disease last
long, the disease by these must be concocted, before it be euacuated by vomit
or purgation. The former of these medicines shall be used, if the disease be
caused by slymy, and Phlegmy humors; the second sort may be used, if by
melancholy humors, and the third sort shall be used, if it be caused by short
humors, deeply enclosed in the tunicles of the stomach.

Emptiers.
A vomit with the warm water of the decoction of Barley, wherewith sir. of
Endive, Oxymel simp. or Squilliticum shall be mingled: this is an excellent
remedy, if the humors fly upward; otherwise we may use lenitiue Clysters, or
take purgations at the mouth; the patient must hold the vomit, after he has
drunk it, for then the matter will the better be fetched out. Diaphaenicon,
diacydonites solutiuus: Hiera picra; sir. of manifold infusion of Roses;
Pillula aromaticae, Stomachicae Cocciae, whereto, if the disease be caused by
a cold matter, Castoreum may be added. Rhab, infusum, Manna, Cassia. These may
be used, if the disease be caused by slymy and biting humors: but they may not
be permitted, if it be caused by emptines: for then, though it be almost
incureable, good nourishment will prove the best physic.

Auerters.
Clysters are good almost in all causes; painful ligatures, and frictions of
the extreme parts must be used, the middle finger of the right hand must be
crushed. Cupping-glasses must be fastened to the back, near unto the twelfth
Vertebra, shoulders, and nauill; afterward to the mouth of the stomach, with
great store of flame; for this is very preualent, if the disease be caused by
windines. Sneezing is good, for by shaking of the head, the belly, and whole
body, the matter enclosed is often stirred, and so cast out. Means must be
used to affright the patient suddenly, and unawares cold water should be cast
in his face. The patient shall likewise hold his breath, if it be caused by
windines, or a cold humor, and cold distemper of the stomach; blisters shall be
raised, if the disease cease by applying Cupping-glasses. The ears must be
rubd, and the little finger put into the hollownes of them. The extreme parts
of the body must be washed with a hot bath.

Diagalanga, Electuary of bay berries, Diacuminum, Srengthners.
Dianisum, Dia^alamintha, Triacle, Mithridate preserved Ginger must be given
in strong wine, Aqua vita wherein Cinnamon has been infused. Wine wherein
infuse the seeds of Cummin, Bays, Juniper, Daucus, Anethus, the Roots of
Galingale, Beauer-stone, Cummin, the decoction of Anethum. Holding of the
breath is good. Fasten a Cupping-glasse to the mouth of the stomach, for by
this means the pain will be mitigated, if not taken away. A fomentation of the
decoction of the seeds of Anethum, Annise, Cummin, Fennel, Ameos, Barberries,
Galingale, Mints, Abrotanum, Origan: these must be boiled in wine and water.
Diatrion pipereon, Triacle, Diaglaanga, Aromaticum caryophyllatum, Diarrhod.
Abbatis, sir. of Mints, Wormwood. Aqua mensalis of our description. Wine
wherein Wormwood has been steeped, strong wine, wherein Cinnamon, Nutmeg,
Mastike, Galingale, Ginger, Asarum, Wormseed, wood of Aloes, and red Corrall
have been boiled: Beauer-stone, preserved Ginger, preserved Acorus, and Cloves
must be chewed. The holding of the breath does help the native heat an: odor
of the seeds of Anethum boyld in sweet wine. A fomentation of Galingale,
Cummin, Wormwood, Schaenanthum, Mints, Origan, Calamus aromaticus. An ointment
of the Oils of Masticke, sweet Almonds, Lillies, Violets, Mace, Beauer-stone.
An ointment of the oil wherein Wormwood, Cummin, Rue, and Annise have been
boiled; this must be applied to the stomach. A Cerate of ancient oil and
Beauerstone. Diarrhod. abbatis, Diatrion sandali, Saccharum, violaceum,
rosac^um. sir. of Violets, Roses, Endive: a Cerate of ^andalum, with the oil
of Roses. A Fomentation of the back, stomach, and adjacent parts with the
oil of Violets. An ointment of the oils of sweet Almonds, Violets, for the
aforesaid parts: they in the first place will do good, if the disease be
caused by winds; they in the second place shall be used, if by cold humors:
if by emptiness, they in the last place shall be used. Philonium Romanum, with
the juice of Endive. These must not be used, until the cure be attempted by
gentler medicines. Pills of Hounds-tongue, the dosis i. ancient Triacle, sirupe
of Water Lillies, Violets, Poppy: give two spoonefulls hereof with the water of
Violets, Saccharum nymphaeae, violarum, rosarum. The Milk of Asses does
assuage the sharpness of the humors. The seeds of Lettuce, Purslane,
Cowcumber, white Poppy, these must be beaten with the water of Lettuce, and
also therein boyld. The patient must drink a great quantity of water, yet it
must be done with caution; at the first gentler medicines shall be used, and
then stronger.

A more particular method serving for the cure of SINGVLTVS or HICKET.
A Clyster.
of the roots of Asarum, ss, Galingale, iiii. flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot,
ana M ii, of Mallows, M ii. ss, of Beete, M i. ss, of dried Figs, no vi. of
white and light Agaricke, ss, seeds of Dill, v. boil these in water q. s. unto
lb i. ss, add to the strayning Hierae picrae Gal. ii. Diacath. i. Mellis
rosati, ii.

A Iulep.
Oxymellis simplicis, squillitici, ana i. Mellis rosati cocolati, i. ss, waters
of Mint, Wormwood, ana v.

of the roots of Asarum, ii. Aristoloch. rot. Gallingale, Elecampane, ana ii.
ss, Calaminth, Thyme, A Potion.
Penny-royall, Hyssop, Horehound, ana M ss, of Dill, Sea Onyons, ana ss, of
Cinnamon, ii. boil these in sweet Wine q. s. unto lb i. add to the strayning
Oxymellis simp. squillitici, i, ss.

Pillul. stomachicharum, Hierae picrae Gal. Troch. de Agarico, ana i. sirupe of
Hyssop q. s. make hereof 8. pills, Pills.
the patient must take some of these in the morning.

Diagalangae, i. Elebori nigri, iiii. of Nutmeg, A draught.
Cinnamon, ana* ss, infuse these for the space of twelve hours in v. of
Malmesey: give this when the disease is at the height.

of the roots of Gallingale, Wormeseede, ana ii. ss, A mixture.
seeds of Dill, ii. of Nutmeg, i. ss, of Mithridate, iii. Mix these, and give
the patient i. in strong wine.

of Beauer-stone, ss, Cinnamon, roots of Elecampane, Angelica, Galingale, ana
ss, of Hypocras, A draught.
iiii.

of the best Cinnamon, iii. of Ginger, Hypocras.
i. roots of Galingale, v. seeds of Annise, Dill, ana ii. roots of Elecampane,
Angelica, Wormeseede, ana i. bruise these grossly, and steep them in sweet
wine, afterward strain these, then add unto the strayning of fine Sugar q.
s. Aceti squillitici, a small quantity.

Pills of Hounds-tongue, ii. ss. Philonij Romani, i. make hereof 8. or 9.
Pills, Pills.
give one of these at night.

leaves of Wormwood, Rue, Mints, A Fomentation.
ana M i. seeds of Cummin, ss, boil these in a sufficient quantity of common
oil, dippe a sponge, or else wool herein, and wash the breast.

oils of Beauer-stone, sweet Almonds, Mace, Masticke, ana i. ss, the seeds of
Dill, and roots of Galingale, An Ointment.
shall be boiled herein, of each of these i. ss, and the stomach must be
anointed herewith.

Aristoloch. rotundae, Galingale, seeds of Annise, Bayberries, An Emplayster.
Rue, Gentianae, ana iii. of Beauerstone, Myrrh, Cloves, ana ii. of red Roses,
M i. of Masticke, iii. make hereof a plaster with a little Honey, and water of
sweet Maioram, if the disease chanseth without a fever, this is very good.
These may be used if the disease be caused by cold and windy matter. But if it
be caused by a hot matter, these following shall be used.

A Iulep.
sir. of the juice of Sorrel, Oxysacchari simp. sir. of Roses, ana i. ss, the
waters of Endive, Sorrel, Purflane, ana iii. Or else

Another.
sir. of Violets, Succory, with Rhab. Acetosi simp. ana i. sir. of
Water Lillies, Poppy, ana ss, waters of Succhory, Lettuce, Purslane, ana iii.

A draught.
the decoction of Succory, Endive, Buglosse, Barley-seeds, of Carduus
benedictus, iiii. infuse of Rhab. ii. for the space of 24. hours, then strain
it forth, and add unto the strayning sirupe of the manyfold infusion of Roses,
i. ss.

of cleansed Barley, M iii. boil it in water q. s. until half be consumed, A
Vomit.
unto vi. of the strayning, add sir, Acetosi simp. ii.

Pills.
Hierae picrae, Gal* rhab. optimi, ana ii. sirupe of Succhory with Rhab. q. s.

An Electuary.
Diarrhod. abbatis, without Musk, ss, Sacchari violati, Nymphaeoe, ana v.
sirupe of Roses, Violets, ana q. s.

of new butter somewhat salted, ii. of the decoction of the seeds of Orache, A
draught.
Barley, sweet Almonds, iii. Oxymellis simp. ii.

An Unguent.
Oil of Roses, Water Lillies, ana v. of Poppy, Quinces, ana ss, of Wax, and
Vinegar, a little.

A medicine for the stomach.
Cerati sandalini, i. ss, of red Roses, seeds of Purslane, ana ss, oil of
Roses q. s.

Philonij Romani, Pills of Hounds-tongue, Pills.
ana i. give hereof one pill at night.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the SVNGVLTVS, or Hicket.
FIrst of all, the matter of the disease, whether it be hot or cold, must be
made obedient unto nature, and then cast out by a purging medicine, and then
the flux of humors turned from the stomach: then the stomach may be
strengthened, and the distemper amended by inward and outward medicines. If the
disease be caused by drynes, or emptiness, flesh broth, sir. of Roses, Barley
water, Goats milk, and other moystning aliments must be given. Also by
chimicall art a liquor shall be extracted from the decoction of Partridges, Hens,
crummes of white bread, sir. of Violets, waters of Buglosse and Mints, and
strong Wine; and when this liquor is to be used, a little Sugar may be put
into it. A bath of sweet water is good: the stomach and back bone shall be
anointed with the oil of Violets: If it be causd by sharp humors, ptisan, oil
of sweet Almonds, or common oil is good. If by the inflammation of the liver,
that must first be cured. If by some venomous matter, Triacle, with the
decoction of the seeds of Carduus benedictus, Dill, Gallingale, Borage,
Cinnamon. If by coldness of the mouth of the stomach, the patient shall hold
his breath, for by this means, the heat will be gathered together.

A method serving for the knowledge of CARDIALGIA, or pain of the stomach.
THe pain of the stomach is a painful sense of the mouth of the stomach
caused by a biting matter. This disease has affinity with the disease called
Cardiaca passio, which is in like manner a disease of the mouth of the
stomach, caused by corrupt humors, and such as are biting and virulent, which
either came from some other place, or else were therein generated, and gathered
together; from whence comes languishing; and faintnes of the body, and a
resolution of the strength by sweat, and sometimes they fall into a swound,
and the outward parts of the body are cold, whenas the Face, Breast, Head, and
Neck, are bedewed with sweat. Cardiaca passio herein does differ from this
disease, because this is caused by biting humors, but that is caused, as was
said, by virulent humors, and also venomous and so malign, that a Fever
comes withal, and that very hot and sharp. These affections of the
stomach ought with great care and circumspection to be looked after, because
the mouth of the stomach has relation to many other parts of the body, first
with the heart, because of its neerues; with the brain, because of the nerves
that are implanted there, and so go from the one unto the other, by whose
virtue, the mouth of the stomach has a quick sense. Seeing therefore that
these parts of the body have so great affinity with the stomach, and it is its
proper office to hunger after meat, even as the hollownes of the stomach does
concoct it: this disease therefore ought to be speedily remedied. This disease
has borrowed the name from the affect, and part affected, for in former times
the physicians did call the mouth of the stomach Cardia, which is the heart,
because when as the mouth of the stomach is affected, such heinous accidents
do follow, as if the heart it self where hurt.

The part affected.
The mouth of the stomach is primarily affected, and the heart is hereby hurt,
because of the neernes. For a pinching pain, with biting and fret^ing, is felt
under the breasts gristles; Cardialgia and Cardiaca passio, is an accident which
does belong unto the hurt of the action of sensitive faculties, viz. the sense
of touching.

Signs.
In the Cardiacall passion, a faintnes and resolution of the native heat does
follow, and also of the whole body. For the most part a sharp Fever, the
pulse is thick, and obscure, the extreme parts are cold, and yet slymy sweat^
do stick about the face and breast, the body smells somewhat earthy; despair,
anguish, disquietnes of mind and body goes withal: but in the Cardialgia,
there is a gnawing, biting, and pricking in the mouth of the stomach.
Sometimes the belly does cast out choleric stuff, and sometimes he does
vomit choler; very seldom a Fever comes with this; the strength is not
dissolved with immoderate sweat, neither is the body so faint: there is a
loading pain in the stomach, by reason hereof they do breathe with difficulty,
they are eased if belching above, or wind below be voyded, and when the
nourishment that is received, goes down to the lower parts of the belly.

Causes.
Both these diseases are caused by sharp and biting humors, which do stick
about the mouth of the stomach, whereby the appetite is abated, and they are
in more pain before meat then after; in the cardiacll passion, besides the
sharp and biting humors, it has a venomous and virulent quality; also
Cardialgia, and Cardiaca passio are caused oftentimes by worms, which will be
made known more plainly in the chapter which does treat of worms. They that
fast too long when they are well, if the body be strongly stirred up,
Cardialgia is stirred up withal. This disease is sometimes caused by sadness:
for by those causes choler comes into the stomach, whereby bitings, and
gnawings are caused. Sometimes it is caused by inflammation, or by some ulcer,
or swelling; sometimes, and that very often, it is caused by sharp, and
phlegmy humors, whereby disquieting winds arise in the stomach, which does so
stretch it, as the guts are stretched in Iliaca passio by winds enclosed. When
it is caused by cold and sharp humors, the appetite holds out well enough.
and the pain is great.

Cardialgia, if it come without a Fever, Prognostiques.
is less dangerous; but the Cardiacall passion, because it does come with a
sharp Fever, is dangerous. And if the disease be caused by worms, it is
dangerous. This disease is incident unto young men; and in sharp diseases, it
often concurres about their increase.

A method serving for the cure of CARDIALGIA, or pain in the stomach.
LEt his air be cold by art or nature. His meat easy of digestion, and such
that is least subject to corruption, as Larks, Partridges, Capons, Hens,
Chickens, and flesh broth; his meat may be sawced with juice of Pomegranates,
Oranges, his drink must be fine watery wine, or the decoction of Cinnamon, and
Barley-water: and as motion does stir up the disease, so rest does assuage the
pain. His sleep must be moderate, and watchings are very hurtful. The belly
should be made answerable to nature. Perturbations of the mind must be
shunned; but especially sadness.

Preparers.
Oxymel simplex and compositum; sir. of Mints, Oxymel squilliticum; sir. of
Wormwood, Mel rosatum. Waters of Sage, Maioram, Betony, Wormwood, Fennel.
Sirupe of Succhory with rhubarb; sir. of Violets, Roses; sir. of the juice of
Sorrel, Acetositatis citri; of Pomegranates; water of Sorrel, Succhory,
Plantane, Roses, Buglosse. If the pain be not so great that it does cross
the order of the cure, and the matter has not taken too deep root in the
tunicles of the stomach, these medicines may be used: if otherwise, such
shall be administered that do assuage pain; they in the first place shall be
used, if the matter be cold; if by a hot matter, they in the second place
shall be used.

A vomit must be made with hot water and Vinegar, as also Oxymel simplex,
Emptiers.
and the patient must be helped either with the Finger, or a feather thrust
into the mouth: A Clyster of the decoction of Cammomill, Mellilot^, Mints,
Mallows, Wormwood, Mercury, Diacath. benedicta laxatiua. sir. of manifold
infusion of Roses, Manna, Tamarindi, Cassia, Rhab. Myrobal. Citrini. Diaturbith
with Rhab. Hiera picra simplex, Composita, Logodij. Pills, of Agaricke,
Alephanginae, Mastichina, Diaphaenicum. The infusion, and decoction of
Agaricke, Agaricus trochiscatus. The basilica vein of the right side shall be
opened, if the disease be caused by plenty of blood, and the pain be great.
Gentle purging medicines shall at the first be used, and if the disease cannot
be cured by gentle medicines, stronger may be used, otherwise not.

A decoction of Cammomill, with Nutmeg, Mitigaters of pain.
may be given in drink, or else the shauings of iuory. For these do mollify
the pain. Aristol. longa is good against all disease of the stomach. A
fomentation shall be made of wines wherein the seeds of Linus Mints,
Fengreeke, Fennel, Calamus aromaticus, have been boiled; a sponge must be
dipped in this decoction, then applied to the stomach, and hot clothes must be
laid upon it, that the heat may be preserved, An ointment of the Oil of
Wormwood, Masticke, Spike, Nutmeg, Dill, Cammomill. A quilt of the flowers of
Cammomil, Mellilote, Roses, Wormwood, Branne, Salt, Millium, flowers of
Rosemary. An emplaister of the flower of Linus, Fengreeke, Roots of wild
Mallows, Oils of Linus, Cammomile. Philonium Romanum; Athanasia Nicholai;
Zazanea. sir. of Poppy, water lillies, Voilets, Roses. They in the last place
shall not be mixed with stupifying medicines, unless the strength be in
hazard.

Aromaticum rosatum, Diacuminum. Diagalanga, Strengthners.
Diarrhodon Abbatis. The crust of bread infused in strong wine. An ointment of
the Oils of Nard, Cammomile, man's fat, Wormwood, Mac^, Mastike, Cloves,
Ceratum Gal. Stomaticum. An emplaister of Ladanum, or storax Calamita,
Galingale, Masticke, Oil of Wormwood. A quilt for the stomach, of Cinnamon,
Mace, Cloves, Ladanum, dry Mints, prepared Coriander. Rosata no^ella, Diarrhod.
abbatis, Electuarium diatrion sandal. Conserve of Sorrel, Roses, Violets. The
conserve of our description is good against this disease, sirupe of Roses,
Pomegranat^, Saccharum Rosatum, the pulpe of Quinces, without seeds. An
ointment of the oil of Roses, Quinces, Masticke: An emplayster must be made
of Roses, Aloes, Masticke, Alome, Hipocistid^. An odor must be made of Roses,
and wine with Rosewater, Aceto rosato. If the disease be caused by cold and
windy humors, the former shall be used. If by sharp humors, they in the latter
place shall be used.

A more particular method serving for the cure of CARDIALGIA, or pain of the
stomach.
A Iulep.
sirupe of Wormwood, Mints, ana i. ss, Oxymelli^ compositi, i. the water of
Mints, Maioram, Wormwood, ana iiii. Give this three or four times in the
morning.

Bolus.
Diaphaeniconis, iii. Rhab. electi, Spike, ana i. of new Cassia, Benedicta
laxatiua, ana ii. ss, with fine Sugar q. s.

Hiera picra Gal. ii. Pills of Masticke, Agaricke, made into a Trochiske, ana
i. sirupe of Wormwood q. s. make hereof 7. Pills, and give of them in the
morning.

A Potion.
Aristolochiae longae, ii. seed of Annise, Carrowaies, ana ^, of Agaricke, ii.
ss, flowers of Cammomile, Centory the less, ana M ii. of Saffron, gr. vi.
boil these in flesh broth, add to the strayning, a little quantity of Sugar.

A vomit.
seeds of Radish, Atriplicis, ana ii. roots of Asarum, i. boil these in water
q. s. until the one half be consumed, add unto the iiii. of the strayning,
Oxymellis simplici^, ii. oil of Linus i. Give this lukewarm in the morning.

Diaphanic. vi. Philonij Romani, A draught
i. the decoction of Cammomile, Fennel, Annise, iii. this may be given in the
extremity of pain.

Sp. Diarrhod. abbatis, Aromatici rosati Gal. ana ii. ss, A mixture
of preserved Ginger, i. Cinnamon, ss, Beauerstone, seeds of Ameos, ana ii. ss,
Cummin, Galingale, ana i. ss, sirupe of Mints, Wormwood q. s.

of Mithridate, i. the Triacle of Andromachus, A draught.
ii. Aristoloch. longae, ss, of strong wine, iiii.

roots of Aristoloch. longae, seeds of Ameos, A mixture
Cummin ana ss, of Cinnamon, i. ss, preserved Ginger, ii. of Beauer-stone, i.
of Turpentine q. s.

of red wine lb i. ss, macerated tosted bread herein, A draught.
add of Cinnamon, Nutmeg, ana i. strain them forth very well, and then add
very fine Sugar. The patient may then drink a good draught hereof often in the
morning.

Diagalangae, iii. Diacumini, old Triacle, Mithridate, An Electuary.
ana i. sir. of Mints q. s.

oil of Nard, Mastike, ana ii. oil of Mace, An Ointment.
Cammomile, Dill, ana iii. oil of Rue, Man's far, ana iii. ss, Nutmeg, ss.

flowers of red Roses, Cammomile, Mellilot, A Fomentation.
ana M i. ss, leaves of Wormwood, M ii. seeds of Linus, Fengreeke, ana i. ss,
seeds of Fennel, Annise, ana ss, boil these in water until the third part be
consumed.

Aristoloch. longae ss, flowers of Cammomile, Another.
Mellilot, ana M i. ss, red Roses, M ss, seeds of Cummin, Annise, Fennel, ana
i. ss, seeds of Fengreeke, Linus, ana i. leaves of Wormwood, M i. boil these
until the third part be consumed.

of tosted bread q. s. macerated in Malmesey, A Cataplasme.
juice of Mints, and Wormwood, q. s, add heereto of Nutmeg, ii. this does
mitigate the pain, vomit and hicket.

An Emplaister for the stomach.
Emplastri stomatici Gal. i. Cloves, Mace, Masticke, red Roses, seeds of
Annise, Fennel, ana i. of Galingale, dry Mints, ana ss, Ladani, ii. ss, oil
of Nard, Masticke, q. s.

A Quilt.
of the flowers of red Roses, dry Mints, Wormwood, ana ii. ss, Galingale,
Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, Lada^i ana i. ss. sew these in a red cloth, and apply
it to the stomach.

Another.
of Cummin infused in Vinegar, Cinnamon, ss, Aristo. longae, i. ss, of Nutmeg,
no iii. Mace, ii, ss, Diarrhod. abbatis, iii. put these in a linen cloth, and
apply it to the stomach.

An Appendix serving for the cure of CARDIALGIA, or pain of the stomach.
FIrst, the humors shall be made obedient unto nature, and then expelled out of
the body, in the mean time such things must be given as may mitigate the
pain, new Triacle is good for this purpose, or else, vi. Electuarij
Diaphoeniconis must be mixed with i. Philonij Romani. Then the stomach shall
be strengthened, and the distemper amended. The body shall be anointed with
the oil of Roses, Myrtle: If the disease were caused by worms, first they
shall be killed, and then thrust out of the body.

A method serving for the knowledge of the weakness of the stomach.
THe crudity or weakness of the stomach, is a disposition of the alteratiue
faculty, wherein either the aliment is not altered, or else not well concocted.
In the former there is a deprivation of the alteration of nutriments, in the
latter a deprauation of the alteratiue faculty. For if the stomach be in its
right temper, the nourishment therein received will remain pure, but if it be
oppugned by some cause contrary unto nature, the action of the alteratiue
faculty is depraved, and then the crudity of the stomach does follow.

The part affected.
The stomach with its faculty is affected: for all men herein agree, that the
stomach is the cause of the nutriments alteration; and then the faculty of the
stomach failing, and crudity of the stomach does follow by some external
cause, and sometimes this happens, though the faculty thereof be not depraved.

The Signs.
Slow and difficult concoction, the stomach does no^ boil after the
accustomed manner, and the quality of the nutriment does remain in the
stomach; sour belchings are frequent, and the stomach is surcahrged with
fumy vapors.

The Causes.
The stomach of such as have recovered of a long disease, is weak, and
sometimes so weak, that it neither is able to receive nourishment, and yet if
it does receive any, cannot well digest it. The relics of the disease left
behind, may be the cause of this, which may hinder the attractiue power that
the stomach either has, or ought to have: sometimes it has this attractiue
power, the body being very lean, and for this only cause desires nurtiment,
and cannot concoct it, by reason of the weakness thereof. Sometimes they that
are in perfect health (as most men may think) have a weak stomach, by reason
of a hot or cold, dry, or moist distemper, which peradventure may chance to
come single, but it cannot long hold out, unless other offending humors join
therewith. For the digestive faculty of the stomach being weakened, raw humors
must needs be gathered together either hot or cold, or else disturbing the
stomach by some outward quality, and then follows a loathing of meat, a
loading of the stomach, belchings and vomitings; and this is often caused by
phlegmy, and putrified humors; and then the relish which is communicated unto
the palate, is sweet, or watrish, and much spettle is voyded without coughing
or hemming; his belch is sour, his concoction is hindered, the stomach is
puffed up, and stretched some hours after meat, great gripings, and pains
are stirred up therein, whereof the dropsy, collicke, Iliaca passio, are
caused. Sometimes it is caused by choler, and a gnawing of the stomach is
felt, especially by fasting, a bitter humor is cast up by vomit, whereby the
mouth becomes bitter; and sometimes this disease is turned into the former,
namely Cardialgia, or pain in the stomach. If it be caused by a melancholy
juice, a sour taste is bred in the mouth. He is sad, fearful, and disquieted
with dreams, a panting is felt on the left side, the appetite for a time does
increase, and so it does become an hypocondriall melancholy, or falling
sickness, the muscles also of the calves are shrunk. Sometimes there happens a
crudity of the stomach when the faculty is not hurt, but is hindered by some
external error, as too much waking, exercises presently after meat, more
store of food taken in then can be well digested, or else some bad quality of
these meats. Sometimes it is caused by vicious humors, sent unto the stomach
from some other parts, as will happen by the suppression of monthly terms,
and hemroides. Likewise in diseases of the joints, the matter is often conveyed
unto the stomach, which is wont to be derived unto other parts.

Prognostiques.
That crudity is worst which is caused by ill nourishment; and it is bad in
those that do abound with choler, for it presently causes an ague; but daily
crudity must be avoided; for sundry long and sore diseases are bred thereof:
it is in a word the mother of all materaill diseases, as dropsy, Colicke,
Iliaca passio, flux of the stomach, and many other diseases of the like kind.
An evil complexion of the stomach if it be ancient, cannot be cured. They
who spet much, and cast up sour water, have a cold stomach.

A method serving for the cure of the weakness of the stomach.
THe air must incline to heat, and it will be good, if the patient were well
armed against injuries of the cold. His meat must be easy of digestion, and of
that, but a small quantity, for he must not take more then his stomach is able
to digest; neither must he receive any other meat in, until the former be
digested. Venison, hard beef and salt, all fat meats, dried fishes may not be
allowed; they also that are presently corrupted, and are windy, and either very
hot, or very cold, and of an evil savor, are unwholesome. Rear eggs with
Cinnamon or Masticke are good. He may drink good wine, but the unseasonable use
thereof is bad. Exercise presently after meat is not good; his sleep must not
be unquiet, and his head must be laid higher then the other parts of the body,
affections of the mind must be avoided, and he must be so merry, that he do
not transgress the limits of wisdom.

Sir. of Wormoood, Hyssop, Calamint, Mint, Preparer.
Oxymel compositum, squilliticum, waters of Mints, Wormwood, Fennel, Betony.
Sir. of the juice of Sorrel, Roses, Quinces, Gooseberries. waters of Sorrel,
Plantane, Roses. If weakness be caused by a cold distemper, they in the first
place may the strength of the stomach is hereby loosened; therefore be used;
if by a hot distemper, they in the latter place shall be used. He may not
drink lukewarm medicines, for whatsoever he takes, must either be hot or
cold.

The liver vein shall be opened, Emptier.
if the disease be troublesome, and come upon the patient on a sudden. Diaturb.
with rhab. Hiera picra, Hiera de agarico. Pillul. Alophang stomaticae. sir. of
the manifold infusion of Roses, rhab. cassia fistula, Myrobal. Kebuli, Emblici,
Bellirici, aloes washed, a vomit with Mulsa, or lukewarm water, wherein Radish
has bin boiled, and a little common Oil must be mingled with it. He may use
sundry nutriments at one time. He may use this vomit every day for the space of
4 or 5 days, and then Oxymel squillit. shall be added; for hereby, the phlegmy,
and other malign humors mixed therewith, may be driven out. Whilst there is
any offending matter remaining, gentle medicines shall be used: for strong
medicines do weaken the strength of the stomach.

Auerters.
Gentle Clysters, and sometimes sharp, even as occasion shall require, may be
used* Strong ligatures of the legs above the knees. Ventoses must be applied to
the buttock, hips, and sometimes to the nauill. Lotions of the feet and arms
with hot water. Opening of the hemroide vein: sweat and urine must be brought
out.

Hinderers.
Sir. of Quinces, Pomegranates, Troch. de Olibano, de terra sigillata.

Strengthners.
Triacle, Mithridate; Diarrhod. Abbatis, Aromaticum rosatum, diatrion pipereon,
Diaspoliticum, Diagalanga, Plirisarcoticum, Diaxyloaloes, Diacinnamomum,
Diacydonium, diacalamintha. Sir. of Mints, Hyppocras, Wormwood, Aqua vitae,
sir. of Wormwood. Orange-peels, preserved Ginger, preserved Galingale, conserve
of Rosemary flowers, long Pepper, Cinnamon, Mace, Cloves, Calamus aromaticus,
Roots of Cyp^rus, decoction of the wood Guaia^um, Wormwood, Mints, Nutmeg,
Masticke, Raisins, the skin of a Hare, whelpe, Cunny: also the palm of the
hand being very warm, may be laid upon the stomach. When he goes to bed,
he must first lie on the right side, then on the left, and at the length
again on the right. A sponge may be dipped in strong wine, wherewith the
stomach must be washed: some of the medicines for the stomach must first be
boiled in that wine. An ointment of Dialthaea, of the Oil of Wormwood, Mints,
Mace, Masticke, spices may be boiled in these. A cap made of the softest
feathers of a Goose, a medicine for the stomach of bombast well carded and
dipped in strong wine, and then it must be dried, at the length some Cinnamon,
Wormwood, Nutmeg, and the former spices may thereto be added. Ceratum
stomatichum Gal. being made of Galingale, Wormwood, Nutmeg, Cloves, Mints.
Sirupe of the juice of Quinces, Gooseberries, Sorrel, dry Roses, Acetosus
simplex, vinum granatorum. Conserve of Roses, Violets, pulpe of Quinces, also
the juice thereof. Diamargaritum frigidum, Diatragacanthum, Diatrion, sandal.
ambra citrina, burnt Iuory, Harts-horne, Corrall, waters of Sorrel, Roses,
Plantane, an ointment of the oil of Roses, Myrtle, Quinces, an ointment of
Roses, Violets, Ceratum sandal. of flowers of Pomegranats, Corrall, Sandalis,
Roses, Spodium, the rinds of Pomegranates. The former may be used, if a cold
matter be left behind, and if a hot matter do there remain, the former.
Things that are too cold, are dangerous.

A more particular method serving for the cure of the weakness of the
stomach.
sir. of Mints, Quinces, Wormwood, ana i. Oxymellis squillit. Mellis rosati
colati, ana ss, waters of Wormwood, A Iulep.
Fennel, Mints, ana iiii. Give iiii. in the morning, at four several times.

of the decoction of Barley and Radish, A Vomit.
vi. Oxymellis squillit. i. ss, oil of sweet Almonds, i. drink these off
lukewarm.

Diaturbith ^um Rhab. iii. of new Cassia, Bolus.
v. of fine Sugar q. s.

roots of Parsely, Buglosse, ana i. ss, Galingale, ii. ss, A Potion.
leaves of Baulme, Mints, ana M i. ss, seeds of Annise, ss, of scraped
Licorice, iii. of Raysins, the stones being taken out i. of Cinnamon, i. of
white and light Agaricke, iii. boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss, add
unto the strayning, Diacath. i. ss, sirupe of Orange-pills, ii.

Pills.
Pillul. Mastichinarum, Aloes, ana i. ss, of the sirupe of Mints q. s. make
hereof 8. pills.

Pills.
Hiera picrae, Gal. Pillularum stomaticarum, de Agarico, ana i. Rhab. electi,
ss, sir. of Wormwood, Mints, ana q. s. make hereof 8. pills.

Specierum aromatici rosati Gabrielis, ss, Dialangae, preserved Ginger, ana ii.
Mastike, Cinnamon, i. ss, of Cloves, Nutmeg, ana i. of fine Sugar dissolved in
the water of Wormwood, and Mints, ana q. s. the patient must eat one of these
one hour before meat, and after it drink a draught of wine.

Pills.
of Mastike, ii. Spikenard, ss, Aloes, iiii. Rhab. i. ss Agarici trochiscati,
i. ss, sirupe of Eupatorium, and Mints, ana q. s.

An Electuary.
Diamargarite^ calidi, ii. Aromatici rosati Gal. of Mithridate, ana i.
Diacydonites cum speciebus, i. sir. of Mints, q. s.

Pills.
of Mastike, Olibani, ana iii. make pills hereof, with the sirupe of Mints,
Give i. of this moystned in wine, in the morning, this does heat and dry the
stomach, and hinders the rheum falling down from the head, if he take it
morning and evening.

A mixture.
of the roots of Flower-de-luce, iii. of red Roses, iiii of dry Mints i. of
Mastike, ii. ss, flowers of Nutmeg; Cinnamon, ana ss, sir. of Pomegranats q. s.
for the disease caused by moisture.

An Electuary.
Sp. Aromatici rosati, ii, Diagalanga, i, of preserved Ginger, i. ss, of
Worme^eede, Nutmeg, ana ii. sirupe of Orange-pills, make this into a soft
Electuary.

A Fomentation.
of the roots of Galingale, ii. flowers of Cammomile Mellilot, ana M i. leaves
of Wormwood, Mints, ana M ii. of the best Cinnamon, Mace, Nutmeg, ana i. bruise
all these, and let them boil together in sweet and strong wine, until till
the third part be consumed, and wash the stomach herewith.

oils of Nard, Mastike, ana i. oil of Roses, An Vngent.
iii. oil of Quinces, i. ss, of Wax and Vinegar a little.

flowers of Cammomile, red Roses, ana M ss, leaves of Wormwood, Mints, ana M
i. Cinnamon, Cloves, A Cerate.
Mace, ana i. of Galingale, of the wood Aloes, Calami aromatici, ana i. ss, of
Mastike, ii. oil of Mints, q. s.

of dry Mints, Maioram, Wormwood, An Emplayster.
ana M i. of Mastike, Frankincense, ana i. of Mace, Ginger, Nutmeg, Cinnamon,
Cloves, ana iiii. Ca^ami odorati, of Galingale, of the wood Aloes, ana ii.
Galli^e musc. Ladani, ana ss, Turpentine and Wax, q. s. make a soft plaster
hereof; this will likewise serve for a medicine for the stomach.

Ceroti stomatici Galeni, i. ss, roots of Ciperus, An Emplayster.
i. of Saffron, ss. of Cinnamon, ii. of Mastike, ss, oil of Wormwood q. s.

of red Roses, M ss, of Wormwood, Mints, A Cataplasme.
ana M i. ss, boil these in strong Wine q. s. dippe a toast herein, and so
apply it, if the disease be caused by a hot matter.

sirupe of Violets, A Iulep.
Succory with Rhab. ana ii. waters of Endive, Borage, Violets, ana iiii.

sir, of Violets, ii. Roses, Pomegranats, Another.
ana i. waters of Violets, Buglosse, ana v.

Rhab. elect, i. Myrabol. citrinorum, ii. of Cassia, ss, Bolus.
of Spike* gr. iii.

of cleansed Barley, M iii. of scraped Licoras, A Potion.
vi. seeds of Gourd, Cowcumber, ana iii. of Sorrel, ii. of Licoras, iiii, of
Raysins, M ii. boil these in water q. s. until the third part be consumed.

sir. of Violets, Roses, ss, conserve of Roses, ii. ss, A mixture.
conserve of Borage, Roses, Violets, ana ss, sacchari rosace^, i. ss, sir. of
Pomegranats, i.

Lozenges.
Diatragacanthi frigidi, Diamargariti frigidi, ana i. ss, of the finest Sugar
dissolved in the water of Violets, make an Electuary.

A Fomentation.
of red Roses, M ii. leaves of Wormwood, M ss, seeds of prepared Coriander,
Sandalorum, Oranges, red Corrall, ana i. ss, boil these in water q. s. until
the third part be consumed, wash the stomach herewith.

An Unguent.
the oil of Roses, v. of Quinces, Myrtle, ana vi. of red Roses, red Corrall,
ana ss, sandal. citrinorum, i. of Wax and Vinegar a little.

A Cerate.
Cerati refrigerantis Gal. sandal. ana i. oil of Roses, Quinces q. s.

An Appendix serving for the weakness of the stomach.
FIrst of all we must try whether the matter will be cast out by a gentle
vomit. And if it be affected, the humors shall be made obedient unto nature.
But rather the medicines shall be given either cold or hot, but not lukewarm,
at the length, when as it may be discerned that the humors are concocted, the
matter shall be cast out with a purging medicine, and then such things shall
be administered as may strengthen the stomach, and always such things shall
be mixed with the former as may comfort the liver, although it be no way
hurt, for that does help the stomach in all its natural operations; for this
is the very beginning, and seat of the natural faculty. Always a care ought
to be had that nothing be received into the stomach, before the former be
well digested, for this is good not only for the cure of this disease, but
also for preserving health. If by consent of other parts, or if the matter be
conveyed unto the stomach by the whole body, that must first be purged, then
the stomach: At the length astringent medicines may be used, for they do
hinder the flux of the humors, for this purpose sirupe of Poppy is good. If
weakness of the stomach be caused by cold distemper, moist medicines shall
be administered, viz. Milk, flesh broth, moist baths, and such like. Yet a
care ought to be had, that the body be not too much moystned, because the
virtue of the stomach may hereby be dissolved. For diversity of causes there
be diversity of cures. If the disease be caused by weakness after a
sickness, especial care ought to be had, that no more nourishment be given
unto the patient then he can well digest; for otherwise there would be danger
of a relaps, or that he be violently seyzed on by this disease.

A method serving for the knowledge of the Obstruction of the Liver.
OBstruction of the liver is a binding, or straightning of the veins, or liver
passages: this disease is more common to this bowell, then unto any other, and
no marvel, for the liver is the storehouse of blood, from which all parts of
the body draw nourishment, and together with pure^ blood, gross and slimy
humors are generated in the liver, and seeing that the branches of the hollow
veins are knitted unto the Vena porta, in such sort, that the knitting, and
continuation does not come within the compass of our sight, and seeing the
nutriments of all the parts of the body must be conveyed through the port
veins, and also the hollow veins ends, which as we said before, are very
small, where they end in the livers substance, it is no wonder then, if by
reason of the passages and straightness, obstructions be oftener caused in
the liver, then in any other bowell, and this disease is the beginning of other
diseases. We do not in this chapter treat of that obstruction of the liver,
which is caused by an inflammation of that bowell, or by St. Anthonies fire, or
any other unnatural swelling, but here we treat of that disease which
follows the obstruction of the veins ends, by the stuffing in of some
substance, viz. windy or thickened spirits, or else some other ill humors.

The part affected.
This disease does breed in the extreme parts of the vessels of the hollow and
port veins, and they are terminated in the livers substance with thin ends,
and are knit one unto another with little bones, nevertheless through these, the
distribution of nourishment must be made throughout the whole body. This may
be perceived by the quality of the pain, and also the seat thereof: for the
patient feels a kind of loading and dull pain in the liver. This obstruction
is not in the substance of the liver, because no passages can there be
perceived that may be stopped, although we do not deny but that there may be
some passages by reason observed therein, yet these cannot be said to be
stopped.

The Signs.
There is a heaviness and stretching pain in the right side, and then most of
all to be perceived, when a man does exercise himself presently after meat.
No ague or tumor comes with it, unless it does wax sorer by continuance, for
every old obstruction does putrify, and by that means causes a Fever; he
draws breath with great difficulty, especially if he climb hilly places; the
color of the face is turned into another hiew, because the remote parts
deprived of their nutriment, the patients urine is thin and watery; If the
stopping be in the hollow parts of the liver, the parts of the liver are heavy
and dull presently after dinner; because the humors cannot so easily enter
into the substance of the liver, by reason of the straightnes of the passages.
The belly is sometimes loose, sometimes it is costiue.

The Causes.
The narrownes of the livers and veins passages is the cause of this disease.
And this happens unto some from their birth, and then the disease is
perpetual, and some sign thereof may be perceived at the infants birth, and
then upon every slight occasion there is a stopping of the liver. This disease
does hunt those most that are of a cold temper; yet for the most part
obstruction of the liver is caused by slymy and gross humors, which wind
themselves into the ends of the branches of Vena portae, from whence it is
conveyed unto the substance of the liver. Then about the right side of the
heart, a dull and loading pain is felt. This is likewise caused by gross and
viscous nourishments, when by immoderate use of baths, or exercise presently
after meat, they are caught into the liver. This is also caused by gross
humors which fall from the brain, or else being gathered about the bowels,
are in like manner conveyed unto the liver. Sometimes the use of opening
medicines, the stomach being full of crudities, does often cause this disease.
Sometimes again it is caused by thick and fumy vapors, whenas they have no
way out, because of their thicknes; and the patient is troubled not only with
a stretching, but a heaviness.

Prognostiques.
For want of nourishment, and because of the continuance of this disease, the
whole body is become thin; and by long obstruction of the liver many diseases
are generated in the body: for by this, a hard tumor without pain does arise,
an inflammation, Fever, putrefaction of humors, loosnes of belly, Iliaca
passio, collicke, dropsy, and yellow ^aundice. When cold humors are too long
retained in the liver, the substance of the liver is turned into a cold
distemper, whereby the dropsy is caused. If obstruction of the liver were at
the birth by reason of narrownes of passages, it cannot be cured: yet by good
ordering, the patient may be preserved from many diseases, which are wont to
follow this disease.

A method serving for the cure of the obstruction of the Liver.
THe air must be hot and clear, his diet such as may heat and rid
stopping; also those that do generate gross blood, must be avoided. In his
broths, the roots of Fennel, Parsley, Sperage with their seeds, the leaves of
Hyssop, Succhory, Peny-royall, Endive, Leeks, must be boiled. He must avoid
variety of meats; neither may he eat any thing, until that be digested which
was formerly received; and then also he must eat but sparingly. His drink
must be ptisan, thin and ancient wine. Exercise presently after meat is
unwholesome, but especially bathings, but an hour or two after, exercise with
moderation may be allowed. Sleeping in the day time, especially long sleeping
is not good, and his sleep in the night time may be the space of seven hours.
His belly must be kept loose. Accidents of the mind must be avoided, chiefly
anger, care and sadness, and all means must be used that may delight him.

Preparers.
Sir. Byzantinus, Agrimony, Wormwood, Mayden-haire. Oxymel simp. Compositum
Squilliticum, Oxysaccharum. Mel. rosatum, waters of Fennel, Sperage, Wormwood,
Agrimony, Parsely, Dodder. A decoction of the roots of Flower-de-luce, of the
greater Rubia, Asarum, Parsely, sea onyons, Hart's-tongue, Calamint, Sperage,
Hore-hound, Hyssop, Succhory, seeds of Annise, Fennel, Mayden-haire, Wormwood,
Dodder, Raisins; Cinnamon, Ciches, with a little Vinegar, and Honey. Sir.
Acetofus simplex. Of Succhory, with Rhab. Oxymel squilliticum, sir. de quinque
radicibus. sir. of Endive, and also the decotion thereof does assuage the
unnatural heat which always follows the obstruction of the liver. The water
of Endive, Succhory* Hops, Dodder, the decoction of red Ciches, Hops, fruits of
winter cherries, Dodder, Endive, Squinanthy, Chamaepitis, roots of grass,
Fennel. The first opening, cutting, and cleansing medicines may be used, if
the disease be caused by a cold, gross and slymy matter, and if neither ague,
thirst, or burning come withal. They in the second place may be used, if
heat, thirst, or ague follow the obstruction of the liver, from what cause
soever this disease does take its beginning, especial care ought to be had,
that the cure be not begun with strong opening medicines, lest we should
force the matter back unto the Liver.

The liver vein on the right arm shall be opened, Emptiers.
if the disease be not old, or if gross matter be very much mingled with
blood; for blood letting forces this matter out of its place. But in the
suppression of hemroides and monthly terms, a vein in the ankle shall be
opened. Electuarium I^dum, Diaphanicum. Hiera picra, Agaricus Trochiscatus.
Pillula Alophangina, Aggregatinae, of Agrimony, Pills of Rabarb, Agaricke.
Rhab. Cassia, Manua. A decoction of the Roots of Parsley, Fennel, Sperage, the
leaves of Wormwood, Hore-hound, Hyssop, Chamapitys, Chamadis, seeds of Annise,
Epithymon, Seen, Agaricke, Rhab, Turbith, Oxymel.

Trochi^ks of Rhab. Agrimony, Wormwood. Strengthners.
Diarrhod. abbatis; Aromaticum rosatum. sir. of Agrimony, Diacur^um, Dialaica;
a confection of Annise, Amber, Pistacia, Raisins, the three kinds of Endive.
The liver of a wolf. Rhab. the juice of sour Pomegranates, mixed with Oxymel,
Wormwood, Dodder, Agrimony; Succhory, Spikenard, Fumitary, Tarragon. Roots of
Ac^rus, Kneeholme, seeds of Annise, Lupines, bitter Almonds. An epitheme of
wine which is moderately astringent, wherein the roots of Cyperus, Asarum, the
leaves of Agrimony, Wormwood, Mayden-haire, flowers of Spike, Cassia lignea,
and Cinnamon, have been boiled. An unguent of the Oil of Spike, Wormwood,
Cinnamon, Wax, Vinegar, and Cassia lignea. An emplaister of Mellilote. The
common Diachylum, ireatum. Such medicines as are slymy and stipticke, must be
avoided, for they do rather increase then diminish the obstruction. The cure
of the Dropsy, Collicke, Iliaca passio, and flux of the belly, which are
accidents following this disease, may be cured, if the Reader have recourse
unto the chapters which do treat of them severally.

A more particular method, serving for the cure of the Obstruction of the Liver.
A Clyster.
of the roots of Asarum, Angelica, ana vi. of Agrimony, Wormwood, Hops,
Dodder, ana M i. seeds of Annise, i. winter Cherries, ss, of red Ciches, iii.
of white and light Agaricke, ii. ss, boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss,
add to the strayning, Diaturbith with Rhab. vii. oil of Wormwood iii.

Bolus.
the pulpe of new extracted Cassia, i. Rhab. electi, Agarici trochiscati. ana
i. ss, a trochisk of Agrimony, i. of the finest Sugar q. s.

A Iulep.
sirupe of Succhory with Rhab. sir. Byzantini, Acetosi compositi, Agrimony, ana
i. water of Dodder, sweet wine, ana vi. Or else

Another.
Oxymellis compositi, ii. squillit. i. of the decoction of Agrimony, seeds of
Endive, roots of Fennel, Sperage, Parsley, Taragon, x. with Sugar q. s.

A Potion.
of Gentian, Asarum, ana ss, Agrimony, Mayden-haire, Endive, Dodder,
Schamaedris, ana M i. seeds of Carrowaies, red Ciches, Fennel, ana iii.
Cinnamon, Mace, Rhab. ana i. ss boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss, add
to the strayning Oxymellis squillit. iii. This is good, if the disease be
caused by a cold matter.

Another.
the roots of Fennel, Parsely, Sperage, ana i. ss, Dodder, leaves of
Wormwood, Agrimony, ana M ss, seeds of Fennel, Annise, ana ss, of scraped
Licoras, iii. of Raysins the stones being taken out, i, Iuiubarum, Sebesten,
ana no 8. senoe Alex. i. of white and light Agaricke, ss, Rhab. electi. ii. of
Ginger, sali^ gemmae, ana i. boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss, add to
the strayning sirupe Byzantini, iii.

Radicum eringij conditarum, A mixture
ii. preserved Orange-pills, i. preserved Galingale, flowers of Elder
preserved, ana ss, Diarrhod. abbatis, troch. de Rhab. ana ii. sir. of Agrimony,
q. s. Give hereof ii. or iii. before meat.

Diacath. Diaphanic. ana iii. Agarici troch. Rhab. electi. ana i. sir.
Byzantini, i. water of Endive, Succhory, A draught
ana i. ss.

Pills of Rhabarb, i. of Agaricke, ss, Diagridij, Pills.
gr. iii. sir. Byzantini q. s. make hereof 8. pills.

Benedictae laxatiuae, iii. Rhab. i. sir. of Agrimony, A draught.
i. water of Endive iii.

Sp. Diarrhod. abbatis, ii. Troch. de Rhab. ss, Lozenges.
roots of Aristol. rotunda, Asarum, ana ss, seeds of Fennel, Annise, Rhab.
Cinnamon, ana gr. xii. of fine Sugar, dissolved in Dodder and Agrimony water q.
s.

Troch. de Rhab. iii. Dialaccae, A mixture.
Diarrhod. abbatis Dianisi, ana i. ss, roots of asarum, Licoras, ana ss, of a
Woolfs liver, iiii, seeds of Annise, i. juice of Fumitory made into the form
of a Trochiske, iii. ss, sir. of Agrimony, Byzantini ana q. s.

leaves of Wormwood, M i. Dodder, M i. ss, A draught.
Elder flowers, M ss, Rhab. elect. asarum, ana ii. infuse these for the space
of 24 hours, in strong Wine, this may be drunk every other day.

Troch. de rhab. of Agrimony, ana iii. Give i. hereof with the juice of Endive,
Oxysacchari simp. i, A Powder.
water of Agrimony, Dodder, ana ss.

of the ointment of Martiatus, oil of Spike, An Ointment.
Wormwood, ana ss, Spike, Cinnamon, ana i. of Vinegar, and Wax, a small
quantity.

flowers of Camomile, Mellilot, An Epitheme for the Liver.
ana M i. leaves of Agrimony, Wormwood, M ^. ss, roots of Cyperus, i. Cinnamon,
Spike ana i. Cassia lignea, ss, Cummin, ss, Branne, i. boil these in a
sufficient quantity of Wine, until the third part be consumed.

A Cataplasme.
flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M i. ss, Wormwood, Agrimony, Dodder,
Sothernwood, ana M i. red Ciches, i. seeds of Endive, Parsely, ana ss,
Spikenard, ii. ss, boil these in water q. s. and then add thereto oil of
bitter Almonds q. s.

A Bath.
roots of wild Mallows, iii. Agrimony, Dodder, Endive, Maioram, Fennel,
Fumitory, Violets, ana M iii. flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M ii. ss,
seeds of Fengreeke, vi. boil these a little while in water q. s. this does
mollify the gross humors which are the cause of the obstruction, and also
makes them subject unto nature.

A Cerate.
an Emplayster of Mellilot, i. ss, roots of Asarum, ss, of Mastike, i. of dry
Wormwood, i. ss, oil of Elders q. s.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the Obstruction of the Liver.
FIrst of all, the humor which causes this Obstruction, shall be made obedient
unto nature by subtle and cutting medicines, and as soon as we perceive that
they are concocted, then they shall be turned out of the body, by a purging
medicine. Then we will endeavor to take away such things as do stop the
passages, and when they be removed, the distemper shall be amended, the bowels
strengthened, and the corrupt matter that was left behind, shall be expelled,
and the accidents, if any do molest the body, shall be assuaged. These
medicines must be often used, because the disease is stubborn; also care
ought to be had, that the first and second digestion be good, for which
purpose his diet shall be thin as well at dinner as supper. They who are
subject unto this disease, must eschew such meats as do breed a clammy and
gross juice. If the disease be caused by a hot and gross matter, the
decoction of Endive, Succhory, Sorrel, Rhab. also the sir. of Succhory with
Rhab. may be given. Or else roots of Fennel, Kneeholme, Parsely, Grass, ana,
i. of Endive, Succhory, Dodder, Mayden-haire, ana M i. seeds of Endive,
Cowcumber, red Ciches, ana ss, of Dill, i. boil these in water q. s unto lb i.
ss, add unto the strayning sirupe Byzantini iii. make hereof a sirupe.

A method serving for the knowledge of the weakness of the Liver.
THe weakness of the liver comes by distemper, without any manifest evil in
that bowell: the proper and principal faculty of the liver is the blood, which
does come to it by a property of its own substance, and cannot be weakened on
a sudden by any distemper; for the distemper must needs take deep root,
before it can hurt the substance of the liver, or dissolve the strength
thereof; but by what distemper soever this is caused, the liver does not
perform its proper duty, unless it be by halfes; for the excrements that are
avoided, do resemble water, wherein flesh newly killed has been washed, and
so long as the proper action, or substance of the liver is not weakened, the
action hereof will be somewhat corrupted, but not taken away, so that we
cannot say that the action of the liver is hurt by every distemper, but only
by that which by continuance of time has weakened the substance of the liver:
and the reason why these excrements are voyded by stool, rather then by any
other way, is this, because it does usually expel the juice being imperfectly
changed by the liver, because of its weakness through the bowels, because it
is a nearer way then by the passages of the urine, through which sometimes these
superfluities, which do resemble the water wherein flesh newly killed has
been washed, are conveyed; and such men are sometimes deceived, that always
say the fault of this is in the stone. Sometimes clear blood is voided by
stool, either without the bloody flux, or any distemper of the liver; and this
does chiefly happen. when as some vein is broken appertaining to the liver.
Sometimes blackish blood is voyded by stool, which does resemble black
choler, and yet it does differ from it, because the clothes that are dipped
therein will be of a black color: this is caused, when as some vein in the
upper parts is burst. Oftentimes also blood is voyded at the stool, because
some accustomed euacuation is stayed, or because some member is maimed, and as
then it is suddenly avoided in great plenty, so it does suddenly cease, coming
again at its proper seasons. Sometimes also it is voyded that way by the
hemroides, and sometimes by an impostume of the liver, or else some ulcer
therein bredde. All which shall be spoken of in their peculiar chapters, for
here we do not treat of such voydings, because they do not come through the
only default of the liver. Therefore among all these excretions of blood, that
alone, wherein the stool does resemble the water, wherein flesh has been
washed, is here to be treated of, and shows that the liver is hurt in its
own essence, without any manifest hurt in the bowell.

The part affected.
The liver is chiefly affected, as will appear by his own functions hurt, in
the color of those that are voyded. For by reason of the weakness hereof, the
blood is not well digested, and then the blood that is voyded by stool, is
waterish: this shows that the nutriment was well concocted in the stomach,
and begun to be concocted in the liver, but not perfected, because of the
livers weakness. This disease is an accident which does appertain unto the hurt
of the action of the livers blood-sucking faculty, which is very much weakened.

Signs.
By what distemper soever weakness of the liver does come, it is so rooted, that
it does scatter the spirits native heat, and dissolve the strength and actions
of the liver, insomuch that it does send forth waterish blood, and half
concocted without pain, and in great abundance. Always the color of the
patients body, especially the face, is of a sad hue, and somewhat stained with
bleaknes and greenness.

The Causes.
A cold distemper is the cause of the livers weakness: and if the distemper be
but slight; the color of the face is white; that which is voyded, stinks a
little, small store of excrements are voyded, the body waxes cold, and swells,
unless the heat of the heart do amend the cold distemper of the liver; the
patients urine is thin, and there is neither Fever nor thirst. Sometimes it
is caused by a hot distemper, and if it be but flight, the excrements are
stinking, and are mixed with thick choler, and are of diverse colors, the
urine is read, thirst, and also a Fever ensues: the tongue is rough, a
yellow color does break out in his face, all his body is too hot, especially
the palms of his hands, and soales of his feet, sharp vapors are often felt
to go over the skin, and choleric humors are voyded by vomit: their
bellyes for the most part are bound, and the heat is the cause hereof. But as
often as a cold distemper has altered the substance of the liver, he seldom
does thirst, but rather moistnes is felt in his mouth; his stool is great,
watery and thin. The contraries of these do happen in a dry distemper* for the
body is become drier and harder, and at the length the strength of the liver is
dissolved, and the face hereby is stained with a sea palenes; his stool at the
first is liquid like cream, and besides other accidents, the flux of the liver
does concur, wherein, as was said before, the excrements are waterish, and
like unto that water wherein raw flesh has been washed. And these excrements
are so often changed, as the distemper of the liver is changed.

Prognostiques.
If weakness of the liver has been of long continuance, it is scarce to be
cured; and in time it is changed into an evil habit of body, from whence a
weakness of the whole body is caused, or else it does turn into a dropsy,
especially if this disease be caused by a cold distemper. Hereof comes a
melting away first of the humors, then of the flesh, and lastly the whole
body. Sometime blood does gush out at the Nose, sometime at the wound and
hemro^de vein, and sometimes through the passages of urine.

A method serving for the cure of the weakness of the stomach.
A Temperate air is good; meats that are easy of digestion, and do moderately
heat, as Capons, Hens, Pheasants, Partridges, Chickens, Larks, may be
permitted. Amongst Pot Herbs, Fennel, Sage, Hyssop, Sauory, and Endue is good.
His broth must be seasoned with Cloves, Cinnamon, Galingale: amongst fruits,
Raisins are best. His drink may be thin and odoriferous wine: moderate
exercise is better then ease. His sleep must be moderate, and no perturbations
of the mind must annoy him.

Preparers.
Sir. of Agrimony, of Wormwood, Endive, Succhory, with Rhab. The waters of
Succhory, Endive, Agrimony, Dodder. A decoction of the roots of Asarum,
Fennel, Parsley, Succhory, Endive, Cyperus, flower-de-luce, Wormwood, Organ,
Mint, Agrimony, Roses, Calamint, Dodder, Hyssop, seeds of Cummin, Annise,
Barley, Calamus aromaticus, Cinnamon, Raisins, Honey, and Vinegar.

Diaprunum solutinum, Electuarium Indum, Emptiers.
Electuary of the juice of Roses. Hiera picra; Tamarindi, Seen, Rhab. Agaricke,
Myrabol. If cold or chollericke humors arising by a cold or hot distemper of
the liver, stick fast in the substance of the liver, or in the veins
neere-adioyning, and if nature do not expel these, they must be euacuated by
convenient medicines, whereto such shall be added that may strengthen the liver.

Diarrhod. Abbatis, Diamargaritum frigidum. Dialucca, Strengthners.
Diacurcuma, with the water of Wormwood, sir. of Agrimony. Electuarium diatrion
sandal. Troch. de Rhab. of Agrimony, of Wormwood, Saccharum rosaceum: Phylonium
Romanum; Rhab. The liver of a Wolf; Snayles flesh, sir. of Wormwood, Agrimony,
with their waters. Water distilled out of Snayles; water of Barley, wherein
Succory and Endive must be boiled. Dodder, Raysins, Pistacium, Endive,
Succhory. Wormwood, Agrimony, Spike, Squinanthum. Cinnamon, Calamus
aromaticus, Myrrh, Vnicorns-horne, the shauings of iuory, Honey, and the water
thereof. Turpentine, does wipe away that which is venomous and putrified. An
epitheme, which in the winter must be given hot, in the summer, cold, with the
waters of Roses, Sorrel, Lettuce; Water Lillies, red Sandals,
Diarrhod-Abbatis, Diatrion sand. Camphyre. A fomentation of the decoction of
Roses, Sorrel, Cammomyle, Wormwood. An ointment of the oil of Roses:
Water Lillies, Quinces, Masticke, Camphyre, red and white Sandals, Vinegar and
Oil of Wormwood; dippe wool in these, and lay it unto the region of the
liver. Diagalanga, Dianisum, Diacalamintha, Diacinnamomum, Troch. de Rhab.
Saccharum salui^, the water of Honey distilled. sir. of Succhory, water of
Endive, Dodder, Succhory. Wormwood, Agrimony, Cassia lignea, Cinnamon,
preserved Acorus. The liver of a Wolf, Nardus, Celtica, Squinanthy; an
epitheme of the decoction of Cloves, Cinnamon, Squinant, Agrimony, roots of
Asarum, seeds of Fennel, Annise, Amie, whereunto Diagalanga, Diacinnamorum,
the waters of Agrimony, Dodder, with a little Vinegar. An ointment of the oils
of Nard, Masticke, Spike, Wormwood, the wood of Aloes, Mastike, Cloves,
Cinnamon, juice of Agrimony. Ceratum stomaticum Gal. A Cerate of the root of
Asarum. Flower-de-luce, Squinant, Wormwood, Agrimony, Mellilot, Mastike,
Myrrh, the Flower of the seeds of Hops, Fengreeke, oils of Masticke, Roses,
Nard, oil wherein the roots of Elecampane, Bitter-wort, wild Galingale have
been steeped. Dialalca, Diacurcuma, sirrupe of Wormwood. The liver of a
Wolf, Saccharum rosatum, Spodium. An Ointment of the oil of Wormwood. Nard
the roots of Elecampane, Galingale, and Fower-de-luce, must be boiled in the
oil. If the disease be caused by a hot distemper, the former shall be used; and
if any of them be too hot, they may be qualified with Endive water. If the
disease be caused by a cold distemper, we may use those in the second place:
if it be caused by moystnesse, they in the last place may be prescribed. Some
of these above mentioned, may be given, be the cause either hot, moist, or
cold.

A more particular method serving for the cure of the weakness of the Liver.
A Iulep.
sir. of Wormwood, Agrimony, i. ss, of Endive, Oxymellis compositi, ana ss,
water of Agrimony, Endive, Centory the less, ana iiii.

A Potion.
roots of Angelica, Fennel, Parsley, ana i. Aristolochiae rot. Galingale, ana
ss, Agrimony, Sage, Fumitory, ana M i. ss, of Mints, Wormwood, ana M ss, of
Licoras, v. Rhab. ii, senae Alex. i. of white and light Agaricke, ii. of
Ginger, i. boil these in water q. s. unto lb i, ss, add to the strayning sir.
of Agrimony, iii.

Pills of Agaricke, Cochiarum, Pills.
of Rhab. ana i. of the sir. of Agrimony q. s. make hereof 8. Pills.

Diagalaengae, i. ss, Trochiske, of Wormwood, Lozenges.
i. seeds of Endive, i. of fine Sugar, dissolved in Betony water q. s.

Trochisc. de rhab. ss, of Wormwood, An Electuary.
li. Dialaccae, i. ss, aureae Alex. i. roots of Asarum, Aristoloch. rot. of the
liver of a Woolfe, ana i. ss, add hereto sir. of Agrimony q. s.

roots of Asarum, ii. Licoras, seeds of Annise, Parsley, A Compound.
ana i. of Raysins, i. of bitter Almonds, vi. troch. de absynthio, ii. sir. of
Wormwood q. s.

Aromatici rosati, Gab. Diagalanga, Diarrhod* abbatis, Another.
ana ii. of Licoras, i. of Raysins, i. ss, seeds of Annise, i. ss, of the liver
of a Wolf dried ii. ss, conserve of Rosemary flowers, i. ss, of preserved
Orange-pills ss. sir. of Agrimony q. s.

leaves of Agrimony, Wormwood, ana M i. ss, of Spikenard, flowers of Cammomile,
ana M i. ss, of Rosemary, A Fomentation.
M i. Cinnamon, i. ss, boil these in an equal quantity of Wine and water.

oil of Wormwood, Mastike, ana ss, of Spikenard, An Ointment.
Roses, ana ii. of Cloves, Cinnamon, ana i, ss, juice of Agrimony, i. of Wax
an Vinegar q. s.

flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M i. ss, seeds of Lupines, ss, leaves of
Wormwood, Agrimony, M i. ss, A Cataplasme.
of of Roses, M ss, add oil of Wormwood hereto, and boil them until they
be soft. These are good, if the disease be caused by a cold matter.

sirupe Violets, ii. Acetosi simp. et compositi, A Iulep.
ana i. water of Endive, Dodder, Agrimony, ana iii. mix these.

roots of Fennel, Sperag, A Potion.
Parsley ana i. leaves of Grounsell, M i. ss, leaves of Succhory, Endive,
Chamepitis, Dodder, Agrimony, M i. seeds of Annise, ss, Licorice, iii. Raysins,
i Rhab. ii. ss, Agaricke, i. ss, Cinnamon, iiii. boil these in a sufficient
quantity of water unto lb i. ss, add to the strayning sir. of Succhory with
Rhab.

Another.
of cleansed Barley, M iii. of Endive, Succhory, Acrimonij, ana M i. ss, of
Lettuce, M ss, seeds of Endive, Gourd, Melons, ana ss, of Licorice, v. flowers
of Violets, M i. boil these in water q. s. until the third part be consumed,
add unto lb i. ss. of the strayning, sir. of Succhory, with Rhab. iii.

Bolus.
of Venice Turpentine washed in Endive water, ss, seeds of Endive, ii. Rhab.
electi* i. Conserve of Roses, ss, of Sugar q. s.

Lozenges.
Conserve of Roses, ii. Diarrhod. abbatis ^ine musco, Diatragacanthi frigidi,
ana i. ss. of a Wolfs liver, ii. of fine Sugar dissolved in Betony water q. s.

Opiates.
Diarrhod. abbatis, ii. Trochisc. de Rhab. seeds of Endive, Diatrion sandal.
Diamargariti frigidi. ana i. ss, of Raysins, i. sir. of Succhory, with Rhab. q.
s.

A Powder.
of a Wolfes liver, i. ss, roots of Succhory, ii. Schenanthi, i. of
Harts-borne, ss, Licorice, i. ss, Rhab. ii. ss, of Spikenard, gr. xii. Give i.
hereof with the water of Honey.

Bolus.
of a Wolfes liver i. Rhab. ii. Spikenard, ss, Venice Turpentine, washed in
Endive water q. s. he must take one lump hereof every other day.

A Fomentation.
of red Roses, flowers of Cammomile, Succory, Broadleafe, ana M i. ss, of the
tops of Wormwood, M i. of red and white French wheat, ana vi. of Camphore, ii.
ss, Succhory, Endive M i. ss, boil these in water.

oil of Violets, i. of Roses, ss, of Cammomile, vi. of Wax and Vinegar, a
little quantity. These are good, if the dis- be caused by a hot matter.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the weakness of the Liver.
Weakness of the Liver for the most part is caused by a cold distemper, when
it does succeed immoderate heat, whether the attractiue, retentiue, alteratiue
faculty be made weak, or whether all at once be weakened, as for the most part
it happens; because when the natural faculty is weakened, all the other
faculties are weakened: therefore this distemper shall be moderated with such
as do moderately: and to the former medicines such shall be added, as do
strengthen the liver, and also open the obstruction. But if this distemper be
nourished by great plenty of raw humors, they shall be first made obedient unto
nature, and then cast out; and then the liver shall be streng^hned, and the
rel^ques amended. But if it be a dry distemper, such as restore natural
moisture, as baths and milk, may be used: but as concerning the weakness of
the liver that is caused by a tumor, as St. Antonies fire, Schirrus, adema, or
inflammation, or else because of some great ulcer, or else by too frequent going
to stool, no mention has been made of them, because they shall be treated of
hereafter, and the cure of them shall also be specified. Sirupe of Agrimony,
Diatrion sandal are most in use for the weakness of the liver, because they
do strengthen the retentiue, attractiue, alteratiue, and expulsive faculty of
the liver, and all these sympathize; for if one be affected, presently the rest
suffer.

A method serving for the knowledge of the tumor of the SPLEEN both hard and
soft.
THe tumor of the Spleen is often caused, when as the inflammation there of is
not well cured. Sometimes it happens that the spleen is soon hardened, and
swells even as the liver does, (although it has a thinner substance then the
liver) because his nutriment is thick, and besides the spleen must receive
the dregs of blood, and his more earthy and impure part. And because of the
thinness of the substance of the spleen, it does so grow and swell, that it
does fill up all the left side of the belly, and so stops the midriffe, that it
cannot be raised up, or thrust down, when it should serve for breathing;
whereby oftentimes great sighings are caused in the sleep, as also difficulty
of breathing. Also the liver is soon hardened; because it has a close
substance, and small veins, whereby it does happen that they that have a
grosser substance, will with more ease stick in their passages, and so in
conclusion wax hard.

The part affected.
The part affected is the spleen, which may be perceived by the loading pain
in the spleen region.

Signs.
A tumor and loading pain is felt in the spleens region, by reason of the
plenty of matter. Sometimes this tumor is hard, sometime loose, which
sometimes fills the whole side, and part of the matter is sometime spread abroad
into the kell or cawle wherein the bowels are lapt; and sometimes it is
enclosed in the spleenes rooms. If the patient does run much, or else
exercise himself but moderately, he does breathe with diffiulty; the like also
happens, if he do rather lie on his right side then left; because this bowell
hangs not so much, neither is the Diaphragma so crushed by the bigness of the
bowell. They who are troubled with this disease, do not well concoct their
meat, and yet they have good stomachs: great store of spettle, and many
windinesses are generated: the latter of these do cause rumbling, and wauing
in the left side; their bellies are stiff; also layzines does cocurre; their
dreams are troublesome, and their heads heavy. From hence fear, and wearines
of living longer does ensue. Their bellies for the most part are bound, but
when the matter is more corrupted, and does begin to rage, as it were in the
body, then all the aforesaid signs are more manifest. The color of the face is
vitiated, and the whole body is corrupted by them; whereby the mouth stinks,
the gummes are eaten, and do part from the teeth, the place underneath the
eylid swells, blood breaks forth, but chefly at the nose, the feeet swell, a
little before night; many black spots, and evil ulcers scarce to be cured, do
appear upon the Hands, and Legs; especially if blood has not been voyded at
the nose: at the length he does sleep very disquietly, and the patient does
draw his breath with great trouble, and in the night time he snorts much,
especially at the forepart of the night.

The Causes.
It is caused for the most part by melancholy humors, which are the dregs of
blood, and are caught into the spleen from the veins of the body, and there
remain for a long time. Or else it is caused, because all the veins of the
body do flow with such melancholy blood; for this bowell by nature is
appointed to receive it; or it is gathered in the spleen in so great
abundance, that the passages are stopped, through which this excrement is thrust
out of the spleen into the stomach, or belly. Sometimes such store hereof is
gathered in the spleen, that it does stretch the whole substance thereof: So
that when such plenty is therein gathered, first a loose tumor is bredde, and
then remaining long in the bowell, because of the weakness of the expulsive
faculty, or else for some other cause, in time by force of heat it does grow
thick and hard, whereby great abstruction of the veins and passages are
caused, through which the spleen was wont to be purged: in time also this
matter does grow hard, and hereof is caused the Schirrhus of the spleen. This
also happens in the inflammation of the spleen, whenas such medicines are
applied, that are astringent above measure, or else dissolve the strength too
much. Sometimes it is caused by watery and phlegmy humors, derived thither from
some other place, as may be perceived in those who have escaped long, cold and
moist diseases.

Prognostiques.
At the first, while the tumor is increasing, the cure is not so bad: but if
it be once ripened, he cannot be cured. Yet there is less danger in the tumor
of the spleen then liver, yet his events are sundry; for in some sometimes it
is diminished, and then again it is increased, and they are disquieted with
the aforesaid troubles; in some, the tumor continues hard, and that without
any inconvenience, though it does last for many years, if it swell not unto a
great bigness. And it often turns into a dropsy, slypperines of bowels,
consuming of the body, and a quartane ague; all which griefs are not easily
cured: so that at the length a consumption, a canker, scabs, and semi-tertian
Fever torments the patient.

A method serving for the cure of the swelling of the spleen.
THe air must be clear and bright, his meat must be such, as has an
opening force, and that is soon concocted, and does breed good blood: but such
as do breed gross and slymy juice, must be eschewed, viz. Porke, Beef, and
hare. His diet must be slender, and he may eat for his sauce, the flowers of
Capors; his drink must be fine wine, which must be allayed with water, wherein
hot iron has been often quenched, and he must abstain from drinking water;
moderate exercise is good before meat: not inferior to this are bathings and
sweatings. His sleep must be moderate, and not presently after meat^. His
belly must be kept loose; pertiurbations of the mind must be shunned, because
they do hinder concoction.

Syrup of Epithymon, Fumitary, Scolopendria, Preparers
Oxymel simplex, Compositum, Squilliticum. sir. Acetosus simplex, de
calamintha. sir. de duabus et quinque radicibus, sir. of Apples. The waters of
Endive, Scolopendria, Tamariscus, the herb Citarch. A decoction of
Sarsaparilla. A decoction of the rinds and roots of broom, Tamariscus, Capons,
Succhory, Endive, Danewort, Rosemary, the seeds of Parke-leaues, Purslane,
Centory the less: he may for many days use these present remedies, and those
that follow; because this melancholy humor is with great difficulty purged.

The Basilica vein of the left side shall be opened by fits, Emptiers*
if the patients strength can endure it; otherwise the vein that goes to the
middle or little finger shall be opened: yet if the disease be ancient, a vein
shall not be opened; for hereby the tumor would grow harder. Pillul. aureae
Aggregatiuae, Pills of Agaricke, Fumitary. Pillulae de lapide armeno, Cyaneo,
confectio hamech, Hiera picra, Diacol. Diaphaenicum, Diacol. Diaphae. Diacath.
diasena, N. Seen, Epith. Polypod. quercinum, Myrabol. Indi, Clysters. But they
shall then especially be used, when the obstruction is in the lower part of the
bowell, and the tumor sticks fast therein. Also diversity of medicines must
be used, lest nature be too much acquainted with one, and because of the
stubbornes of this disease, purging medicines must be often given.

A decoction of Sarsaparilla, Auerter^.
a fomentation of the leaves of Mallows, Tamariscus, Scolopendria, Citarch,
roots of Caper-trees, seeds of Linus, Fengreeke, the flowers of broom.
Anoyntment of Althaea, of Agrippa de, arthanita. An ointment of the Oil of
Lillies, Capers, sweet Almonds, Hens and Goose-grease, Butter, the marrow of a
Hearts or Calves leg, the juice of Cyclamen, Brioniae, Gum Ammoniacke
dissolved in Vinegar, also an ointment of the Oil of Capers fat of Cammels.
Squilla boiled in the Oil of Capers, whereto the Roots of Lillies must be
added. A Cerate of Hyssop, of the oil of Tiles, Capers, sweet Almonds. A
Cataplasme of the leaves of Danewort, Mallows, march Mallows, Bears foot,
Figs, roots of white Lillies, Danewort. squilla, boiled in strong wine, and
oil. An ointment of Gum Ammoniacke, dissolved in Aceto squillit. the marrow
of Hearts and Calves, the fat of a Ducke, the grease of an Estrich, of a
Cammell, with Wax Butter and Vinegar. An Emplayster compounded with Mellilot,
Diachylum simplex, Magnum, de Mucilaginibus. An Emplayster of the oil of
Tiles, and Gum Ammoniacke.

Strengthners.
Diarrhod. abbatis, troch. of Agrimony, Capers, Cancamum, Triacle, Diamuscum
dulce et amarum. Aromaticum rosatum, Diacapparum. Electuary of Bay berries, a
decoction of Tamariscus, leaves of Willows, flowers of broom, Scolopendria,
roots of Caper trees, Danewort, Broom seeds, Endive, Rosemary, Epithymon.
Sarsaeparillae i. with the powder of Tamariskes, also Capers, and
Scolopendrium. A Fomentation with the flowers of Cammomile, seeds of Cummin,
Rue, Annise, leaves of Penny-royall, Rue, Hops, Dill, Cammomile. A Brick heat
red hot, and quenched in very sharp Vinegar, the fume hereof must be
received, with a cloth, and so laid to the region of the liver. An Unguent of
the oil of Capers, Rue, Mastike: an Emplayster of leaven; Emplayster of Gum
Ammoniacke, Oppoponax, Cucumeris asinini, Capers, and Vinegar* Cupping-glasses
with scarification shall be applied unto those veins, which look black about
the spleen. Or in stead of these, bloodsuckers shall be applied to those parts,
and the vein shall be opened. Also an actual cautery may be used. When the
hardness of the spleen is softened by the former medicines, these discussing
medicines shall be used, and then softners must be again used. But such
medicines as resolve too much must not be used.

A more particular method, serving for the cure of the tumor of the SPLEEN.
sir. Byzantini, Fumitary, A draught.
Oxymellis simp. ana i. of Calamint, i. ss, water of Fumitary, Hops, Parsely,
ana iiii.

roots of Cyclamen, ss, roots of Willows, i. rinds of the roots of Capers,
Tamariske, ana iii. of Dodder, A Potion.
M i. of Seen, iii. of Licorice, ss, seeds of Annise, Fennel, ana iii. boil
these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss, add the strayning sir. Acetosi comp. i.

rinds of the roots of Capers; Tamariske, roots of Danewort, ana i. of
Fumitary, Succhory, Hops, ana M i. ss, Another.
of Maydenhaire, Thyme, Cetrach, ana M i. Epithymi, M ss, of Licorice, iii.
seeds of Annise, ss, Fennel, ii. senae Alex. Polipodij quercini. ana i, ss, of
white and light Agarick, iii. Ginger, i. flowers of Borage, Broom, ana M i.
boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss, add to the strayning sir. Acetosi
compositi, iii.

Confect. ^amech, iii. Diasenae, i. Diacath. i. ss, A draught
sir. of Epithymum, i. water of Scolopendria, iii.

Pillul. Indarum, foetidarum, Pills.
Agarici troch. ana i. Pills of Rhab. ss, de lapide lazuli gr. vi. sirupe of
Epithymum q. s. make hereof 7. or 8. Pills, and he may take of them twice in a
month.

Pulueris sancti, i. ss, A draught.
Diacath. iii. of the common decoction, iii.

Troch. of Capers, ss, flowers of Broom, Another.
M ii. rinds of Tamariske, i. infuse these for the space of 24. hours in lb i.
ss. of wine, he must drink of this strayning two hours after he has taken
some of the following Electuary.

An Electuary.
Diacurcumae, ss, Dianisi, Diacaster^i, ana i. ss, of ancient Triacle, ii.

Opiates.
the rinds and roots of Capers, Broom, Tamariske, i. ss, Epithymi, Cetrach,
ana ii. of Cinnamon, ii. conserve of Borage, i. ss Aromatici rosati Gab. of
Mithridate, ana i. sir. of Fumitary q. s.

Lozenges.
Troch. de Cappare, de Eupatorio, ana ss, rinds of the roots of Tamariske,
Sarsaeparillae, ana ii. roots of Ruscus, i. Rhab. i. ss, of fine Sugar,
dissolved in the decoction of Sarsaparilla, he may take one of these in one
day.

A Fomentation.
roots of Asarum, Cyclaminis, ana i. rinds of Tamariske, roots of Capers, ana
iii. Menthastri, Wormwood, Origan, Centory the less, Mercury, Fumitary,
Scolopendriae, ana p. i. flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M i. seeds of
Cummin, Carrowaies, ana ss, seeds of Linus, Fengreeke, ana i. boil these in a
sufficient quantity of Wine and water, unto a softness, dippe a sponge herein,
and apply it to the region of the liver.

An Ointment.
oil of Tiles, Rue, Capers, Juniper, ana ii, oil of Cammomile, ss* marrow of
a Calfe, iii. Bryony, Ciclaminis, ana ss, of Gum Ammoniacke, dissolved in
Vinegar, i. ss.

Another.
Vnguenti arthanitae maioris, i. ss, Gum Ammoniacke dissolved in Vinegar, ss,
oil of Capers white Lillies ana q. s.

Another.
Vnguenti Agrippae, arthanitae maioris, ana i. Gum Ammoniacke, Oppoponax,
dissolved in Vinegar, ana ss, Ol^i cucumeris asinini, ss, this must not be used
at the first, until the tumor be softened.

A Quilt.
of Salt, seeds of Cummin, ana M i. ss, fry them together: flowers of Mellilot,
M i. roots of Danewort, i. seeds of Rue, v. bruise these together, and sew them
in a fine linen cloth, and when this is to be used, some Vinegar, wherein a
brick heat red hot has been cast, must be sprinkled upon the cloth^ two
quilts must be made hereof, and they must be applied unto the region of the
spleen, one after another. It does soften dry and resolve.

rinds of Tamariske, ss, roots of white Lillies, A Cataplasme.
i. Danewort, i. ss, flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, Wormwood, Rue, ana M i.
seeds of Lupines, Linus, Fengreeke, ana ss, 8 Figs, boil these in water q. s.
unto a softness, then bake it, then add thereto of Barley flower, Fimi
cappararum, ana i. of Gum Ammoniacke, Sagapeni, ana ss, Oil of Tiles,
Capers, ana q. s. this may be used after a Fomentation.

Dia^hyli magni, Emplastrum de mucilaginibus, de Melliloto composito, ana ss,
Vnguenti dialthaeae, Aggrippae, An Emplayster.
ana iii. rinds of Tamariske, i. seeds of Rue, ss.

Sagapeni* Gum Ammoniacke, ana i. oil of Lillies, Another.
ii. root of Flower-de-luce, ii. salis gemmae, i. ss, the Gum must be
dissolved in Vinegar.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the tumor of the SPLEEN.
FIrst of all, the stopping matter shall be made obedient unto nature, and
that the force of medicines may be conveyed to the spleen, lenitiue medicines
shall be given, and then use preparing medicines. When this is done, the
matter shall be fetched out of the body, by a purging medicine, and the bowels
tumor must also be made soft; and with medicines for this purpose, strengthners
should be mixed; in conclusion such may be used as do consume the relics.
It is great ease unto the patient, if the Hemroids be opened, and after the
receiving of any inward medicine, the patient must lie on the left side: for
either of these are helpefull for the cure of this disease.

A method serving for the knowledge of ICTERITIA, or the yellow IAVNDISE.
ICteritia, is an effusion sometimes of yellow choler, sometimes black,
sometimes both over the whole body, and this is incident to maids: also this
chollericke blood is spread over the whole body with the blood, because the
excrements are not daily, or not at all voyded. And this happens chiefly for
these causes, either through the default of the whole body, or else of the
liver, or by some default of the passages by which it must be purged, or else
by default of the excrements. This color breaks out and appears chiefly in
the white of the eyes, and about the temples.

The part affected.
In this disease the same place and part is not always affected: for sometimes
the liver is in fault, when as it is too hot or else impostumed, and then both
the urine, and ordour are stained with a yellow color. Sometimes a Fever does
concur with a certain pain in some part of the liver, whereby the color of
the face is changed; sometimes the bladder of the gall is affected, and then
heaviness is felt in the right side of the hearts walls; the excrements are for
the most part white, but the urine is yellow, also he is freed from agues.
Sometimes this disease does happen through default of the whole body, and then
very few of the signs formerly rehearsed will appear, the skin is more
withered and combred with an itch, and the solid parts of the body are
distempered with too much heat; this affect is an accident appertaining unto
the mutation of the qualiay of the body.

The Signs.
This evil is manifest to sense, but especially the color of the eyes do
witness that a man is sick of the Iaundise. The patients appetite is
diminished, and bitterness of the mouth does increase because of heat, and yet
for the most part it is without a Fever, but headache, and loosnes of the body
does ensue: the urine is like unto Saffron, also muddy and thick, and
sometimes it is stopped. The excrements are white, if the bladder of the galls
passage be stopped, and but little is avoided, and that often and by little and
little. A heaviness without tumor is felt in the place of the liver, the urine
is sometimes red and thick, even unto blackenes: but if the yellow Iaundise
be^ caused by plenty of gall by reason of the hot distemper of the liver, and
that the passages which reach to the bladder of the gall be opened, then the
excrements will be^ blackish, because black melancholy is got into the belly,
and also the patient is scarce sick. If the Iaundise is caused by the default
of the spleen, the body is not so heavy, as when it does come by choler; yet
there is sometimes a heaviness, and hard tumor on the left side, the patients
are more musing and sad then formerly they were, their bodies are first died
with a dark color, then with a leaden, and very black; their bellies for the
most part are bound, and the ex^rements that are voyded are very black, so
also is their urine. The patients for the most part are troubled with an itch,
and they sweat but little: and if this disease has been of long continuance,
the body at the last waxes white with bl^aknes.

The Causes.
Sometimes it comes by increase of choler, through the livers too hot
distemper; for hereby such store of choler is generated, that the gall cannot
contain it, and then a boiling heat is felt about the seat of the liver in
the left side: the excrements are stained with choler, the urine is thick,
and like to Saffron, also lazines, and difficulty of breathing does concur,
and then especially the latter two may be perceived, whenas the patient does
exercise himself. Oftentimes it is caused, because the liver, or the passages
that go from the liver into the galls bladder, or from thence into the bowels,
are stopped; for then the liver cannot avoid choleric humors by those places
which are destined by nature for that purpose, by which means, the blood must
needs be impure: and the choleric humor flying back into the veins, is
mixed with blood, and then does spread it self over the whole body: a heaviness
is felt on the right side, and the excrements are white. Sometime this disease
is caused by the default of the whole body when as the natural heat in every
part of the body is made sharp and biting, because of the parts too hot
distemper; for then the humors do rather turn into gall, and sometimes into
so great abundance, that the gall is mixed with blood enclosed in the veins,
by which means the whole body is stained with gall, and died with a golden
color; also a great itch breaks forth, and a dulnes of mind and senses,
feeblenes and lazines do concur. Sometimes it is caused by choleric
Feauers, because the offending matter is thrust out of the body by the natural
force, into the uttermost parts of the body, and so leaves an impression in
those parts through which it did pass, and the excrements are then natural:
also the urine retains the perfect color, and hereby the patient may be rid
of his ague. The yellow Iaundise caused after this sort, does arise suddenly.
Sometimes it is caused by inflammation of the liver, in which case the whole
body is stained with gally excrements, by reason of the great heat of the
blood; and then the excrements and urine are died with a very yellow color;
also a vehement ague concurs, the color of the face is changed, the patient
does thirst much, and does feel a loathing pain in the region of the liver.
In conclusion, a venomous quality corrupting the blood, does c^use this
disease, which will be made known, if the color of the patients face be
changed, when as no Ague does ensue.

Prognostiques.
If the yellow Iaundise continue long, it does threaten danger of a dropsy;
especially if the urine be long time watery: for then a great obstruction is
caused by the bowels coldness. It is also dangerous, if the liver waxes hard;
also it is an ill sign if the patients have no appetite, if they be troubled
with waking and doting, or if they speak with difficulty. If this disease be
caused by default of the spleen, it does last longer then if it were caused by
the distemper of the liver. And as the yellow Iaundise, so sometime the black
choler is caused by the liver, but the spleen never causes the yellow choler.
It is dangerous if an ague follow the yellow Iaundise. But if it does come upon
one in sharp diseases, as the evil is doubtful, so it is hardly to be shaked
off. Yet if it be caused on the Critical day, and good signs of concoction do
appear, and no hardness does arise in the Liver, it is a good sign; for this
shows that the expulsive faculty has got the victory; but if it be caused
before the Critical day, it is an evil sign. It is good that the hemroids
run in this disease. Also that man is in danger, who is sick of a confirmed
Iaundise, and is neither cured, neither is the matter presently cast out; for
at the last, either the heart, or some other noble part is oppressed.

A method serving for the cure of the IAVNDISE.
THe air must be temperate; and their diet such as may cool, and moisten, and
extenuate the humors, and may easily be digested; as Hens, Pullets, Birds of
mountains, fishes that do live in grauelly places; the patient may also eat
Pruines, Apples, Cherries, Melons, yet with great moderation. His meat may be
seasoned with the juice of Lemmons, and Oranges. Such nutriments as generate
gross and melancholy blood, and such, as bind, and multiply choler, must be
avoided. The patient may drink ptisan, or wine allayed with the water of
grass, or Parsely. Also exercise in a mean may be permitted. And baths and
Frictions in the winter time are good. The sleep in like manner must be
moderate; and the excrements avoided in due season. Such perturbations of the
mind as do inflame the spirits must be shunned, and pleasing objects supply
their place.

Preparers.
Sirupe of Violets, Endive, Lemmons, of Roses, Sorrel, Pomegranats, of Succhory
with Rhab. water of Sorrel, Succhory, Endive, Eyebright, Lettuce, Plantane,
sir. de Duabus et quinque radicibus, Oxymel-simplex, sir. of Agrimony,
Wormwood, Mel rosatum, sir. Byzantinus. Water of Agrimony, Hops, Dodder*
Sperage, Fennel, Radish, Ruscus. A decoction of the roots of Angelica, Broom,
Rubiae tinctorum, Sperage, Parsely, Asarum, Fennel, Aristol. Fumitary,
Mayden-haire, Serpillum, St. Iohns-woort, Calamint, Chamoepitys, Sorrel,
Rosemary, Endive, Succhory, Cinnamon, Sugar, Horehound. Because phlegmy and
gross humors are mixed with choler, openers and clensers are very good; but
they must be used, some distances of time coming between; otherwise there
would be great danger. If the disease be caused by hot humors, the former of
these medicines may be used, and the latter may be used in a cold cause.

Emptiers.
Electuarium epsyllio, of the juice of Roses, Diaprunum solutinum. Hiera picra,
Diaphaenicum, Pillul. aggregatiuae, de Rhab. of Agrimony, Manna, Cassia, Rhab.
Also the infusion hereof in the water of Endive. Diaphaenic. Pillul.
Alephangina, Aureae, Hiera simp. Agaricus trochiscatus, Agaricke infused with
Rhab. Cassia, Manna. A vomit with Elleborum, if the belly be bound, a gentle
clyster at the first is good, for this does draw back the humors which were
running unto the skin. After this a stronger may be given, and at certain
distances of time be administered. The Clyster may be made with the roots of
Fennel, Horehound, Parsely, Wormwood, Agrimony, Maydenhaire, seeds of Annise,
Fennel, Electuary of the juice of Roses, Cassia fistula. If blood abound at
the first, the Basilica vein shall be opened; or else there would be danger of
the dropsy. But especially the vein shall be opened, if the Iaundise be caused
by the obstruction of the passages, through which the gall is conveyed into the
bladder. If there be store of excrements about the belly, they shall be driven
away by some gentle purge, before the former preparing medicines be
administered. For evil humors will sooner be caught into the great veins of the
liver: if opening medicines be administered, these also will generate
obstructions. When the excrements are removed from the belly, then those
humors that cause obstructions, shall be made obedient to nature, and then by
these present remedies shall be expelled.

Clysters. Errhins. Sneezing medicines. If the hemroids did formerly run,
they must again be opened. Auerters.
Also the monthly terms must be caused to flow.

Conserve of Roses, Violets, the great conserve of our description. sir. of the
juice of Lemmons, Pomegranates. Strengthners.
A decoction of Guaiacum with Oxymel. juice of Dodder, roots of Radish. roots
of Cyclamen, Rhab. Hore-hound, Fumitary. An epitheme for the liver of red
Roses, Spike, Spodium, French Wheat, Saffron, Rose Water, Buglosse, Endive,
Vinegar. If this be applied to the heart, white and red Beans, the wood Aloes,
Cloves shall be added; a bath of Violets, Endive, Lettuce, Succhory. Diacurcuma,
dialacca, Diacalamintha, Diatrium sandali, Diarrhod. Abbatis. Triacle,
Mithridate, Trochiske of Agrimony, of Rhab. with the decoction of Ciches,
Cream of Goats Milk, also the Milk of Goats that do feed upon Sperage,
Agrimony, Fennel, Parsley, worms dried in a furnace; the powder of them must
be drunk with wine and Sugar. A decoction of Hore-hound, red Ciches, Sperage,
Radish, and white wine; the ordure of dogs that have fed for the most part upon
bones, as also Goose-dung.

Shauings of iuory infused in wine, Correctors of accidents.
or some other opening liquor. Worms also dried, and given in Wine, the roots
of Fumitary boyld in water, and then drunk off. A Fomentation with the root
of Cyclamen, herewith sweat must be caused. An odor of sharp hot Wine: the
patient as he does sit in a bath, may receive the fume hereof up at his
Nostrils* Errhins of the juice of Cyclamen, Nigella, Beete, Anagallidis.
Rosewater dropped in the patients eyes in the beginning of the disease, for
this will hinder the humors running unto the eyes. The eyes also may be washed
with the water of Barley, juice of Sorrel, Pomegranats, and a little Vinegar.
Dry baths, also moist baths with sweet water and Vinegar for the eyes. A bath
of Brimstone, or else a bath of the decoction of the flowers of Cammomile,
Mellilot, Calamint, Rosemary, Dill, Branne, Pellitory of the Wall. These do
take away the yellow color of the eyes, and soften the hardness of the liver.

A more particular method serving for the cure of ICTERITIA, or IAVNDISE.
A Clyster.
leaves of Fennel, Parsley, ana i. Scolopendriae. M i. ss, leaves of Mallows,
Coleworts, ana M i. of Dodder, M ss, senae Alex. Polipodij quercini, i. ss,
Epithymi, i. Colocynth. ss, M i. boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss, add
to the strayning Diacath. i. ss, oil of Rue, i. of Cammomile, ii. of Salt, i.

A Iulep.
sir. Byzantini, Oxymellis compositi, ii. waters of Endive, Succhory,
Alkekengi, ana iiii.

Bolus.
Electuarij de psillio vi. Diacath. iii. Rhab. Agarici trochiscati, ana i. Give
this in the morning, or if the patient does rather desire a liquid thing, these
may be dissolin the decoction of Radish, Asarum, Aristol. rot. Agrimony, Dodder.

A Potion.
roots of Asarum, Aristolochia rot. ana ss, Fennel, Par^ley, i. seeds of
Annise, Juniper, red Ciches, ana iii. ss. Polipodij quercini, i. ss, Rhab.
electi, ii. ss, Ginger, Spike, ana ii. boil these in water q. s. unto lb i.
add to the strayning sir. de Epithymo, Byzantini, i. ss.

Electuary of the juice of Roses, ii. Diacath. i. ss, A draught.
Diaphenic. ii. ss, Rhab. electi. ss, of Spike, gr. v. sirupe of Succhory with
Rhab. ss, water of Succhory, iii.

Pillulae de Rhab. Hierae simplicis Gal. Aggregatiuae, Pills.
ana i. Diagridij, gr. iii. sir. of Wormwood q. s. make hereof 7 pills.

Rhab. electi, i. Aloes, ii. Agarici trochiscati, ii. ss, Pills.
Radicum rubiae tinctorum, Cyclaminis, ana i. Diagridij, gr. xii. sir. of
Agrimony q. s. Give i. hereof after the first sleep.

water of Endive, vi. macerate herein of Cinnamon, A draught
ss, Rhab. electi, i. Give some of the strayning with i. Oxymellis compositi,
unto the remainder of the strayning, add of fresh Rhab. i. of Cinnamon, gr.
xii. the water of Endive q. s. macerate again all these together upon hot
embers for the space of twenty four hours. The strayning hereof must also in
the same manner be drunk.

roots of Asarum, Radish, ana i. ss, A Vomit.
boil these in water q. s. until the third part be consumed, mix ii. of oil
with a good quantity of this decoction.

Troch. de Rhab. iii. Diarrhod. abbatis, Diacurcuma, An Electuary.
ana ii. Diatrion sandal. i. juice of Dodder, Horehound, ana ss, sir. of
Endive, juice of Sorrel, ana q. s.

flowers of Elder M iii. Dodder, M i. ss, of burnt Iuory, A Potion.
i. roots of Asarum, ii. Rhab. electi, i. ss, infuse these for the space of 24.
hours in lb i. ss, of strong wine, add to the strayning of fine Sugar q. s.
the patient may drink a draught hereof two hours after they have taken the
Electuary.

Troch. de Rhab. ss, Diacurcumae, ss, A mixture.
of Earth Worms dried ii. ss, roots of Cyclamen, ii. sir. Byzantini, of
Agrimony, ana q. s.

Lozenges.
Diarrhod. abbatis, Diacurcumae, ana ii. Trochisc. de Rhab. i. of fine Sugar,
in the water of Dodder q. s. These following may be applied, if the disease
be caused by the spleen.

A Potion.
roots of Fennel, Parsely, ana i, roots of Cyclamen, rinds of the roots of
Tamariske, Capers, ana ii. Dodder, M i. ss, Scolopendriae, M i. Sarsaparillae,
ss, roots of Ruscus, seeds of Annise, ana i. boil these in water q. s. unto lb
i. ss, add to the strayning Oxymellis simp. iiii.

Another.
roots of Cyclamen, v. of Radish, i. roots of Acorus, Licorice, ana vi. boil
these a little in lb ii. of white wine. After they be macerated, add to the
strayning Oxymellis simp. iiii. Give hereof iiii. in the morning, and so lay
him down to sweat, but first he must be purged with the following purge.

A draught.
Diacath. iii. of Cassia, Manna Calabrina, ana ss, with Cream of Milk: this
must be given first of all.

Another.
roots of Althaea, Elecampane, ana iii. of cleansed Barley, M v. of Succhory,
Fumitary, ana M ii. ss, leaves of Sorrel, flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot,
Violets, Buglosse, ana M i. Volubilis, Centory the less, ana M i. ss, boil
these in water q. s. the humor that is running toward the skin, shall be
driven another way herewith.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the IAVNDISE.
THis disease for the most part is caused by stopping of the vessels passages,
through which the Gall is conveyed from the liver and spleen, into the bowels,
by reason of gross humors, which do heat the liver, and generate plenty of
Gall therein: Therefore the belly shall first be emptied by a Clyster, for by
reason of the costiuenesse thereof, the Gall cannot descend, which should
stir up the bowels for the avoiding of the excrements. After this, the gross
humors shall be made obedient unto nature, with cutting, fining and opening
medicines, and after they are concocted, they shall be thrust out of the body:
then the bowels shall be strengthened, and the passages opened. If it be caused
by inflammation of the liver, that must first be cured. If there be danger of
the livers swelling, add some Ammoniacke unto a plaster of Mellilot: a
decoction shall be made of the roots of Lillies, Althaa, Figs, and Raysins:
also an ointment with the oil of sweet Almonds and Dialthaea. If it be caused
by some venomous matter, he may cast it forth with a vomit: But if it does
descend into the bowels, then a Clyster shall be used. If this matter do run
through the whole body, Triacle with the decoction of Orange pills, Lemmons,
Endive, Cardum benedictus, Angelica, Buglosse, Baulme. If it be caused by the
obstruction of the Galls bladder, then purging and opening of a vein shall be
used. Agaricke with Rhab. is herein of great force. It will be good to wash
the skin with a bath, and to use such medicines as will cause sweating: for
hereby the matter that does lurk in the body, will be fetched out. It will
also be good for the patient to wash his face and eyes, with the water which
is used for the bath, or else with the water of distilled Mellons.

A method serving for the knowledge of the disease of the WORMS.
IT is evident that Worms may breed in many parts of the body: for they breed
in rotten ulcers, in teeth, in ears, and kidneys. Yet in this chapter only
mention is made of those Worms alone which do breed in the bowels; which are
called Lumbrici. Some of these are long and round, and breed oftener then the
rest, and are like the worms that do breed in the earth; some are long and
broad in the likeness of gourd seeds, and these are spread sometimes over all the
bowels; for they have been seen of incredible length. There are some also
that are very little, if they be compared with the former, which in Latin are
called Ascarides, and are like mites breeding in rotten cheese.

The part affected.
The guts are here affected, for in them all sorts of worms are bredde
whereof we speak, and the straight guts are troubled with Ascarides, or mites.
Long round worms breed in the upper guts, from whence sometimes they fall into
the belly, and they are sometime voyded at the mouth, sometimes at the nose.
But broad worms which are far longer, and thinner then the rest, are spread
over all the guts: for by reason of their length, they do as well touch the
thin guts, as the thick.

Signs.
They that are troubled with mites, have an extreme itch in the fundament, and
narrow guts, and they have a desire to go to stool often. And sometimes the
right gut slides out of the body, but after they have voyded somewhat, they are
not so much troubled, because they are voyded for the most part with the
excrement. But long and round worms do stick entangled in the guts passages,
and then grievous accidents do ensue. For through want of meat, they do often
ascend up into the stomach, and distresseth it by biting, and do also stir
up such biting panyes, that dissolution, choking, also trembling of the body,
and sometimes faintnes of the heart does follow; and then great panting of the
heart, and a cold sweat ensues: oftentimes a desire to vomit, and sometime
they vomit: a yexing and dry cough is also stirred up, and the face looks red,
and they are cast into a sudden heat, yet it does not last long. Hence is it
that some start out of their sleeps and do cryout, peradventure they do leap
out of their beds. Some do grynd their teeth, and toss their bodies after
sundry sort; yet they are more troublesome in the day time then in the night:
when they be waking, their nose is troubled with an itch; in the night their
mouth is hot with spettle, their belly swells, and is as hard as if they were
troubled with the dropsy; also the belly is very much wrung. Sometime a flux
likewise ensues, and a palenesse of the face. For the most part the body is
wasted, when as there are such store of worms, that the nourishment that the
patient does receive, is scarce sufficient to feed them, and if they do want
this nourishment, presently they get up to the stomach, and there afflict the
patient with continual gripings; they cause the patient to have a good
appetite, and sometime a doggish and ravenous greedines, yet for the most part
they are lean; they do often thirst; and inordinate Feauers, somewhat like
quotidians, are caused, which bring horror with them. And as the appetite is
sometime great, so sometime it is very small. All these accidents must not be
expected in all men; the broad worm, when it does trouble the patient, as it
has many signs in common with those that are round, so also a leanness of
body concurs; much food is desired, which being digested, is soon voyded,
whereby he is forced to take fresh meat; otherwise there will be a gnawing of
the guts. There is also a sure sign of this broad worm noted in the stool:
for little bodies are mingled withal, like unto Gourd and Cowcumber-seeds, and
it is the proper excrement of these sorts of worms.

The Causes.
The cause of worms in common is rottennes, or gross, phlegmy, and slymy
matter, such as is apt to corrupt; also a putrefying heat accompanies all
these, which does prepare this matter, and then it is wrought up by the
perfusion of natural heat, which does give life to the worms. By salt,
sharp, or bitter humors, worms are never generated, but rather are destroyed
by them. In conclusion, Summer and sweet fruits which are soon rotted, do
breed worms.

Prognostiques.
Many men have made a slight matter of being troubled with round worms, but in
the end have proved, that the danger of being molested with them, is not small:
for they do eat up many, and they do so fret the guts of others, that they
bring them in danger of death: the greater worms are more dangerous then the
lesser, many then few, red then white, living then dead; but such as are
diversely colored are worse then all the rest; for they are a sign of a far
greater putrefaction. Ascarides are least dangerous, because they be little and
slender; and because they do breed in a place most remote from the principal
parts of the body, namely, in the straight gut. Oftentimes grievous diseases
are caused by them, and sometime they procure sudden death; sometimes they do
cast one into a swound; sometimes they do bring the falling sickness, and a
ravenous appetite, sometime the collicke, or an inordinate Fever, which does
afflict the patient twice or thrice with cold and hot fits in the space of 24
hours; for the most part they annoy children, and such as are come to ripenes
of years. Worms voyded in the beginning of a Fever, signifies no good. For by
them may be perceived, that there is great store of rotten and pernitions
matter in the body, if they be voyded symptomatically in the state and height
of a Fever: but if they be voyded in the declination of a Fever, there is
some hope of health.

A method serving for the cure of the WORMS.
THe air must be temperate; their meat such as does breed good juice, and
they may eat largely, or else the worms will gnaw their guts for want of
sustenance. Also sweet meats must be given; for hereby the worms are quieted.
Cheese, Milk, and fish must be avoided, and all such as do breed phlegmy
humors; He may drink wine mingled with water. It is better for him to sleep
in the night then day: the excrements of the belly must be kept loose, all
perturbations of the mind must be avoided.

Sirupe of Wormwood, Endive, of Succhory, Preparers.
with Rhab. de Acetositate citri; the water of grass, Purslane, Wormwood.

Agaricus Troch. The infusion of Agaricke, Emptiers.
in Oxymel. Hiera picra, Diacol. common Pills or pestilentiall Pills either
eaten or laid to the navel, are very good. Pillula ex Aloe, myrrha, Rhab. Sale
gemmae. Diaturbith cum Rhab. is very good to kill and expel the worms.
Diacarthamus is also good for the same purpose. Rhab. Aloae, Turbith. A
decoction of the roots of Wormseed, Angelica, Grass, Fine Wheat, Barks and
roots of Capers, Borage, Buglosse. Violets, seeds of Sanctonicus: add unto
these Diaturb. with Rhab. A suppositor with Aloes, seeds of Sanctonicus,
Coriander, Harts-horne, Myrrh, Honey, and the gall of an Ox: The matter
whereof the worms are generated is expelled by these medicines.

The great conserve of our description. Mithridate, Destroyers of worms.
Triacle of Andromachus, Hiera picra, Wormseed, seeds of Sanctonicus, Male
Pimpernell, roots of Grass, Male Fennel, and Vinegar. Centory the less with
the seeds of Sanctonicus, Aristoloch. Rot. both Southernwood, al kinds of
wormwood, Bitter-wort, Garlic. Aloes* Seeds of Lupines, Purslane.
Orange-leaues, of Peaches, wild Mints, water Germander, Turmentill, Dittany
with the decoction of Sauine, Coloquintida, Agaricke, Harts-horne, the juice of
black Hellebore, Plantane, Wormwood. Water of Wormwood, Rue, Agrimony,
Valerian, Mug-wort. sir. of Purslane with the seed of Orange, Oil of Violets,
with Euphorbius. Vnguentum de arthanita. An ointment for the belly and stomach
of the oil of Rue, Wormwood, Mints, seeds of Sanctonicus, Aloes, Vinegar, the
Gall of a Sow, Milk, Honey, and Sugar. An Emplayster for the navel, of Aloes,
the gall of a Sheep, Ox, and Sow, Wormwood, Wormeseed, Tormentill, triacle,
oil of Mints, Wormwood, juice of Peaches, Wormwood, tosted bread macerated
in the best Vinegar. These medicines may diverse ways be applied, either take
them in at the mouth, or else they may be given in a Clyster, or else they may
be laid to the navel: if they must be taken in at the mouth, the patient
must fast a pretty while before he take them, and if for want of meat they
pinch and gnaw the stomach, pleasing medicines shall be given.

Driuers out of Worms.
When they be killed, the former emptiers shall again be administered; Pills of
Rufus, Triacle, Mithridate; oil of sour Grapes. A Clyster of the decoction of
a Pullet, Barley, Sebesten, Sugar and fresh Butter. An ointment of the oil of
Rue, Wormwood, the iuyces of the same, powder of Dittany, Tormentill,
Hartshorne; a plaster with leaves of Sothernwood, Rue, Cresses, meal of
Lupines, leaves of Horehound, Mercury, Sage, Wormwood, Gall of an Ox, Aloes.
A Fomentation of the same. A suppositor for the Worms in the straight gut. oil
of Rue wherein a qantity of Aloes, and Cow gall is dissolved: this must be put
into the body by a pipe, or else it may be made with Honey, and a good quantity
of Aloes. Also a suppositor may be made of fat lard, and so thrust into the
fundament, a thread must be tied unto it, that it may be plucked back again.
When the Worms are killed, lest that sore pain should afflict the body, they
must presently be expelled, lest rotten feauers should be caused by their
malign humors, or else some other sore humors break out.

A more particular method serving for the cure of the WORMS.
sir. of Succhory with Rhab. Byzantini, A Iulep.
ana ii. waters of Fennel, Parsley, ana v. Give this in the morning, and make
hereof three draughts.

roots of Grass, A Potion.
wheat ana i. roots and rinds of Capers, ana i. ss Tormentill, ss, flowers of
Borage, Buglosse, Violets, ana M ss, boil these in water q. s. until half
be consumed; unto lb i, ss, of the strayning, add Diaturbith with Rhab. i. ss.

seeds of Plantane, of Wormeseed, Lupines, A powder.
Centory the less, ana i. of Aloes, Myrrh, ana ss, of Hartshorne burnt,
shauings of Iuory, ana i. ss. roots of Tormentill, Dittany, ana iiii. shauings
of Unicorns horn, ii.

of Hartshorne burnt, ss, Rhab. seeds of Endive, Another.
roots of Tormentill, Dittany, ana ss, seeds of Sanctonicus, gr. x. of the
finest Sugar, ii. Give at one time i. hereof.

seeds of Sanctonicus, i. ss, roots of Fearne, A draught.
Tormentill, Dittany, ana ss, Centory the less, M ss, steep these in the best
wine over hot embers, for the space of 16. hours, the patient may drink of
this strayning, iii. but first i. of Triacle must be added hereto.

of the Pestilentiall pills of Rufus, i. of Triacle, ss, Another.
decoction of the seeds of Sanctonicus, iii.

of Triacle, i. male Pimpernell, water Germander, Another.
ana ii. Give this with the decoction of Sanctonicus.

roots of grass, iii. seeds of Sanctonicus, ss, A Potion.
Centory the less, M i. ss, Licorice, i. Wormeseed, Rhab. ana iii. boil these
in water q. s. unto lb i. Give iii, hereof with i. of Hartshorne, burnt, and of
Sugar q. s.

of the roots of Dittany, Elecampane, ana i. Sauin, Another.
Licorice, i. heads of Garlic, i. ss, boil these in water q. s. until half
be consumed: add hereto some new Cowes milk, of Barley flower, Saffron, and
Sugar, ana q. s.

A draught.
of male Pimpernell, seeds of Sanctonicus, Annise, ana i. (if the patient be
not troubled with a fever) Pepper, Pulpae colocinth. ana i. Salis nitri, gr.
vi. Mellis despumati, i. water of Purslane, vi. Give this at two draughts.

Another.
seeds of Sanctonicus. ii. macerate these in Aqua vi^ae, for the space of 24.
hours add unto two ounces of the strayning of Triacle i.

An Unguent.
oil of Tiles, i. ss, Aloes, iii. ss, Pulpae colocynth. i. ss of the gall of a
Bull, i, of the flowers of Lupines, i. juice of black Hellebore, vi. with Wax
q. s.

A Cataplasme.
roots of Aristol. rot. Dittany, Elecampane, ana i. Centory the less, M iii.
leaves of Wormwood, Arsesmart, Southernwood, ana M i, ss, boil these in water
q. s. until they be soft, then add of Aloes, i. Myrrh, iiii. flower of the
seeds of Purslane, Sanctonicus, Lupines, ana iii. of Oxes gall, oil of Rue,
Wormwood, ana q. s. this must be applied unto the belly, and i. of Hartshorne,
with the water of Honey must be taken first.

Another.
roots of Ditanny, Tormentill, ana i. of Fearne, ss, Centory the less,
Sothernwood, Horehound, ana M ii. flowers of Lupine, Oxes gall, i. ss, oil of
Wormwood, q. s.

An Emplayster.
of Centory the less, seeds of Lupines, ana i. ss, Nigella, Aloes, Wormwood,
ana ii. Sothernewood, Hartshorne burnt, ana i. male Pimpernell, ss, roots of
Dittany, Wormeseed, Calamint, Origan, ii. ss, Myrrh, Aloes, flowers of
Lupines, ana i. ss, juice of Wormwood, Rue, Oxes gall, ana ss, oil of Tiles,
i. ss, Wax and Turpentine q. s. this must be laid to the belly.

A Fomentation.
roots of Dittany, Elecampane, ana i. of Sauine, i. ss, boil these in water q.
s. until the third part be consumed: this must also be used about the belly.

Rhab. turbith. Hierae picrae Gal. ana i. Ginger, Pills.
Myrrh ana ss, Saffron, Salis gemmae, ana gr. vi. juice of black Hellebore q.
s. make hereof 8. Pills.

Diaturb. with Rhab. vi. Agarici trochi^hiscati, Bolus.
i. Triacle, ss, of fine Sugar q. s.

Diaturb. with Rhab. iii. Aloes, Myrrh, A draught.
Agarici trochiscati, ana i. Salis gemmae, gr. v, sirupe of Succhory with Rhab.
i. water of Purslane, iiii.

of Goats and Cowes milk, xii. of course Sugar, A Clyster.
i. Honey, ss, two yolks of Eggs: this may be given when as it may be
discerned that the Worms are killed.

Appendix serving for the cure of the WORMS.
FIrst of all the malign and corrupt matter, whereby these Worms are
generated, shall be made obedient unto nature, and then expelled with a
purging medicine. Agaricus trochiscatus, Diaturb. with Rhab. and many other
formerly recited, are good for this purpose. When it may be discerned by the
signs, that Worms are in the body, presently such medicines must be given as
may kill them. But when medicines for this purpose are received in at the
mouth, then also a plaster must be laid unto the belly; but before such
medicines be given that may kill the Worms, the patient must drink new Cowes
milk for the space of 4. or 5. days, and the medicine prescribed for the
killing of worms, may be dissolved in Cow milk, or else they may be
administered with Honey and Sugar. If children be unwilling to receive bitter
things, they must be forced thereto; either they may be put into a sirenge,
and by that means conveyed into their mouths, and body, or by a clyster pipe;
afterward such shall be administered as will expel them: Sour, bitter,
sharp, and salt things, not only hinder the breeding of Worms, but does also
kill and expel them, if they be bred in the body. As for the small Worms in
the fundament, a Clyster of the decoction of Arsesmart, Wormwood, Hiera picra,
oil of bitter Almonds may be given; or a suppositor of the same, and Aloes
must be sprinkled upon it; and it may be rolled in birdlime, because the
Worms will stick hereto; suppositors are best for the killing of the Worms,
called Ascarides. Here one thing must be observed, that although the worms
are voyded at the mouth, or lower parts, yet we must not presently seek
remedies for the expelling of the rest, because it does often happen in sharp
diseases, whenas plenty of rottennes does lie hid in the inward parts of the
body; but first we must make that humor obedient unto nature: and rather
endeavor to drive that out then the worms; otherwise there will be danger of
increasing the disease, and killing the patient.

A method serving for the knowledge of DYSENTERIA, or FLVX of the Belly.
A Dysentery so properly called, is a flux of the belly with exulceration, and
excoriation, whereto great pain with gripings is joined. Chiefly fat corpulent
bodies are galled by sharp humors, and sometimes the filmes of the inner
tunicle of the bowels are voyded by stool; this happens when the disease has
taken deep root in the guts sometime blood is voyded, and it is a sign of
some filthy ulcer, if great store of blood be voyded without pain: if it does
stink much, then the ulcer is putrified; even as commenbdable matter is a
sign of a clean ulcer. Sometimes the lood is voyded without a flux, first, in
regard of the weakness of the liver, and then the excrements do resemble the
water where in raw flesh has been washed. Secondly, in regard of the
obstruction of the higher vessels, and then that which is voyded downward, is
clear: and sometimes they are suppressed for the space of 3 or 4 days and
there, worse excrements are voyded then the first, and after, thin bloody
matter, a gross humor not much unlike wine-lees is voyded; sometime without
any ulcer of the bowels or obstruction of the upper veins, or weakness of the
liver, red and liquid blood is voyded in great plenty, and at certain
distances of times.

The parts affected.
The inward parts are affected; and those things that are voyded, do testify
as much; the excrements are thick, and some fat or bloody drops are mixed
therewith, and sometimes foamy, which is voyded with wind; this blood for the
most part as it were, swims upon the excrements, if the ulcer be fastened on
the inward bowels. But if the pain rest about the navel, or somewhat higher,
and that a quantity of blood is mixed and drowned with the stool, and if it
does stink, and be choleric, and have diverse colors, and if great gripings
and pains are stirred up, and if it does cause swounding and faintnes of the
heart, the disease is in the smaller guts, and then fat geere is seldomer
avoided. whenas the gut called Ieiunum intestinum is affected, the pain is
above the navel, and a great queysines of stomach, and propension to vomit
arises, and oftentimes vomiting does follow, also thirst, and loathing of
meat is sometimes caused; the excrements are raw, and blackish blood is mixed
therewith. In this case a dangerous Fever follows, insomuch that the strength
is almost dissolved, and the patient is almost at deaths door. This disease is
a breach or solution of the continuity of the parts.

Signs.
In the beginning of this disease, for the most part biting, choleric, and
excrements of diverse colors are voyded, wherewith at the last some quantity of
blood is mixed: also there is a griping pain of the bowels, the excrements are
liquid and voyded by little and little; and after this a small scantling of fat
and flesh is voyded; and sometimes also parcels of the bowels inner tunicles do
appear in the excrements that are voyded, and before this excretion, the guts
were very much wrung, whereby a great desire of going to the stool, and pain
in the fundament does concur, and hereby the patient is not only hindered
and molested in his sleep, but also he is altogether deprived of natural
rest: they do also thirst often, and are troubled with agues, especially if the
ulcer be in the upper bowels, and if the humor be sharp; at which time also
blood is mixed with the excrements, rather then when the ulcer is in the thick
bowels.

The Causes.
The flux is caused by sharp humors, and such as are biting, and very much
putrified, whether they be bredde in the bowels, or else come from some other
parts of the body, as from the greater veins of the liver, spleen, and other
adjoining parts, but especially if these humors do stick in the winding of
the guts. It is also caused by brinish phlegmy yellow choler, also by burnt and
black choler, which are caused by continual crudities of sharp and naughty
meats, evil fruits, venomous and excoriating medicines, and by extreme cold
or heat. Sometimes a dyssentery is caused by inflammation, but that will be
known by the signs of an inflammation.

Prognostiques.
The failing of the stomach, increase of thirst, continual flux of the belly,
are bad signs; also if the urine be not answerable to that which is drunk,
and if black excrements be voyded, the body being lean, if parcels of fat and
f^esh and pieces of the guts be voyded, as also if the patient be weak, the
flux is mortal, because the flesh cannot grow together, nor the ulcer be made
hard. A loathing of meat, especially if the patient have an ague, is dangerous
in long fluxes. Those fluxes are worst, when the excrements do resemble the
color of a Leeke, and when they be blackish, and do stink very much a
dyssentery coming upon such as are troubled with the tumor of the spleen, is
good; for hereby melancholy humors which were in the spleen are euacuated. A
dissentery which is in the small guts, is hardly cured, but it will be cured with
more ease, if the disentery be in the greater guts. If it be caused by black
choler, the dissentery is hardly cured, because a canker does come withal.
These frettings are with great pain: if therefore they do depend upon a deep
and old ulcer, and if there be a great failing of strength, there is hope of
life. Then the excrements do stink very much, and are light, and of a blackish
color. If the dissentery be turned into a flux of the stomach, there is great
danger: a vehement collicke sometimes follows the flux of the belly, because
the thin is expelled, and the thick is left. All fluxes of the belly that do
cause a dropsy, are mortal, because the cure of the dropsy must be by the flux
of the belly.

A method serving for the cure of DISSENTERIA, or FLVX of the Belly.
THe air must be temperate: the patients diet must be easy of digestion, and
such that will breed good blood, because the concoctiue and retentiue faculty
are feeble. The flesh of Hens, Pullets, Capons, Partridges, Turtles,
Blackbirds, Pheasants, roast Eggs are good. Furmenty made with Rice, Amylum,
Panicum, grated Bread and Milk may be given the patient to eat, but first the
seeds of Plantane and a little quantity of Cinnamon, must be added thereto. The
broaths of the aforesaid fleshes are also good: binding, salt, and sour
nourishment must be avoided, because of the ulcer that is in the bowels. He may
drink red astringent wine, whereto Saccharum rosatum must be added: exercise
and motion must be avoided; and because watchings are hurtful for the flux of
the belly, the patient may be permitted to sleep at any time. All
perturbations of the mind must be avoided.

Sir. of Violets, sir. Rosatus, Endive, Succhory, Quinces, Preparers.
waters of Plantane, Buglosse, Wormwood. When some euacuation has been used
in the beginning of the disease then the matter may be digested, and made
obedient unto nature, especially if there be no imminent danger, and if the
excrements be not voyded in such plenty.

Emptiers.
Myrobal. Citrini, Kebuli; Tamarindi, Rhab. Agaricke when the excrements are
phlegmy. Diacath. sir. of Roses, Violets. A Clyster: sharp, choleric, and
corrupt humors which run to the part affected, shall be expelled by such
medicines as do moderately loosen; and lest that we should bring flux upon flux
by so doing, moderately astringents shall also be mixed with them, though they
were not digested before: for by this means a passage for the malign humors
is opened, that they that ouerflow may be euacuated, and the obstructio^ may be
taken away: but this euacuation must often be reiterated, because new matter
will presently supply the place of that which was voyded. At the first
therefore there shall be no astringents used; for hereby great danger would
ensue. For a Fever, inflammation, ulcers of the bowels, and conuulsions are
often stirred up; for the corrupt matter does arise up to the upper part, when
their euacuation is hindered. But it shall be better to fetch it forth with a
Clyster, then with a potion, if the matter do stick in the thick bowels; and
if the matter stick in the thin guts, a potion is better then a Clyster.
Scammony, and all other sharp medicines must be avoided, as Electuarium
rosatum Diaprunum solutinum.

Auerters.
At the first the shoulder vein shall be opened, before there be any ulcer, if
the strength will endure it, and if the patient do feel great pain, and if
there be a great inflammation, or that some usual euacuation was avoided,
because this does draw back the course of the blood, and mitigates the
sharpnes thereof: This shall also be effected, if the patient be troubled with
a sudden suppression of the belly, because i^ is to be feared, that these
defiled excrements which were usually voyded, should ouerwhelme some noble
bowell. But when there is no ulcer, a vein shall not be opened, for it does not
cure the ulcer, and yet it does cast down the strength. A gentle vomit is
good. The urine must be brought down, frictions of the arms and shoulders
blades, painful ligatures of the same parts, lotions of the feet and hands in
astringent wine. A dry bath which may procure sleep; this may be made with
bricks heat red hot, and wrapped up in woollen cloth^s, but they must first be
sprinkled with wine, and so laid unto the patients feet.

Trochisci de terra sigillata, Stayers of the flux.
with the juice of shepheards-pouch, Trochisci de spodio Mesuae with the seeds
of Sorrel* Electuarium diatrion sandal Diarrhod abbatis, sir. of Quinces, dry
Roses, Viole^s, Myrtle, Poppy, a^charum rosatum, conserve of Roses, Quinces,
water of Roses, Plantane, first Masticke must be boiled in this water, and then
Saccharum rosatum must be added. Athanasia, Philonium Persicum with the juice
of Plantane; Diacodium Actuarij cum aqua Caelesti. Spodium must be boiled
herein. The iuyc^ of Goosberries, Barberries* Medlers, Quinces, Bulleys,
Harts-horne burnt and washed: and if there be any suspicion of virulent matter
that does lurk in the body, the liver of a Wolf, or kid, the Coagulum of a
Hare. Water and Milk mixed together are good, some dissolve white paper in
Milk; and then beat it fine with Bean flower, and thereto do add fine Sugar,
with a small quantity of Cinnamon, and then do make hereof a furmenty. Raysins
the stones being taken out, and then beaten with Honey, Spodium, and Sugar.
Rhab. also is very good; Pistakes, Cubebs, Liuer-wort. A potion of the water
wherein Sage, S^mach, flowers of Pomegranates, Comphreys, the roots of
Wallwort, Roses, Plantane, also Masticke shall be boiled herein. A fomentation
with the water wherein the roots of Plantane, Roses, French Wheat, Endive,
Spodium. An ointment of the Oils of Roses, Quinces. Anoyntment of the Oil of
Quinces, Carabe, Masticke, powder of Roses, Bol^ Armony, Coral, Sanguis
draconis. A cataplasme of tosted bread, Mastike, oil of Quinces, Roses strong
wine. Emplastrum Diaphaenic. in a cold cause is good. When the greater part of
the corrupt matter is euacuated, these astringent medicines shall be used; but by
no means at the first: for this corrupt matter will then cause a Fever,
Plurify, inflamatio^ of the inner bowels, conuulsions, and other grievous
accidents. For it is to be feared, that the matter being suppressed before its
time, should get up into the upper parts. And therefore we will use such
medicines that do bind in a mean, and so we may proceed unto stronger. Always
those things must be mingled with them, Clensers.
that may strengthen the liver and stomach.

A potion of Barley-water, made in the form of ptisan, whereto great and store
of Saccharum rosatum shall be added. A Clyster of the decoction of Roses,
Plantane, Lupines, Bole armony, Sanguinis drachonis, Gum Arabicke,
Frankincense, Myrtle, Polygonium, Shepherds pouch, parched Barley, Tutiae,
Litargirij, Troch. de Terra Lemnia, water wherein steel has been quenched.
We will leave our Oils, because they do hinder the knitting together of the
parts. Also a Clyster of the decoction of Barley, Sugar, yeolks of Eggs, or else
red wine, Cream of Goats Milk, Hydromel, Mel rosatum, or of the decoction of
Branne, corn, red Cyches, the wood Guaiacum, Roses, Plantane, Lupines. If the
ulcer be deep, the Clyster in the latter place shall be used, because it does
cleanse the sharp matter that does exulcerate; and when the excrements that are
voyded be clear, the Clyster in the first place shall be given. Clysters in this
disease are best. Correctors of accidents.


A Clyster of the decoction of Roses, Oil of Roses, Mucilago seminis psyllij,
is good, also sheeps Milk, or cowes Milk, wherein a hot stone has been
quenched, also Roses may be boiled, and yeolks of Eggs must be added, that it
may stick the longer. Athanasia, Philonium Romanum, P^lls of Hounds-toung;
sir. of Poppy, Saccharum rosatum; decoction of the seeds of Poppy, in Rose
water. A Clyster of sheeps Milk, Tragaeanth, Goats grease, Butter, Oil of
Roses, Pills of Hounds tongue. The former of these do assuage the greatest
pain^s; the latter do procure sleep, and make the matter more unapt to flow
out of the belly.

A more particular method serving for the cure of DYSSENTERIA, or FLVXE of the
belly.
of cleansed Barley, M iiii. boil them in water q. s. A Clyster.
unto lb i. add to the strayning of course Sugar, i. ss, of the yolks of
Eggs, no ii. this must be often given, that the inward parts may be cleansed
from their sharp excrements.

of the decoction of Plantane, Roses, Another.
parched Barley, lb i. Mellis rosacei, of course Sugar, ana i. oil of Roses,
i. ss, of the yolks of Eggs no ii. Give this a little before meat, this
s^owres and clense^h the inward parts; also a Clyster may be made with the
urine of children, and water of Honey, especially if there be an ulcer.

of the decoction of Barley lb i. Mucilago psyllij, Another.
extracted with Rosewater, ii. Goats grease, i. ss, Mellis rosacei, i. Phylonij
persici i. ss, oil of Roses, ii. this does mitigate the pain.

roots and leaves of wild Mallows, Dill, ana M i. ss, Another.
leaves of Mallows, flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, Roses, ana M i. seeds of
Quinces, ss, seeds of Linus, Fengreeke, ana i. boil these in water q. s. unto
lb i. ss, add to the strayning oil of Roses, viii. This does mitigate the
pain which is caused by the sharpness of the humors.

leaves of Wormwood, Pellitory of the wall, Another.
Centory the less, Beat, ana M ss, Red Roses, M i. seeds of Lupines, red
Ciches, ana iii. of Branne, Barley, M i. ss, boil these in Cream to lb i add
to the strayning, Mellis rosacei, iii.

Another.
of huld Barley, Plantane, Sheapherds-pouch, Poligonij, ana M i. boil these in
water q. s. unto lb i. add to the strayning of Bole Armony, Frankincense,
Masticke, Sanguinis draconis, ana i. juice of Plantane, i. gum Arabicke,
Tragacanth. ana iiii. the yeolke of one Egg. A small quantity hereof shall be
iniected, if we do intend to bind and consolidate the bowels, and when we
do intend to cleanse them, a greater quantity shall be iniected.

A Potion.
Rhab. electi, i. ss, Corticum myroabl. citrinorum, iii. macerate these a
little in red Wine, roots of Plantane, i. Licorice, ss, boil these in water q.
s. unto x. add to the strayning Mellis despumati, ^. Give this at twice.

A draught.
Corticum mirobal. citrinorum, iii. Kebulorum, ii. beat these well together:
add of Raysins, i. Spike, ss, boil these in the water of Plantane, q. s. unto
iii. strain these forth very well: add thereto Rhab. electi, ii. ss, a little
Sugar.

Another.
Rhab. iiii. of Harts-horne burnt, and washed in Plantane water, and Cinnamon
water, ana i. water of Endive, iii.

Another.
Rhab. myrobal. citrinorum, ana i. ss, Kebulorum, i. Give i. hereof with ss, of
the sir. of Roses, water of Plantane, Shepherds pouch, ana i. ss,

A Potion.
of red Roses, M ii. of Violets, M i. seed of Plantane, Quinces, ana iii.
boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. add to the strayning sirupe of Quinces,
iii. and if we do intend to consolidate the inward parts, of Frankincense,
ii. must be added, of Bole Armony, i. Terra sigillatae, i.

A Iulep.
sir. of Myrtle, Roses, Quinces, ana i. ss, of red Wine, x.

A draught.
sir. of Quinces, dry Roses, ana ii. ss, of the former decoction iiii. Give
this at two several times.

sirupe of Roses, rob Berberorum, the juice of Quinces, A mixture.
boiled, ana ^ i. Bole Armony, Yerrae ^igillatae, sanguinis draconis,
Hartshorne burnt, ana ss, conserve of old Roses, q. s. he may take hereof often.

of Hartshorne burnt, Bole Armony, troch. de spodio, A powder.
sanguinis draconis, ana i. seeds of Plantane, ss, Gum Tragacanth. i. red
Coral, i. roots of Tormentill, ii. Myrrh i. ss, Give i. hereof with the water
of Plantane.

seeds of Plantane, ii. Cinnamon, ii. bruise these, Another.
and give them in broth.

Conserve of old Roses. i. Hartshorne burnt and washed in Plantane water, A
mixture.
i. Sp. Diatrion sandal. Troch. de carabe, ana ss, juice of boyld Quinces, vi.
sirupe of dry Roses, q. s. the decoction of Barley, with Mel rosatum may be
mixed with it, if it be time to cleanse the body of these humors.

water of Plantane, Succhory, Roses, Sorrel, Nectar.
ana ii. Sacchari rosati, vi. Sp. Diarrhodonis abbatis, without Musk, Diatrion
sandal. ana ss, Cloves, Mace, ana ss, rob de Berberis, i. ss, of fine Sugar ii.

Diacydonites sine Sp. i. ss, An Electuary.
Gum tragacanth. ii. troch. de spodio, de terra Lemnia, ana i. ss, seeds of
Sorrel, Plantane, Roses, ana i. flowers and rinds of Pomegranats, ana ii. of
Hartshorne burnt, red Corrall, Amylum, ana ii. ss, sir. of Myrtle, Quinces, ana
q. s.

roots of wild Mallows, Longwort, ana ss, A Fomentation.
flowers of Roses, Cammomile, ana M i. seeds of Myrtle, Pomegranats, Sumach,
Plantane, ana ii. flowers and rindes of Pomegranates, ana i. ss, boil these in
red astringent Wine; this is for the belly.

oil of Quinces, Roses, Myrtle, Dill, ana i. trochisco, An Unguent.
rum de spodio, i. ss, Bole Armony, seeds of Myrtle, ana i. Masticke, ss. a
little Wax. This shall be used, when as the body is purged, for else it would
force the virulent matter into the body. The like may be said of all other
astringent medicines.

An Emplayster.
Emplaystri diaphaenici, i. red Roses, rinds of Pomegranats, Sanguinis
draconis, ana i. seeds of Plantane, Myrtles, ana iiii. bole Armony, Mastike,
ana ii. oil of Mastike, Myrtle, Roses, ana ss, of Wax and Raysins q. s.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the FLVX of the Belly.
AT the first the flux must not be hindered, but the inward parts must be
cleansed by a Clyster, and it must often be used, and it may be guessed that the
matter is gross, clammy, or sharp, whereby an ulcer may be caused: such
medicines shall be mixed with this Clyster, as will lessen the sharpness of
the humors, and cleanse the body. Also such medicines must be added, that will
mitigate the pain, if through too much use of abst^rging medicines, the
patient be tormented, At the length clysters shall be given, that are
astringent, and do hind^r the flux, whereto such things may be added, as
will consolidate, and strengthen the bowels: these Clysters must be kept
longer then the other: purging medicines also shall be administered, that the
corrupt matter may be voyded, and then the flux must be hindered, which may be
effected by turners aside formerly mentioned. If the ulcer be in the upper
bowels, potions are best, especially such as do assuage, the pain, heat, and
inflammation: Then such as cleanse the ulcer caused by a sharp matter; lastly
astringent, whereto strengthners, and such as do beget new flesh. If sharp
humors be caused by a cold distemper of the liver, this distemper will be
amended with the oil of Roses, Cerato sandalino, and other medicines of the
like kind.

A method serving for the knowledge of the COLLICKE.
THe Collicke is a continual passion of the bowell which is called Colon, and
there follows it a difficulty o^ voyding the excrements, and wind at the lower
parts. A grievous pain, and sore prickings do come by fits, because this
bowell is thick and sinewy, whereupon if any hurtful thing creep into its
tunicles, it is not presently driven out. This disease has taken its name from
the part affected, viz. of the bowell Colon, wherein winds are very often
gathered, for this is the proper receptacle of them. This disease has affinity
with Iliaca passio, because they that are affected with either of these
diseases, are wrung with vehements and sharp pain; their bellies are bound,
and they vomit often, but in the Iliaca passio, the pain is more vehement,
because the thin gut wherein this disease does lurk, is tenderer, and has a
quicker sense of the pain, then the gut Colon, and the vomit is also more
troublesome, because it comes oftener. The stomach is quite overthrown, and
sometimes a swounding, sometimes doting comes withal, and oftentimes cold
sweates. This pain also wanders upward from the Nauels region, and is more
settled. But the pain of the Collicke does rather pinch the side close by the
stomach, where the gut Colon does pass.

The parts affected.
The looser gut called Colon, is chiefly affected, but signs of the part
affected will appear by that which follows.

Signs*
A vehement pain, as though the patient were bored through with an auger' is
stirred up in the inside of the bowell where Colon is seated, and for the most
part it is unconstant, for sometimes it does pinch on the one side, then one
the other, now it does enter on the region of the liver, anon the spleen is
affected, sometime the stomach, then the reins, for the most part it does
pinch the least share, because the Colon is there somewhat narrower; and hereby
it is discerned from the pain of the kidneys, which comes oftener then the
pain of the collicke, also the kidneys pain is always in one place, either
in the right or left side of the reins. The Collicke is eased by lenitiue
Clysters, and Fomentations, with much more speed then the pain of the reins
can be assuaged. In the pain of the reins, the urine is watery, and a small
quantity is voyded, and sometime it is altogether suppressed, but at the length
it is voyded in great abundance, which is sometimes thick. The pains of the
collicke do afflict the belly, unless it be caused by thin phlegm, for then
it is steadfast; also the pains of the Collicke do chiefly molest the right
side, and from thence is carried to the lest; also it leaves some impression
near unto the reins and back: and it is a more certain token of the
Collicke, if the pain be felt in the places above the region of the kidneys:
their bellies sometimes are so bound, that nothing is voyded, not so much as
wind. In the pain of the reins little sandy bodies, sometime astone, or
bloody gear may be perceived when the urine is settled, and when the stone is
voyded, they are freede immediately of their pain; but none of these are
voyded with the urine in the Collicke, only a thick and phlegmy choler is
mixed with the urine. Sometime vomit, oftener a propension to vomit is caused in
the Collicke, and these be more troublesome and continual, then in the pain
of the kidneys. The appetite and concoction is weakened, and by reason of great
pains the urine is gally, and scalding hot, and does falsely represent a
choleric nature: and this happens, because choler is conveyed to the kidneys,
by reason the passages of the bowels, through which the gall is usually voyded,
are stopped, that neither belching or wind can any way get out.

The Causes.
There be many causes of the collicke, because diverse matters do run to the
guts by reason of their widenes. But there be four chief causes of this
disease; either first it is caused by inflammation of the same part, and then
the pain is more settled and bitter, heat, thirst, an inclination to vomit,
loathing of meat, and sometimes vomiting of choler does ensue; they are bound,
and retain their urine long; also there is an inward heat, and ague ready to
molest them: or secondly it is caused by a sharp biting humor, and then the
heat and thirst, also the Fever is not so great as if it were caused by an
inflammation; coolers do not a little ease the patient; the excrements that are
voyded, are mixed with choler, and in the voyding of the urine, a sharp pain
is felt: or else thirdly it is caused by slymy and gross humors, and by thin
phlegm that is in the filme of the Colon, and then the pain is more steadfast,
and hardly to be cured, unless the matter be euacuated; and the inner gut is
as it were bored through with an anger; they do vomit phlegmy humors, and a
propension to vomit oftener with belchings does concur; the belly is so
bound, that nothing can pass through it, and if the patient does belch, very
small ease does ensue. Hot things do ease the patient: and because that Colon
is the receptacle of winds, the collicke is often caused by them, whenas great
plenty of them is gathered together in those places. These are sometime shut up
in the Colons filmes by dregs too much hardened; forthly, it is caused by slymy
and gross phlegm, sticking in the common passages: and sometimes from a tumor
remaining in the inner bowels, whereby the guts are so strongly pressed, hat
the wind can scarce get foth, and then extreme pains are caused: the patient
does feel great gripings and rumblings in the belly, but when the stopping is
so great, that the excrements can have no way forth, Iliaca passio is caused.

Prognostiques.
The collicke does often turn into a resolution of the sinews, or into a
joint gowt, or into Iliaca passio: Sometime into a dropsy. Of all collicks that
is the worst which is caused by an inflammation; the collicke is less
dangerous, if the excrements be voyded in due time, or a settled pain is not
felt in one part of the Colon.

A method serving for the cure of the COLLICKE.
THe air must be temperately hot and inclining to drines; yet the native
heat of the outward and former part of the belly must be kept hot with warm
clothes. Their meat must be easy of digestion, and such as does generate very
few superfluities, it must be moist, and not windy or slymy. Waterfowles are
naught, but ^ullets, Capons, Hens, Birds of mountains, also Veale, the flesh
of Kids may be given, and they must rather be boiled then roasted. The fat
broths of Pullets and Capons are good, because they are better conveyed through
the bowels passages. Also with these broths Thyme, Maioram, Origan, Hyssop,
Fennel, Sperage, Sauory and Parsley may be boiled; and sometime Malmsey may be
put in these broths. At dinner the patient must eat sparingly, and at Supper
more sparingly. Their drink may be strong wine, ptisan: water and wine mixed
with water, is prohibited. Exercise is good before meat, and when they have
filled their bellies, they must addict themselves to rest; and if necessity
require, they may sleep longer then usually they did, and also in the day time
they may sleep. The excrements of the body must be answerable to nature, and
all such things also as are astringent. Perturbations of the mind must be
avoided, yet it will be good for them to be somewhat vexed.

Mel rosatum colatum, sir. de duabus and quinque radicibus. Preparers.
Water of Fennel, Baulme, Wormwood. A decoction of the roots of Sperage,
Elecampane, Asarum, Galingale, Wormseed, Piony, leaves of Mints, Maioram,
Origan, Horehound, Thyme, Hyssop, flowers of Rosemary, Cammomill, seeds of
Annise, Carroways, Dill, as also Figs; this decoction must be made with sweet
wine. The matter of this disease for the most part is stubborn; therefore this
matter shall be made subject unto nature, by cutting and concocting medicines:
such syrupes as have any Vinegar in them, are unwholesome.

Clysters of the flowers of Cammomill, Mellilote, Emptiers.
roots of Althaea, the seeds of Linus, Annise, Dill, Centory the less,
Calamint, Origan, Mallows, Figs, bastard Saffron, bruised Agaricke, Colocynth,
Cassia, Electuary of Bay Berries, Hiera picra, Logodij, Diacolocynth. Benedicta
laxatiua, oils of Cammomill, Rue, Nuts, fresh Butter. Those that are to be
boiled, must be boiled in fat flesh-broth; this Clyster may be given often,
even until health be restored. Electuar^um Elescopi, Diaphaenicum. Electuarium
Indum, Hiera picra, Benedicta laxatiua, Diaturbith with Rhab. Pillulae
alephangi^ae, Aggregatinoe, Faetidoe, these must be given before meat. Troch.
Alhandal, Rhab, Myrobal. Cassia, and seen, because they do breed winds, may not
be given. Turpentine. A suppositor. A vomit before meat; if he did not vomit
with ease in the beginning of the disease, it may be furthered with the
decoction of Radish, Asarum, or with Oil and Malmsey mixed together. A vein
shall be opened, if the disease be caused by an impostume: from gentler purging
medicines we may proceed to stronger, if the disease be stubborn, and after we
have used cutting and clensing medicines.

The opening of a vein is very good, Auerters.
if the pain be vehement. Also Cupping-glasses shall be fastened to the navel,
and part affected. Clysters, Suppositors, frictions of the Arms, and
Shoulder-blades. The broth of Capons, and Hens, with a little Saffron.
Harts-horne burnt; a decoction of Cammomill flowers, roots of Althaea* in wine,
or Cammomill water. A Clyster of fat broths, Oil of Linus, Cammomill, or else
a Clyster may be made of the decoction of the flowers of Cammomill, Mellilote;
or else it may be made with the Oils of Rue, Bays, Hiera picra, strong wine.
Or else only with Oil, and strong wine. Or else with the Oil of Rue, and the
Electuary of Bay Berries; a bath of the decoction of the flowers of Cammomill,
Mellilot, leaves of Bays. Rue, Oil of sweet Almonds, with Hyppocras may be
drunk; a great bladder half filled with the Oil of Cammomill, Li^lies, Dill
or common Oil, also must be applied to the region of the belly; a small
quantity of thread boyld in lee and ashes must be laid hot to the belly. A
quilt of Milium and salt fried, flowers of Cammomell, seeds of Fengreeke,
leaves of Mallows, Fennel, Althaea. An ointment of the Oil of Cammomill,
Lillies, Liuus, Parsley, Dill, Rue, Beauer-stone, Malmsey, or else a small
quantity of Aqua vitae. An unguent only of the Oils of Rue and Bays, new
Triacle, Athanasia Nicolai, Philonium Romanum, Andromachi, with the decoction
of Cammomill, and Rue. Opium may be mingled with Beauer-stone, Pills of
Hounds-toung, a Clyster of fat broths, wherewith a portion of the aforesaid
benumming medicines shall be mixed: a potion with Diaphaenic. Hiera Gal. Electua.
^lescopi, Philonio Romano: some of these do assuage pain, either because they
take away the cause, or else because they do amend the distemper, or because
they do dull the part affected. For benumming medicines are good in a hot
matter; but hurtful in a cold cause; for hereby the cold humors would be made
colder, whereby winds would increase, and the humors wax grosser, and be
harder to be expelled, and by this means the obstruction be increased. Yet
sometimes necessity does force us to use these, when no other will prevail.
Clysters are better then potions for the asswaging of the pain; Sometimes i.
of benumming medicines are to be mixed with a purge, if the patient must
receive it at the mouth: for hereby the patient will be eased; also it is a
safe and good method for the cure of this disease; for hereby the cause is
taken away, and the pain is mitigated.

The great conserve of our description is an excellent medicine in this case,
Mithridate, Triacle, Diacuminum, Strengthners.
Diatrium pipereon, Aromaticum rosatum, Diagalanga, conserve of Roses. The
Electuary of Bayberries, Diamuscum. Wine wherein Wormwood has been steeped,
and i. of Cummin must be infused in it, after that, the strayning must be
drunk. Or else the leaves of Cummin dried may be infused in the wine.
Beauerstone if it be drunk with Honyed water, is good. Also Harts-horne, stones
of Medlers, Worms, the intrals and dung of a Wolf. Great Cupping-glasses
shall be applied to the part affected. An ointment of the oil of Rue, Dill,
Cammomile, Parsley, Bays, Beauer-stone, Lillies, seeds of Annise, Cummin,
Fennel, Galbanum sagapenum, Beauerstone. A drink with the flowers of
Cammomile, Mellilot, leaves of Rue, Calamint, Origan, Bays, Rosemary.

A more particular method serving for the cure of the COLLICKE.
roots of Lillies, i. ss. Angelica, i. flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M i.
ss, leaves of Calamint, A Clyster.
Wormwood, Rue, Centory the less, Sothernwood, ana M i. seeds of Linus,
Fengreeke, ana ss. Nigellae, Cummin, Annise, ana iii. boil these in fat broth
q. s. unto lb i. ss, add to the strayning Benedictae laxatiuae, Electuarij
elescopi, ana iiii. oil of Rue, Cammomile, ana i. of fresh butter. ii.
Electuary of Bayberries, iii. of Salt, i. one Yeolke of an Egg.

Another.
sir. de quinque radicibus, iii. Oxymellis compositi, i. ss, the decoction of
Horehound, Calamint, Cammomile, vi. broth of Pullets, iiii. and if the disease
be not too violent, administer this at three times.

Bolus.
Electuarii ^lescopi, iii. ss, Benedictae laxatiuae ii. ss, Diaphae^. ii. of
fine Sugar q. s.

A Potion.
roots of Fennel, Parsley, ana i. seeds of Annise, Rue, Cummin, Fennel, ana
iiii. Polipodii quercini, white and light Agaricke, ana iii. seeds of
Carrowaies, Daucus, Amiss ana vi. boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss, add
to the strayning Benedictae laxatiuae, Electuarii elescopi, ana iii* drink
hereof morning and evening.

Pills.
Hiera diacoloc. ii. Rhab. i. Diagridii gr. iii. sir. of Wormwood q. s.

Bolus.
Pillul. sine quibus esse nolo, faetidarum, ana i. ss, of Beauer-stone gr. xii.
Troch. althaendal. gr. iii. this does take away the cause of the disease, and
mitigate the pain.

Pills
Hierae Gal. i. Opii gr. i Saffron, gr. iii. sir. de quinque radicibus q. s.
make hereof pills, which may be given in the extremity of pain.

A draught.
Philonii Romani, i. Diagalanga, i. ss, Electuarij elescopi, iiii. ss, drink
this with strong wine.

Another.
the Electuary of Bay Berries, i. Diacumini, ss, of wine, iiii. Give this
lukewarm.

A Clyster.
oil of Rue, viii. Cammomile, Lillies, ana i. Gummi serapini, Oppopanacis,
Beauerstone, ana i, Electuary of Bay Berries, ss, Opij, gr. ii. of strong wine
q. s.

Another.
of common oil, x. oil of Lillies, iiii. of fresh Butter, iii. this is good,
if the disease be caused by dryness, and retaining of the dregs.

A Vomit.
seeds of Dill, i. ss, roots of Radish, i. boil these in water q. s. until
half be consumed: add to the v. of the strayning i. ss, of the oil of white
Lillies: this must be drunk lukewarm.

Sp. Diacumini dianisi, A draught.
ana iii. Electuary of Bayberries Diagalangae, ana i. ss. Give i. hereof with
Hyppocras, and when it must be used i, of ancient Triacle shall be mixed with
it.

Electuary of Bay Berries, Philonij Romani, Another.
ana ii. Diagalangae, ii. Electuarij elescopi, iii, ss. i. hereof must be given
with strong wine.

roots of Althaea, i. leaves of Mallows M ii. ss, A Fomentation.
flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M i. ss, seeds of Linus, Cummin,
Fengreeke, Fennel, Parsley, ana ss, Nigellae, iii. ss; boil these until the
third part be consumed, this must be applied to the belly.

flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, Pennyroyall, Origan, A Bath
Mentastrum, ana M i. seeds of Fennel, Annise, Amiss, Dill, ana i. boil these
in water q. s. until the third part be consumed. But the following quilt is
better then the bath.

flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M i. Penny-royall, Branne, ana M ii.
Nigellae Romanae, iii. seeds of Annise, A Quilt.
Cummin, Fennel, ana ii. ss, of Salt, v. heat these in a vessel, but without
water, the flowers excepted: these must all be put in a bag, and be moystned
with hot wine, and it must be laid to the belly.

Vnguenti dialthaeoe, oil of Cammomile, An Ointment.
ana vi. oil of sweet Almonds, Dill, Lillies, ana iiii. oil of Spike, ss,
fresh butter, Capons grease, Man's fat, ana v. if this disease be caused by
dryness, and retayning of the excrements.

oil of white Lillies, i. ss, Beauer-stone, Another.
i. Olei petrol^i, Rue, ana ss, roots of Galingale, i. Galbani, iii. of Wax q.
s.

Emplaysters of Bayberries, ii, ss, oil of Lillies, Rue, An Emplayster.
ana q. s.

Emplayster of Bayberries, ii. Vnguenti Agrippae, Another.
i. oil of Lillies q. s.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the COLLICKE.
IF the pain be immoderate, first that shall be assuaged, and the cause also
by degrees must be taken away, the pain shall be eased by lenitiue medicines,
and if these will not prevail, stupifying medicines must be then used: these
may be used also at the first, for in delay there is danger; and yet they must
not be used, except the case be desperate, for if the cause be first taken
away, the pain will be mitigated. This disease for the most part is caused by
winds and phlegmy matter, and then the pain will also be mitigated, if the
cause be taken away, (which is the matter that does cause the Collicke) by a
gentle Clyster, and this is better then that which is taken in at the mouth:
but in the Iliaca passio, medicines given at the mouth are best. Yet because
the Collicke and Iliaca passio have one, and the same cause, one and the same
way of curing shall be used, only herein they do somewhat differ, because
Iliaca passio is caused by an obstruction in the thin bowels: the Collicke is
caused by obstructions in the thick and lower bowels. Wherefore at the first a
purging medicine is good, and within one hour after, a Clyster will be good.
Amongst all medicines that are used, discussors of the wind, and asswagers of
the pain shall be mixed, and then such medicines shall be prescribed that do
strengthen the bowels, and amend the distemper. For this purpose a clyster made
of Hyppocras is best. If part of the matter be voyded by clysters from the
inward parts, and if the residue do fall from some other parts into the belly,
then the whole body shall be purged; whenas preparing medicines have bin duly
used. In strong obstructions v. of common oil with the broth of Chickens,
wherein the flowers of Cammomile have bin boiled, may be taken; and then for
the space of 4. hours nothing else shall be admitted. The patient must not
drink water. And also strong purging medicines must be avoided, especially in
the beginning of the disease; lest the matter that is at a stand, should fall
down into the belly, and so the disease will be made worse then it was.
Beauer-stone often drunk, is a very good remedy against this disease.

A method serving for the knowledge of the DROPSY.
THe dropsy is such a passion, that it is not without plenty of watery humors,
because the blood-breeding faculty is vitiated; it is a long disease, and for
the most part caused by coldness of the liver. There be 3 kinds of dropsy,
Anasarca, Ascites, Tympanites, which are distinguished both by their matter and
place. Anasarca is a scattering of phlegmy humors over the whole body. In this
disease, the whole body increases most unnaturally, for it is all over
swelled, and a humor mixed with phlegmy blood is spread over all the body,
between the skin and the flesh, and the body does suck it up, even as a
sponge sucks up water: and by reason of this, an evil color appears all over.
Ascites is that, when great store of winds, but greater of water, is gathered
together in that place, which does lie between the guts and Syphach. In this
disease first the belly and Abdomen by little and little, then the thighs are
swelled, and all the other parts of the body wax lean. But when there is
greater store of wind then water, whereby the Abdomen is stretched beyond
measure, then it is called Tympanites, and then rather a noise of wind then
water, is perceived; if the belly be struck, for there is the sound of a
taber, from whence this disease has taken its name. Also the natural color
of the face is nor altered* Such a sound as this is not heard in Ascites, but
when the patient does turn himself from the one side unto the other, his
belly waves as a bladder that is half filled.

The part affected.
The liver for the most part is affected: for hereby the blood is generated,
and from this the Dropsy is caused. The Dropsy is caused by the primary affect
of the liver, and then a small cough comes withal, because the hugeness of
the liver causes obstruction about the lungs: also the excrements are not very
liquid; sometime the disease is caused by consent of the mesentery, spleen,
stomach, miseraicall veins, and Ieiunium intestinum. Whereof a weakness of
such veins does follow, as did convey food to the liver, and then excrements
are heaped together in the lower parts, until they be corrupted, and so
surcharge the body* and afflict the patient with a laxe.

Signs.
The common signs of a Dropsy are these. They are for the most part troubled
with a fever, and do thirst very much, especially if they be troubled with
Ascites: and because of Salt and putrified humors, they loathe meat, the
color of their face is whitish, hardness of breathing, and heaviness of the
body concurs, also swelling of the feet, because of the distances of the
heart. In anasarca, the whole body is weakened, does faint and swell equally,
yet for the most part the swelling is in the shinnes and feet, so that the
prints of ones finger being thrust into the flesh, will remain a long time.
The belly is not here puffed up as in Ascites, yet being touched, it is felt
to be thicker, and their flesh like unto those that are dead, are stiff,
loose, and pale: a lingering fever concurres, their vrines are thin and
white, especially after meat, they always draw breath with great difficulty,
but in the Ascites, the belly is more swelled and the other parts of the body
do wither away; they do also breathe with difficulty, because the Diaphragma
is crushed by the tumor. And as the disease does increase, so the cods, thighs,
and feet do by little and little swell: if the patient do stir himself from
one side unto the other, the belly wauers; and this is caused by watery huwors
which remain in the Abdomen: and no maruayle, for the inward parts do as it
were swim in water. Also in the beginning of the disease, they do void much by
urine, and by little and little they do void less, and do wax more red, and
gross. The patient also is very thirsty, and also an ague does feaze on him in
Tympanites the face swerues not so much from its natural color, and a noise,
like unto the sound of a taber, is heard, if the belly be somewhat beaten upon.
Here not such a gross body, and so troublesome as in Ascites: from hence it
is, that the guts rumble, and many signs of windines concur.

The Causes.
A great cooling of the veins and liver, is the cause of this most long and
sore disease, whereof a great abundance of humors are generated. This happens
to the liver, either by it self, or else by the coldness of the spleen, guts,
mesentery, kidneys, mydriffe, which sometime because of their obstruction,
sometimes because of their weakness, draw not unto them too much blood; also it
is caused by to much bleeding at the nose, or by immoderate running or staying
of months, or hemroids: for so the natural heat is choked by the loss of
spirits with the blood. Sometime this disease is caused by the flux of the
belly or stomach, if they do last long: for the natural spirits, and native
heat are scattered. Also they who are sick of a ^aundise, or the joint gowte,
as of the feet or hips, often fall into a dropsy. Also they who are spent with
long agues, whereby natural heat and spirits are scattered: as also failing
of the liver, too much drinking of cold water after heat or exercise of the
body, is cause of it. In conclusion, whatsoever does break the force of the
liver, so that it cannot turn the juice into blood, does also cause a Fever
but Ascites does arise not only of too much cooling, or crudity of the parts,
as Anasarca does but is often caused by too much breach of some bowels, or
continuity of vessels, wherein humors are contained. And for that reason, all
things that do dry the liver, as burning feauers, too much use of strong wins,
and hot nutriments, do often cause a Dropsy: because the bowels, but oftener
the liver by too much dryness, wither away; whereby the humors do slide
through some chinkes in the bowels caused by dryness in the Abdomen, by
sweating out, and dropping. Oftentimes it is caused by a hard tumor of the
liver, spleen, or other parts, for so the bowels are cleft by too much
dryness, and want of moisture, whereby in time, the filmes, going round about
them, do break, and so by little and little, watrish and wheyish excrements
fall down into the Abdomen.

Prognostiques.
If ulcers arise in the body by water that is between the flesh, because of
the great plenty of humors is hardly to be cured. They who are suppurated, or
have a Dropsy, when they be cut, or burnt, if that water or matter does run
out, they dye presently. Also if a cough do seize on them that have a Dropsy,
or if the disease does come again after the patients are cut, they are in a
desperate case. Of all these dropsies, Tympanites is the worst, next unto that,
Ascites, but Anasarca is easier then all the rest to be cured. For it is a
sign that nature is not quite decayed, when that which is hurtful, is spread
over the whole body. All ancient Dropsies, and such as have corrupted the
habits of the body, are very dangerous, and not very easily cured. If the
Dropsy be caused by a hard tumor of the liver, or spleen, the disease is
incurable. They that are in a consumption, for the most part fall into a
Dropsy, because this evil is communicated unto the liver: for matter, and
venomous filth, having found a way into the liver, get in and stick fast
therein, and so do corrput the substance of the liver.

A method serving for the cure of the DROPSY.
THe air must be clear, and it must somewhat incline unto heat and drynes;
moist and windy air do increase the disease. They may eat the flesh of Hares,
Connies, Pheasants, Partridges, Chickens, Hens, Larkes, rear Eggs. Hens livers
are accounted good against this disease. At supper roast meat is better then
sodde. Beef is not good, because it is hard of concoction; also flesh broth
may not be given unto them, unless they do take purges. Their cates may be
seasoned with Cinnamon and Cloves: and even as fishes are forbidden, in like
manner white meats, and Pulse is disallowed. They may drink thin wine, but
not sweet, because this will not quench thirst. And they must also abstain
from drinking of water: and as it is good for this disease to endure hunger, so
to thirst long is very dangerous. Moderate exercise before meat is good;
riding, sailing, walking, frictions, and dry baths are good. They may sleep in
the night, but not much. The excrements must be answerable to nature: they must
also abstain from Venery: and even as fear and sadness do hurt very much,
because they do hinder digestion, so anger and care are very good.

Sir. of Agrimony, Wormwood, Endive juice, Succhory: Acetosus simp. Oxymel.
simp. water of Dodder, wormwood, Preparers.
Hore-hound, roots of Radish, Sperage, Fennel, Parsley, Danewort, Dodder,
Alkekengi. A decoction of Wormwood, Hore-hound, Agrimony, Dodder, Sperage,
Roots of gross, Fennel, Parsley, Asarum, seeds of Annise, Fennel, red Ciches,
Licorice. This decoction must be made in white wine. sir. Byzantinus, Endive,
Pomegranates, Oxysaccharu^. The waters of Maiden hair, Endive, Hops, Wormwood,
Hore-hound, Fennel. Because a hardness of the liver does concur, therefore
such medicines as do bring down the urine, and open the body, are very good.

Diaturbith with Rhab. Hiera diacoloc. Hiera logodij, Electuarium Indum. Pills
of Euphorbium, Mezerum, Rhab. Agrimony, juice of flower-de-luce, of Agaricke,
Sagapenum. A decoction of the roots of Elder, Dane-wort in wine. Sagapenum made
into Pills; it is as good as Sea-colewort. The juice of wild Cowcumbers dried,
or Elaterium. The juice of Sea-colewort, or Soldanella. The juice of the roots
of wild flower-de-luce, or else the decoction hereof is very good. Also small
sticks of this root must be macerated in white wine for the space of 12
hours, and then strain it: that which is strayned out, must be drunk: this
is very good against this disease, if it will admit of any cure. Rhab. does
strengthen the liver, Agaricke and Seen do as much. The Electuary of Mesuae,
made of Thymelaea, expels the water out of the body. But it is very
troublesome, and hurtful unto the liver: the distilled water of the rinds of
Elder, flowers of flower-de-luce. Some grains of Alkak^ngi, leaves of
Fumitary, Dodder, Wormwood, seeds of Annise and Fennel must be infused in the
Cream of goats Milk. A vomit herein is also very good. A vein shall not be
opened, although the urine be read, because it does increase the distemper;
yet in this case it may be lawful, if there be danger of the suppression of
the months, or hemroids, because else the blood would run unto the liver,
and by reason of the same corrupt quality, or else because of the great
abundance, would oppress the native heat thereof. Clysters in this disease are
very good, and it shall be made of some of those medicines formerly recited; but
in the dropsy called Asites, the juice of flower-de-luce shall be used, an
unguent of Swine-bread, if these will not prevail; but then the patient must
be young and strong; this incision shall be made four fingers breadth above
the navel, but then there must be no tumor, or Schirrus of the spleen, or
liver, or ulcer of the lungs. The incision knife must be drawn to the right of
left side: for it skills not much which side is launced; the outward skin
shall be drawn downward, for so the mouth of the wound will be better clozed, and
the outward skin return to its natural place. But here care ought to be
had that too much water run not out at one time; but a certain quantity may
twice or thrice in one day be drawn out by a pipe; therefore it is good to
take time enough for the drawing out of the water. In stead of incision, a
potentiall cautery must be made, and after that an actual, and then a hole
will with more ease be made: also vesicatories, and scarifications of the cods,
and issues in the legs may be here admitted: no great euacuations must be
made, lest that the strength of the liver be overthrown, but we will empty it
a little at one time, and often, and at certain distances of time, the
following strengthners of the stomach and liver may be given.

Trochisci de Rhab. Diacurcuma, Dialacca, Diarrhod. Strengthners.
Abbatis, Diatrion sandal. old Triacle, sir. of Wormwood, Agrimony,
Mayden-hayre, Hore-hound, the juice of Agrimony, Dodder, Wormwood, the waters
of Agrimony, Dodder, Hore-hound, Wormwood: the decoction of Gnaiacum, roots of
Cyna, Sarsaparilla. Rhab. Dodder. Agrimony. A fomentation must be made for the
belly of the decoction of the flowers of Cammomill, Mellilote, leaves of Bays,
Origan, Rosemary, Sage, Calamint, Maioram, Dill, Penny-royll; with Branne and
Allome. Part of these must be boiled in lee, the rest in white wine. And that
it may not suddenly wax cold, hot stones shall be put under the vessel when it
is taken from the fire. A quilt of branne, salt, sand, leaves and berries of
Bays, seeds of Annise: this must be laid to the belly. Bath^ both natural,
and artificial, with the water of the decoction of flower-de-luce, Bryony,
Hyssop Maioram, Penny-royall, Calamint, Rosemary. Fennel, Rue, Cammomill,
Dill, Bay Berries, Juniper, Bran, salt. This has a resolving force.
Vesicatories must be made in diverse places of the belly with leaven,
Cantharides, strong Vinegar: let them lie on for the space of ten hours, and
when the blisters be raised, they must be opened, and kept open for the space
of 40. days, the leaves of Colewort must be put upon them, and anointed with
Butter; or oil, also a little bit of Wax must be put into the blyster to
keep it open. The thigh and outward skin of the codde shall be scarified,
and little wounds shall be made therein; also an issue shall be made in the
leg two fingers breadth above the ankle. Vnguentum Agrippae, whereto oil of
Lillies, and Dill shall be added. Emplaysters with Bayberries, the roots of
Cyperus, Goats, or Cows dung.

A more particular method serving for the cure of the DROPSY.
A Clyster.
roots of Cyclamen, Danewort, Asarum, ana ss, leaves of Mercury, Sea Colewort,
Agrimony, Wormwood, Penny royal, ana M i. seeds of Carrowaies, Parsley,
Broom, Annise, ana iii. Polypodij quercini, senae Alex. ana ss, flowers of
Broom, M i. boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. add to the strayning
Diaturbith with Rhab. v. Benedictae laxatiuae, iii. oil of Rue,
Flower-de-luce, ana i. ss, of Salt, i.

sir. de quinque radicibus, of Agrimony, ana i. Endive, Acetosus comp. ana ss,
water of Dodder, Succhory, Radish, Claret wine, A Iulep.
ana iii.

roots of Danewort, Rubiae tinctorum, Asari, ana i. Fennel, A Potion.
Parsley, ana ss, Dodder, Agrimony, Endive, Betony, Scolopendria, Wormwood, ana
M i. seeds of bastard Saffron bruised, i. sena Alex. i. ss, Polipodij quercini,
v. of white and light Agaricke, ii. ss, seeds of Fennel, Melons, Daucu^, ana
i. flowers of Broom, M ss, Ginger, Cinnamon, ana i. Licoriee, v. Raysins the
stones being taken out ii. boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss, add to
the strayning sir. Byzantini, iii, Aceti squillit, ii. of the finest Sugar, i.

Diacath. iii. Diaturbith with Rhab. ss, A draught.
Agarici trochiscati, ss, water of Agrimony, iii.

Pills of Rhab. ii. Agregatiuarum, i. ss, Elaterij, Pills
gr. iii. juice of the roots of Flower-de-luce q. s. make hereof 8. pills.

Hierae diacoloc. i. Pillul. de Rhab. ss, Pills.
Oxymellis compositi, q. s.

Pillul. de euphorbio, ii. ss, A draught.
de Rhab. i. sir. of Agrimony, i. water of Agrimony, iii.

Dialaccae, Diacurcumae, ana iii. Nutmeg, An Electuary.
seeds of Parsley, ana ii. Licorice, i. sir. of Wormwood, Agrimony, ana q. s.

Sp. Diarrhod. abbatis, Trochisks of Agrimony, A draught.
ana ii. juice of the roots of Flower-de-luce, vi. water of Honey, iii.

Rhab. electi, ii. Masticke, Spike, Roses, Cancamum, Lozenges.
ana i. leaves of dried Bays, and infused in Vinegar, i. of white and light
Agaricke, Turbith, ana ss, of baked Agrimony, gr. vi. dried Worms, i. beat
all these into a small powder, then add Elaterij, ss, juice of the roots of
Flower-de-luce, i. ss, of fine Sugar dissolved in Endive, and Succhory water,
q. s.

Diarrhod. abbatis without Musk, Dialaccoe, Lozenges.
conserve of Roses, Troch. de Rhab. ana ss, of fine Sugar dissolved in the
water of Endive, Succhory, and Agrimony, ana q. s.

Troch. alkekengi, i. the flesh of a hedgehog dried in the sun, ii. ss,
roots of Asarum ss, Oxymellis squillitici, A Potion to provoke urine.
i, the decoction of the roots of Radishes, Danewort, Licorice, iii. vomit in
the beginning of the disease is good, but it is bad, when the disease has
been long upon the patient.

roots of Asarum aristolochiae rot. ana i. ss, Rue, A Liniment.
Lupines Parsley, Cummin, ana ii. red Ciches, i. juice of Swines-bread, Sea
Colewort, ana ss, Bays, Thymelaea, ana iii, oil of Scorpions, i. of Wax q,
s. this may be used about the region of the reins, and navel.

An Ointment.
Vnguenti Agrippae, i. ss, Arthanitae, i. Martiati, oil of Nard, Scorpions,
ana ss, juice of Rue, iii. Aquae vitae ss. some drops of Vinegar.

A Cataplasme.
roots of Danewort, i, ss, Bryony, Flower-de-luce, i. Bay berries, vi. flowers
of Cammomile, M ii. seeds of Annise, i. boil these in water and wine q. s.
until they be soft, then bake them, and add the flower of Lupines, Cummin,
ana i. ss, of Brimstone i. Goats or Cowes dung, vii. of Honey q. s. this is for
the belly.

Another.
Emplayster of Bay berries, i. ss. Vnguenti Agrippae, roots of Danewort, ana
ss, Pigeons and Cowes dung, ana ii. natural Brimstone, iii. ss, infants urine
and Honey q. s. this must also be applied to the same place.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the DROPSY, called in Latin, ASCITES.
FIrst, the humors shall be well concocted, at the length such things shall be
prescribed that do take away the water out of the body; to these such things
shall be added, as do comfort the liver, and amend the distemper, and this may
be effected both by inward and outward medicines: the accidents also that do
follow this disease, must be amended, viz. thirst, swelling of the parts of the
body, the stopping of urine, and many other accidents formerly recited.
Cataplasmes and Unguents, must be applied to the belly with great care, for
they must not touch the region of the liver. For the swelled legs, a bath may
be made with lee made with the ashes of Cabbages, Fig Trees, Vines, Alome,
salt, and the root of Daffodill. And then cataplasm^ may be made with Cows and
Goats-dung, figs and wine. In the tympany those things shall be prescribed that
do discuss the wind. And for this purpose emplaisters that heat and dry, are
very good. Anasarca will be cured by purging medicines, and such as do provoke
vomiting* after that, baths, and dry stews, and such as cause sweat are good,
if the strength will permit, or if the disease be caused by the suppression of
the monthly terms or hemroids, a vein shall be opened, but in Tympanita, and
Aascite, a vein shall not be opened, although the urine be very red, for
hereby the cold distemper of the liver would be increased. Yet in the latter of
these two, rather then the monthly terms and hemroids shall be suppressed, a
vein shall be opened, lest the matter should run to the liver, and so the
liver be ouercharged.

A method serving for the knowledge of the STONE.
The stone in the kidneys is a hard substance, bred like unto a stone, or
sand-stone in the substance of the reins, From whence by the force of the
urine, it is often conveyed through the straight pipes into the bladder, if it
be not too great; which does so stretch the passages of the urine, that great
pain does follow; and if through weakness of the urine, it cannot be brought
out, it grows bigger, and as it does increase, so the pain does likewise
increase. The bigness of the stone is uncertain, and as they have diverse
colors, and forms, so they are not always of one bigness. For sometimes small
stones are bred in the reins, sometimes great, which do vary much in form,
roughnes, and color. This disease does differ from the collicke: for that does
straggle over the whole region of the belly, but in this disease, the pain is
more settled: This disease does take its name from the efficient cause.

The part affected.
The settled pain is in the reins, and sometimes the right side, or the left
side is affected, or both sides at one time, even as the right or the left
kidney is affected: for the grauel is bred in the mouth of the kidney, or flesh
and substance of them; sometimes stones do breed in the liver, lungs, guts,
joints, and other parts of the body, but for the most part they do breed in the
bladder and kidneys. And hereof we now treat.

Signs.
A great loathing of meat, frequent belchings, and extreme pain in the reins,
are signs of this disease, and then the pain is great, when the stone does
pass through the passages of the urine, or when it does move to and fro in the
kidney, and so touches the filmes, but then the pain is greatest, when the
body is exercised with violent motions, and when the patient bends forward too
often: this pain is not exasperated by touching, as it is by the catarach or
rhewme falling upon it; but the stone does so pain the patient, as if thorns
were put into the passages of the urine. Yet so long as the stone moves not,
rather a loading then pricking pain is felt lying upon the kidneys, which for
the most part is settled, and steadfast, and which does sometime reach unto the
nearest testicle, sometime to the hippe: the belly for the most part is bound,
whereby the pain in the kidney is increased, because the kidny is crushed by
wind and abundance of excrements, a queisines of stomach and propension to
vomit concurs: when the pain is increased, the patient has a greater desire
to vomit; at the length they do vomit phlegm and choler, and sometimes
greenish choler is voyded, whereby the pain is assuaged, for the reins are
joined to the stomach by Peritoneum. Also the pains do increase by lying on
the contrary side, and when the patient is full fed: an emptiness does
diminish the pain, though it does not take away the affect. The patients
cannot well endure bending forward; there is no tumor discerned about the part
affected; the seg and thigh of the affected side is benumbed, because of the
crushing of the sinews, also the testicle on the same side is as it were pulled
back: this happens, because the stones and legs have some affinity with the
reins, by the means of arteries, sinews, and veins, which lie upon the
back, and are spread through those parts of the body; the urine in the fit time
is thin and little, and oftentimes bloody, chiefly after riding, and
immoderate exercise, and also when the stone is conveyed from the kidneys; If
the stone do stop the passages of the urine, an extreme pain is caused,
especially if the stone be rough, but when the stone runs back to the kidneys,
or when it is thrust down from the vrine-pipes into the bladder, thick, and
great store of urine is voyded, and therewith sometimes grauelly and uneven
stones. This for the most part happens, because they that have been long
troubled with this disease, do void a thick and reddish blood, which sometimes
is muddy; sometimes that which is settled in the bottom, is sandy, red and
slymy. Urine of this kind, is voyded without any danger for the space of many
months and years. And no maruayle: for great stones have been often found in
dead men's kidney^, without any pain in the back; when the stone sticks in
the bladder, a pain is felt in the privy parts, and an itching in the
passages of the yard* Retention of urine is common to both diseases, and when
the patients do endeavor to make water, extreme parts torment them, which for
the most part is pricking.

The Causes.
The cause of the stone is a grauelly and sandy constitution of the kidneys,
immoderate heat of the kidneys concurring; and for the most part gross and
slymy humors.

Prognostiques.
They that are loose-bellied and do often vomit, are seldom troubled with this
disease: the stone in the kidneys of old men is scarce cured; and besides it is
incident to old men rather, then young, also the stone is rather in the
bladder. Gross and corpulent bodies are very seldom troubled with this pain.
This is often an hereditary disease; smoothe and round stones, are with more
ease voyded then long and rough. They that were never troubled with this
disease before, are extremely pained with the least stone that is in the
passages of the urine. For the most part, the stones of the kidneys are red,
sometimes white, when the kidneys are bespred with matter. In such as have
life, the stone has been perceived only by the mixture of the blood, no other
disco^modity chancing, in whom sometimes a very sore pain is stirred, contrary
to the opinion of many men, and this pain does return after long distances of
time; the ulcer of the kidneys is caused by the stone of the kidneys, because
it does fret and waste the kidneys by rubbing, and then for the most part
bloody urine goes before mattry without a Fever also the stone of the kidney
is sooner wasted then the stone of the bladder: first* in regard of the places
distances: secondly, because of the hardness which the stone makes in those
places: In conclusion both are dangerous, because by the suppression of urine,
an impostume is oftentimes caused by pain, or else some other disease comes
upon the patient. If the stone in the bladder be great, it cannot be taken
away but by cutting.

A method serving for the cure of the STONE.
THe air must be clear and bright; they may eat Veale, Lamb, Larkes, and
they must rather be sod then roast. They must eat mode^atley* for ^atiety does
not only exasperate the disease, but also breeds it at the first. White meats,
and al^ slymy meats must be avoided. They may drink wine that is not too
strong, ptisan, and flesh broths. Their exercise must be very moderate; and
they may sleep more then ordinary. The belly must be kept loose; and for the
better preservation of health, it will be good for the patients, to take once in
every month x of new extracted Cassia, with flesh broth wherein Semina
alkekengi have been boiled. All perturbations of the mind must be avoided.

Sir. Byzantinus; de quinque radicibus; Acetosus simplex, Preparers.
Oxymel simplex; water of Saxifrage, Betony, Penny-royall, Calamint.

A Clyster of the decoction of the roots of Althaea, Emptiers.
seeds of Annise, Fennel, Carrowais, flowers of Cammomill* Mellilote, Dill,
Mallows, Violets, figs, Benedicta laxatiua, Oil of Cammomill, Dill,
Scorpions, fresh Butter, oil of sweet Almonds, and Cassia fistula must be
mixed with them. Diacath. Electuarium elescopi, Benedicta laxatiua, Hiera
picra. Cassia fistula may be given every other day with the common decoction;
Rhab. Agaricus. A vomit suppositors are good. The cubite vein of the pained
side shall be opened, if the body be full, or if there be danger of an
inflammation, by the humors that do assault the body. Clysters in the time of
the fit are better then medicines taken in at the mouth; for these do sooner
assuage the pain, because they do free the body of an unprofitable burden.
Also by them, the virtue of softning and asswaging medicines will sooner come
to the reins, whereby also the heaviness, and pain of the loins is not so
great: and that the reins be not too much ouercharged, a small quantity shall be
iniected.

The former Clyster, Mitigaters of pain.
or else a Clyster with the Oil of Cammomill, with a small quantity of Cassia
fistula: they may eat the fat broths of flesh wherein Althaea, Mallows, and
Butter were boiled: they may take Turpentine, mixed with Nutmeg, and after it
drink a draught of white wine. A fomentation may be made with water, wherein
the leaves of Althaea, Cammomill, seeds of Annise, Fennel, Carrowaies, and
branne have been boiled: a bath of the decoction of the seeds of Linus,
Fengreeke, flowers of Cammomill, Mellilote, Mallows, roots of Althaea. An
ointment for the region of the reins with the Oil of Lillies, sweet Almonds,
Violets, Cammomill, Hens-grease, fresh Butter, Vnguentum Agrippae, Dialthaea.
Cupping-glasses fastened along on the urine vessels, one after another coming
down to the priuities: for they do so stir the stone, that the pain is
presently suppressed, the stone being conveyed into the bladder. A ^ataplasme
of the flowers of Cammomill, Mell^lote, meal of Linseed, Fengreeke, Wheat and
Lupines.

Breakers and driuers (...) of the ^ne.
Lythontripon, with Turpentine, washed, or with the decoction of the roots of
grass and Fennel. Elect. Iustinum, of the ashes of Scorpions, Dialacca. The
decoction of the wood Guaiacum. The ashes of a Scorpion, the iaw of a Pike,
Egshelles when the Chickens are hatched. The great conserve of our description
is a good preservative against the stone. Conserve of the roots of Parsley,
Radish, Watercresses, Turpentine burnt upon a hot tile, the stones of
Peaches, and Cherries. Hot Goats-blood, that it may not curdie in the belly, a
little of the Coagulum, or seed of the Goat must be added. The powder of a
hare with the skin dried in the furnace; the fruits of Alkekengi bruised, and
strained, when they have been steeped in wine. Lapis Iudaicus. A Wren, a
Wagtaile, Sampier, seeds of Saxifrage, Burnet, Ruscus, Fennel, Parsley, Radish,
Milii solaris. Broom. A decoction of Radish, red Chiches, Parsley, Ruscus,
Sperage, Mallows, Fennel, Nettle, Saxifrage, roots of Grass. The rindes of
sharp Radishes, bruised, and macerated in white wine. The flowers of Broom,
macerated in Cammomill, and so set in the sun. oil of scorpions, these may
be used when Cherries, and oil of medicines that do break the stone are
given. Cupping-glasses must be applied as was formerly showed. If the urine be
stopped, it may be fetched out with a siringe, they must set upon a form, and
spread the legs abroad, that after the urine is voyded, some vrinary medicine
may be iniected, as namely the oil of Scorpions. Whenever the urine should
be brought down, a double thread shall be run through the hollownesse of
the sirenge, and at the one end of the thread a piece of Cotton shall be tied,
the urine must needs follow if the thread be neatly put into the yard* But
before medicines that break the stone, be administered the pain must be
assuaged, and the body purged of corrupt humors; or else the humors lying
thereabout be carried to the part affected.

A more particular method serving for the cure of the STONE.
roots of Parsley, Aristoloch. rot. Althaea, ana ss, A Clyster.
leaves of Beete, Mallows, Mercury, ana M i. Branne, i. flowers of Cammomile,
Mellilot, ana M i. ss, seeds of broom, iii. fruits of Alkekengi, v. seeds of
Linus, Fengreeke, ana iii. Figs, no 8. boil these in water q. s. unto lb i.
add to the strayning Elect. elescopi, i. Benedictae laxatiuae, ss, oil of
Rue, Cammomile, ana i. ss, oil of Scorpions, vi. Venice Turpentine, ss, Salt,
i. After this is given, A draught*
the patient must take of the oil of sweet Almonds, ii. Malmsey, iiii.

oil of Cammomile, of the seeds of Linus, ana v. sweet Almonds, ii. Rue, i.
ss. this by provoking to sleep, A Clyster.
takes away the pain.

A Bath.
leaves of Mallows, M ii. Pellitory of the wall, M iii. Mugwort, Rue, St. John's
wort, ana M i. ss, roots of Fennel, Parsley, ana M iii. ss, flowers of
Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M ii.ss, seeds of Linus, Fengreeke, ana iiii.

A Fomentation.
roots of Althaea, i. leaves of Mallows, Althaea, ana M i. ss, Branne, flowers
of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M ii. Figs, no 8. seeds of Linus, Dill, Fengreeke,
ana i.ss, boil these until the third part be consumed: this must be used
about the reins and bladder.

An Ointment.
oil of white Lillies, Mans-fat, ana ss, oil of Cammomile, ana i. oil of the
stones of Peaches, vi. Anoint the back herewith.

of Pellitory, M iii. flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M ii. Figs, A
Cataplasme.
no x. leaves of Mallows, M ii. Seminum milij solis, Lupines, ana v. boil
these in water q. s. until they be soft, add to the meal, of Linus,
Fengreeke, Barley, Wheat, ana ss, oil of Cammomile, Dill, fresh butter, fat
of a Coney, q. s. Saffron, i. bake all these together.

A Vomit.
of hot water, iiii. of new made oil, i, sir. Acetosi simp. i. ss, this as the
former does ease the pain.

A Potion.
seeds of Annise, Milij solis, ana iiii. roots of Fennel, Parsley, Althaea,
ana i. seeds of Parsley, ss, Licorice, vi. wood Guaiacum. i. ss, leaves of
Mallows, tops of Althaea, ana M i. ss, fruits of Alkekengi, no xiiii. Figs,
Pruines, ana no vi. Raysins, the stones being taken out, ss, leaves of Violets,
flowers of Buglosse, Borage, ana M i. of the four colder seeds, ana i, Turbith
albi et gummosi, white and light Agaricke, ana i. ss, boil these in water q.
s. unto lb i. ss, add to the strayning Electi elescopi, Benedictae laxatiuae,
ana ss.

A draught.
of Cassia, i. he must take hereof between meals, with the decoction of
Licorice, Damask Pruines, and Raysins* This must be drunk for the space of
two days, before medicines that should break the stone be administered.

Elect. elescopi, Benedictae laxatiuae, iii. ss, Bolus.
Diatharbith with Rhab. i.ss, of fine Sugar q. s.

Elect. elescopi, iii, ss. of Cassia, ss, seeds of Parsley, A draught.
Nutmeg, ana i. the water of Beane-flowers, iii.

of Dropwort, ss. Rubiae tinctorum, A Potion.
ii. roots of Althaea, ss, red Ciches, M i. ss, seeds of Juniper, ss, Annise,
Fennel, Carrots, ana i. seeds of Alkekengi, v. flowers of Keiri M i. seeds of
Cheruell, ii. of Raysins, the stones being taken out ss, Licorice, iii. boil
these in an equal quantity of water and Rennish wine, unto lb i, ss, add to
the strayning a little quantity of Sugar.

The blood of a Goat newly killed, A powder.
i. Gum tragacanth, ss, Milij solis, the shells of Eggs when the chickens are
hatched, ana i. Nutmeg, i. drink this powder with white wine.

Mitij solis, ii. Seminis Petroselini Macedonici, ii, Annise, Fennel,
Bay Berries, Louage, ana i. Long Pepper, Another.
Saxifrage, Carrots, ana gr. xv. of Mace, ii. ss,

Sp. Electuarij ducis, ii. Pulueris reginae, Lithontripi, Lozenges.
ana i. Sp. Diatrij sandal. without Camphire, powder of the Electuary of
Bayberries, ana ss, seeds of Saxifrage, Nutmeg, ana gr. v. Saffron, gr. iii.
Cinnamon, ss, fine Sugar dissolved in the water of Carduus benedictus q. s.
Give hereof to the patient i. ss.

of red Ciches, i. ss, seeds of Broom, Parsley, Carrots, A Powder.
Milij solis, ana ii. of Mace, i.

seeds of Broom, ii. roots of Saxifrage, iii. Specierum lithontripi, ss,
powder of Licorice, ss, Give i, A Powder.
of this powder with i. ss, of white wine, Parsley, juice of Fennel.

seeds of Parsley, Cummin, Alkekengi, Grummell, Another.
ana iii* red Ciches, Saxifrage, Chamaedrios, ana ii. Scorpions ashes, i. Give
of this powder i. with water distilled out of such Herbs as do provoke urine.

A Liniment.
Olei keirini, i. of Scorpions, Cammomile, Dill, ana ss, Goats grease, ii. a
little quantity of Wax.

An Unguent.
oil of Linus, white Lillies, Man's fat, ana ss, oil of Cammomile, Scorpions,
ana i.

Another.
Vnguenti Agrippa. i. oil of Scorpions, ss, oil of Peach-stones, iii. Also a
plaster may be made of those things that are used for the Fomentation; whereto
oil of Linus, Cammomile, May-butter and Hens grease must be added.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the STONE.
TWice in every week the belly shall be kept loose by a Clyster, and such
medicines shall be mixed with it, as do discuss the winds in the body, and
assuage the pain. But Clysters that are too strong, are prohibited, for hereby
the humors would be drawn inwards, and by that means, the passage of the
urine hindered. If necessity require, a vein shall be opened, but the best way
to mitigate the pain, is by applying inward and outward medicines, such that
by provoking to sleep do take away the sense of pain. After these, the
humors, that are gathered together shall be softened, and the passages from the
reins unto the bladder shall be made wider, and this may be effected by baths of
fat broth, and the use of Cataplasmes, and then the gravel and stones will
with more ease be voyded. But before these be administered, the safest course
would be to purge all the body, if it can be perceived that the body is full:
otherwise not. After all this another Clyster may be made with Hiera picra,
Lithontripu^, electu, elescopi, Benedicta laxatiua, oil of Rue: and at the
length somewhat shall be taken at the mouth to expel the stone. And even as
the stone of the kidneys and bladder have great affinity, because they have one
and the same cause, and are a like generated; so they may be both cured after
one manner; but the stone will require stronger medicines, because it has a
harder substance; in this disease the ventricle shall be strengthened with the
Oils of Mace, Mints, Wormwood, Roses. If the patient be pained with great
heat in the reine, they shall be anointed with the Oil of Violets: and Roses,
whereto some Vinegar shall be added. If the stone have fallen once into the
bladder, it cannot be expelled by medicines, because of its greatness, and
therefore it must be cut out.

A method serving for the knowledge of DIABAETES, or inuoluntary pissing.
DIabaetes is a default of the kidneys, and a swift passage of that which is
drunk through the body, the drink being nothing altered; also an unmeasurable
thirst follows, or else Diabaetes is a long continued affection resting about
the kidneyes, which does cause great desire to drink, and drink being
received into the body, it is but as it were strayned through the reins, and so
voyded: for the beer is not much altered or changed.

The part affected.
Both the kidneys are affected, as appears by the action that is hurt. For the
reins do purge all the other veins from their watery blood: but in this
disease the reins snatch it away by force from the neighboring parts. The
veins by these means being, dry they do draw moisture from the liver, and by a
continuation of order, from the stomach; this is the cause that a man does
desire drink, only to satisfy the reins. For this cause Diabates may
properly be said to be an affect of the reins: the disease of the reins, and
of the mouth of the stomach are somewhat alike, when as the stomach
continually gapes for more. The attractiue faculty of the kidneys draws
immoderately, and the retentiue faculty is so weak, that it cannot retain the
moisture that is attracted, unless it were altered: and then because the quality
is not changed, it does pass through without any resistance.

Signs.
A great heat is felt in the reins, and such an insatiable thirst does
follow, that no liquor can quench their thirst; the proverb is verified, Ever
drink, ever dry. If they do strive to hold their urine, their stones, hips,
and loins swell, and so great heat is felt in their inward parts, as though
their bowels were burnt, because the watery moisture of the blood wherewith the
blood is usually tempered, is drawn from the reins; and at the length the
solid parts humors are drawn from the reins, and then the heat increasing in
the bowels, a consumption follows, because the body is melted away with heat.

The Causes.
Is the too hot distemper of the kidneys, wherewith the feeblenes of the
retentiue faculty may be joined. It is sometimes caused by sharp humors in the
kidneyes; also it is caused die brinish phlegm. Sometimes it is caused by a
venomous matter; sometimes a pernicious quality mixed with the blood or humors
fastened to the reins. Also it is caused by too much drinking of thin wine.
But none of these are here treated of, unless a great thirst concur.

Prognostiques.
In time a great dryness, and consumption of the body follows, because the
reins do not only draw the humors of the veins, but also those that are in
the whole body, because of the immoderate heat of those parts; In a young man
this disease is curable otherwise not. If the patient have a burding Fever, it
cannot be cured becaule radical moisture is wasted by two strong caused.

A method serving for the cure of the inuoluntary Pissing.
THe air must incline to cold and moist; and their diet such as will breed
good, but thick juice, and such as will qualify the sharpnes of the humors;
they may eat freely of them. Almond Milk, rear Eggs, ptisan, fishes, that
do breed in stony places, Apples, Pears, Rice, new Cheese, fresh Beef, lean
Porke, and Veale well boyld, are good. Amongst herbs, Endive, Lettuce, and
Purslane are allowed; such things as provoke urine, are not good: neither (...)
salt and sharp meats or nutriments. They may drink strong astringent wine,
the juice of Pomegranates, and Goose-berries, with the decoction of Endive,
Lettuce, Myrtles. Rest is best, because it does stay the motion of humors. The
belly must be kept loose by art or nature, and perturbations of the mind
avoided.

Sir. of Poppy, de acetositate citri, of water Lillies, Emptiers.
Buglosse, of Violets, Roses, Myrtle, Sorrel, dry Roses. Waters of Purslane,
Violets, water Lillies, Endive, Sorrel, Plantane, Buglosse. A decoction of the
roots and flowers of water Lillies, Plantane, whereto some Sugar must be added.

The cubite vein shall be opened at the first; for it does not only draw back
the humors, but it does also allay the heat. If the disease be old, a vein
shall not be opened, because hereby the body is more heated, and the weak
strength too much weakened. M^nna, Cassia, Tamarindi. Sir. of manifold infusion
of Roses. Diaprunum simplex. Diacath. Rhab. A Clyster of the water, wherein the
leaves of Althaea, Mallows, Violets, and damask Pruines have been boiled; unto
this decoction also Cassia newly extracted, and Oil of Violets, shall be added.

A vein shall be opened. Auerters.
A vomit may be given with oil and lukewarm water, frictions of the Arms,
Head, and Shoulders.

An electuary made of Harts-horne burnt, red Roses, Blossoms of Pomegranates,
seeds of Plantane, Pu^s^ane, Quinces, Sorrel, Endive, Myrobal. Citrinis,
Hypocistid. Bole Armony, Cor^all, Camphor, sir. of Myrtle, of Violets, Gum
Arabike, Saccharum rosatum. These also must be boiled in red wine astringent
and if i of Myrobal. C^trini be added to the strayning, it is then a good
medicine. Troch. de sp^dio, de succo Polygonij, de terra Lemnia, de camphora.
Triacle, Athanasia magna, Diacyd^nites sine sp. Saccharum rosa^um. Conserve of
the flowers of water Lillies, Roses, juice of Goos-berries, Sanguinariae, with
astringent wine. Myrobal. Conditi, and Hedge-Hogs flesh dried in an oven; i.
hereof is good with astringent wi^. A cataplasme for the privy parts, ^oynes
and sides, with Lettuce, Purslane, Pellitory, Vine-leaues, Barley-flower. An
ointment of the Oil of Roses, Myrtle, Acetum rosaceum, Vnguentum rosatum. M.
Ceratum refrigerans Gal. thin plates of lead wherein many holes are bored,
must be laid to the region of the reins. Emplaisters of the seeds of Quinces,
Shepheards-pouch, Barley, flower of Pomegranates, Purslane, red Roses, Bole
Armony, Cumme Arabicke, Oil of Myrtle, Roses.

Strengthners.
Troch. Alk^kengi, with astringent wine or Honyed-water. An epitheme for the
liver with the water of Roses, water Lillies, Endive, Sorrel, Vinegar, white
and red Corrall, white French-wheat, seeds of Purslane, Sorrel, Spikenard,
Campher. An ointment for the reins, privy parts, sides, and loins, w^h the
oil of roses, water Lillies, Poppy, Myrtle, Spikenard, red Roses, the cooling
unguent of Poplar. Rosatum Mesue. A quilt of the flowers of Violets, Roses,
seeds of Endive, Purslane, Sorrel, white and red French Wheat, Spikenard,
Plantane, Succhory. A cataplasme of Purslane, Roses, Barley-flower, seeds of
Poppy, flowers of Pomegranates, French Wheat, Oil of Myrtle, Roses, Quinces,
worms of the earth. An emplaister of Barley-flower, Plantane, red Roses, Oil
of Myrtle, Hypocystis, flowers and rindes of Pomegranates.

A Sowes bladder must be fastened to the top of the yard, Correctors of acdents.
so that the urine may fall into that bladder. Triacle, sirupe of the juice of
Sorrel, sirupe of Pomegranates. Agresta. The former of these will prevent the
stinking of the bed, or breeches: the latter of these do quench the thirst.

A more particular method serving for the cure of DIABAETES, or inuoluntary
pissing.
sir. of Water Lillies, Roses, ana i ss. Myrtle, A Iulep.
juice of Sorrel, ana ss, of the decoction of Plantane, Myrtle, Violets,
Sanguinariae, lb i.

roots and leaves of Althaea, ana M i. ss, A Clyster.
leaves of Violets Mercury, Beete, Mallows, ana M i. cleansed Barley, M ii.
Rhab. electi, ss, Miro. citrinorum, iii. the greater four cold seeds ^. boil
these in water q* s. unto lb i. ss, add to the strayning Diacath. i. ss, oil
o^ Violets, iii.

Pulpae cassiae fistulae, v. ^amarind. iii. Rhab. electi, Bolus.
i. ss, Sacchari ros^c^i q. s. and if the patient like it better in broth, they
may therein be dissolved.

Diacath iii. sir. of the manyfold infusion of Roses, A draught.
i. ss, Cassiae, i. Myrobal. Citrinorum i. ss. Rhab. ss, water of Sorrel,
Violets. ana i, ss.

roots of Borage, Buglosse, ana i. ss, of Plantane, A Potion.
i. leaves of Violets, Plantane, ana M i. seeds of Plantane, Purslane, ana iii.
flowers of Borage, Violets, Water Lillies, Buglosse, ana M i. Myrobal.
^lauorum, vi. boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss, add to the strayning
sirupe of manyfold infusion of Roses, ii. add unto iiii. of this strayning,
when occasion shall serve, Rhab. electi, Mirobal. citrinorum, ana ii. and give
it in the morning.

conserve of Buglosse, pulpe of Quinces, An Electuary.
ana i. Gum Tragacanth dissolved in Rosewater, iii. Sanguinis draconis, Bole
Armony, ana ii. ss, mix these with sir. of Poppie.

Lozenges.
of Hartshorne burnt, of a hedgehog, dried in an oven, ana ss, seeds of
Plantane, Purslane, Roses, ana ss, fine Sugar dissolved in Plantane water q. s.

An Electuary.
Troch de sp^deo, v. of the cup of an Acorne, i. ss, seeds of Roses, Purslane,
ana i. pulpe of Quinces, without seeds ii. sir. of Myrtle, q. s.

the flesh of a Hedghog dried in a furnace, iii, red Roses, Another.
i. ss, Spodij, gr. iiii. Bole Armony, i. seeds of Coriander, Lettuce,
Purslane, ana ii. ss, Camphor, i. ss, sirupe of Violets. q. s.

Pills.
Bole Armony, i. red Roses, Spodium, flowers of Pom^granats, ana i. ss, seed of
Lettuce, Plantane, Purslane, ana ii. Gum Arabicke, ss, Camphor, ss, sir. of
Myrtle q. s.

A Powder.
Troch. alkekengi, ss, de Carabe, i. ss, Frankincense, Gum Arabicke, ana i.
Cinnamon* ii.

A mixture.
Myrobal. citriuorum conditorum, ii. conserve of the flowers of Water Lillies,
i. s^, troch. de spodio, i. ss, red Roses, ss. Sacchari rosati, i. ss, sir. of
Water Lillies q. s.

A Fomentation.
roots and leaves of Plantane, ana M ii. grains of Sumach, iii. red Roses, M
i. seeds of Purslane, i. Roses, ii. red and white Sandals, ana i. boil these
in water q. s. for the reins.

An Epitheme.
Rosewater. vi. water of Endive, Succhory, ana viii, Vinegar. i. of Sandals,
ii. seeds of Plantane, i. the region of the liver must be washed herewith.

An Ointment.
of Sandals, i. Hartshorne burnt, ss, red Roses, seeds of Purslane, ana i. ss,
oil of Roses. Myrtle, ana i. ointment of Popler, vi. of Wax, Aceti rosacei,
q. s.

Another.
the cooling ointment of Roses, of Galen. the ointment of Popler, ana ss,
Camphor, i. oil of Roses, Quinces, ana iii. of Wax, and Vinegar q. s. the
reins and the whole backe-bone shall be anointed herewith.

leaves of Plantane, Shepheards-pouch, Willowes, A Cataplasme.
ana M i. ss, red Roses, M ss, Grains of Sumach, iiii. rinds and flowers of
Pomegranats, ana iii. boil these in water q. s. until they be soft, add
hereto of Barley-flower, i. ss, oil of Violets, Myrtle, Sacchari rosati q. s.

leaves of Violets, Endive, Mallows, Plantane, Water Lillies, ana M iii. red
Roses, M iii. ss, seeds of Quinces, A Bath.
iii. Barley, lb i. ss, boil these in water q. s. mix herewith some new milk.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the inuoluntary pissing.
FIrst the offending humors shall be made obedient unto nature, and then
expelled by a purging medicine: also the violence of the humors shall be brought
back again by Frictions of the head, arms, and shoulder; or by vomits. But
first such shall be given as may hinder the humors running to the reins,
whether they be inwardly taken, or outwardly applied, it is no great matter.
Lastly, the reins shall be strengthened and the hot distemper amended. If all
this will not prevail, but that the disease does rather increase then
decrease, stupifying medicines must be used, for which purpose i. Philonij
Romani is good. Or else. Philonij Perfici ancient Triacle, ana i. ^, give them
with the decoction of of Poligonium. Such medicines as provoke urine must
especially be avoided.

A method serving for the knowledge of the HEMROIDS, or PILES.
HEmroids are veins of the fundament, stretched beyond measure, or swollen most
excessiuely, which does happen because of melancholy blood. Sometime they do
appear about the fundament, and then they are called outward hemroids.
Sometimes they swell inward, and then the swelling is not so great, and
therefore the veins do not appear outwardly. This is called the inner
hemroids. Also the veins do often bleed, without either pain, or swelling.
This flux of blood is provided by nature, whereby melancholy blood is euacuated
at appointed seasons: and if then it be voyded in a mean, they do prevent
imminent danger of diseases, and free them from those which are already come.
For it does purge the whole body from the obnoxious humors, and soon euacuates
the superfluities of good blood. Sometimes it comes by fits, and at vn^ertaine
times, and yet this flux is natural, because without impairing of the
strength, it ca^te^h out naughty and corrupt humors. Sometimes good blood is
voyded at these veins, and in such abundance, that the strength is weakened,
but not a jot relieved. Sometimes it is avoided with such force, that in stead
of gross, black, and melancholy blood, great store of pure blood is voyded.
Sometimes these veins are stretched and swelled, and yet no blood is voyded:
and this is as much against nature, as the former, and then is a man afflicted
with great pain, and then they are called obscure hemroids. An inflammation is
incident to both kinds of hemroides: the obscure hemroids are sometimes hard
like warts, and then they be called Verrucales, and are worse then all the
rest. Some are gentle and soft, called Morales, sometimes they are spread with a
purple color like Grapes, and then they are called Duales; It is better to
close the obscure hemroids, rather then to open them, if they swell too much
yet if extremity of pain require, they shall be caused to flow. Partly these
veins go into the straight gut through the branch of Vena porta, partly from
the hollow veins, and are terminated with the fundament, and are called
outward hemroids. If the melancholy blood be carried down by the former
veins, when the veins lie so deep within, that they cannot be discerned,
without a glass or turning A^us upward, then they are called inward hemroids.
Here blood is voyded with the excrements, but is not mixed with them, but
rather does lie above the excrements, no pain concurring, but in the flux of
the belly the excrements and the blood are mixed together: nature helps the
diseases of the reins and liver by such excretion, through the former branches:
the latter branches nature uses, for to help the default of the spleen, the
meseraicke veins, and other adjoining parts, the part affected is formerly
mentioned to be the veins in the Fundament.

Signs.
When they run too much at the first, they do void melancholy, black and
thick blood, but after it, good and ruddy blood is shed, at the length the
blood is of a citrine and pale color, whereby the strength of the body fails,
weakness of the legs, and a loding pain about the hips concurres. If the
Hemroids be stayed against nature, then the back, hips, kidneys, breast, and
fundament are pained; if blood from the Hemroids be stayed in the straight
gut, it does resemble a clodde of red blood; if the blood come from a weak
liver, it is like unto the water wherein raw flesh newly killed has been
washed; the mesentery vein sheads a small quantity hereof: If any veins of
the vper parts be burst, or eaten through, or too much opened, the blood which
is shed by continual boiling, does resemble pitch; for it looks black and is
as it were burnt. If blood be voyded because of the flux of the belly, the
signs hereof were formerly mentioned. By these signs may be discerned from
whence the blood comes, because the blood runs out at the fundament, from many
parts of the body. Therefore all the blood that is voyded at the fundament, is
not presently caused by the Hemroids.

The Causes.
The blood is oftentimes this way euacuated, because abundance of dreggish
blood, which is generated in the body by evil digestion, would else rot and
putrify the body; wherefore nature has provided, that the liver, spleen, and
other parts adjoining, through the former branches should send all their
corrupt blood by the fundament. Sometimes the Hemroids are caused by thinness
and sharpness of the blood; sometimes it does happen to women with child, or
to such whose monthly terms are stayed for sometimes nature drives out
superfluous blood, by branches derived from the hollow veins, close by the
bottom of the flanks through the fundament, even as men are relieved by her.
Sometimes it is caused by opening, breaking, or exulcerating of veins, and
such superfluous blood is unnaturally stayed by contrary causes.

Prognostiques.
If the hemroids flow naturally, neither inflammation of the lungs, or sides, or
else eating ulcers or leprosy, melancholy or quartane Fever will molest any
one. Hemroids coming upon such as are mad, or are troubled with black
choler, or the affects of the kidneys, are good. Yet if they do bleed too much,
there is great danger; for it does threaten a dropsy; because the strength is
too much spent, wherefore if they flow too fast, let them be stopped, because
otherwise the liver and the whole body is thereby cooled, and the strength cast
down. Yet if one hemroid vein be not left open, there is danger of a dropsy,
plurisy, inflammation of lungs, leprosy, quartane Ague, melancholy, Mania, or
Consumption of the lungs; for these bad excrements flow back to the liver and
heart walls; wherefore there is great danger by untimely stopping of the
hemroids, as there is by their too much running.

A method serving for the cure of the HEMROIDS too much flowing.
THe air must be somewhat dry; and their meat must be such as do breed very
few excrements, and that does bind moderately. Fat flesh broth is good for this
purpose, and the juice of Quinces must be added thereto. In like manner
furmenty is good. Their drink may be wine somewhat binding.

Sir. of the juice of Sorrel, of Roses, dry Roses, of Quinces. Waters, of
Plantane, Sorrel, water Lillies, Mel rosatum, Preparers.
Sir. of wormwood, de myrobal. Citrinis. Waters of Wormwood, Buglosse, Mints.
If the blood be choleric, and thin, the former may be given. If it be
watery, the latter shall be prescribed.

Sir. Rosarum solutiuus. Diasena. Rhab. Myrobal, Emptiers,
flaui. Pillul. de bdellio; Myrobal. Kebuli, Emblici. Polypodium quercinum,
seeds of bastard Saffron. Sharp Suppositors may be given to loosen the belly:
a stool may be procured by a candle made of tallow, or with fat lard.

The liver vein of the right arm shall be opened, Auerters*
for is hinders the breeding of melancholy blood. Cupping-glasses may be
fastened to the right and left side, and upon the region of the liver. The arms
and hands must be well rubbed, also painful ligatures of those parts, and
fomentations and baths for the same.

Troch. de spodio, with the seed of Sorrel, Closers of the mouth of the veins.
de terra sigillata. Confectio de scorio ferri. The great conserve of our
description is good to hinder the disease in the beginning. Saccharum rosatum,
Conserve of Roses. Pillulae de bdellio; Sanguis draconis. Bole Armony and the
seed of Sorrel are very good. Terra sigillaeta, sq^amma et scoriae ferri,
rindes of Pomegranates, Rhus ob^oncorum, Hypocistis. Waters of P^antan^, Roses,
^ybright. Galbanum; Philonium Romanum, Triphera Persica, Phenonis, At^anasia
Nicolai. A bath of astringent medicines. Fomentations with astringent wine,
wherein the roots of Plantane, red Roses, flowers of Pomegranates, Myrtle,
Terra sigillata, Bole Armony, Rhus obsoniorum, Harts-horne burnt, Galla: out of
these, juice may be strayned, and so put into the veins with a sirenge, if the
hemroides be inward, Galla, with the Oil of Myrtle, made into the form of a
p^aister is good. A suppositor of lead burnt, white lead, Colophonia, Acatia;
Vnguentumcomsitissae is very good, if it be laid to the loins, and Fundament.
An emplaister of Aloes, Frankincense, new laid Eggs, Hairs of a Hare.
Empliasters of the dross of Iron, the grease of a Snake roasted and tempered
with the roots of Filipendula, either laid to the fundament, or put into the
body with a suppositor; this does stop the blood of the hemroids, and yet the
hemroids must not suddenly be stayed, because there would be danger either of a
dropsy or consumption.

Phylonium Romanum. Athanasia N. An ointment of the Oil of Lillies, Correctors
of accidents.
Violets, worms, Linus, Poplar, yeolke and white of an Egg with a little
Opium. Ointment of Poplar. The patient must sit in water where in steel has
been quenched, and wherein the seeds of Linus, the leaves of Malleyne,
Plantane, Mellowes, Violets, flowers of Cammomill, Mellilot, heads of white
Poppy, Myrtle, bloomes of Pomegranates, are boiled. The mucilage of Linus and
Fengreeke are very good. An emplaister or cataplasme of Barley-flower,
Fengreeke, Mucilago Althaae, Psyllij, Mellilote, Purslane, Oil of Roses,
whites of Eggs, crummes of bread and Milk boyld, Diachylum with a little
Saffron, and Opium. Long tents may be made and dipped in the former Ointments,
and so put them into the fundament, if the Hemroids be inward. If with the
flux, the patient be in pain, that must be assuaged, lest that the pain
be doubled by the sharpness and hardness of the excrements: to these must
be added such medicines as do hinder an inflammation, which for the most part
accompanies this disease.

A more particular method serving for the cure of of the HEMROIDS.
sir. of Myrtle, Roses, Quinces, ana i. ss, A Iulep.
decoction of Myrtle, Sumach, flowers of Pomegranats, viii. of red astringent
wine, iiii.

Pillul. de Bdellio, i. Rhab. ss, Pills.
sir. solutiui rosarum q. s. make hereof 8. pills, and give of them after the
first sleep.

Rhab. electi, ii. Mirobal. citrinorum, i. ss, A draught.
sirupe of Mints, i. the water of Buglosse, iii.

sir. of Quinces, i. ss, Bole Armony washed in Rose Water, ss, Masticke, i, ss,
Sacchari rosac^i, ss, Another.
water of Plantane, iii.

conserve of Roses, i. Troch. despodio, de su^cino, An Electuary.
ana iii. red Corrall, Date-stones, ana ii. Bole Armony, blossom of
Pomegranats, ana i. sirupe of Roses, Myrtle, ana q. s.

of Date-stones, Myrobal. Indorum, ana ss, Lozenges.
Coriander, red Corrall, ana ss, red astringent wine, and fine Sugar, q. s.

Troch. de terra sigillata, i. sir. of Quinces, A draught.
i. water of Plantane, iii.

roots and leaves of Plantane, ana M i, Rhoe obsoni^rum, flowers and rinds of
Pomegranats, fruits of Sumach, A Fomentation.
ana M i. ss, of Dare-stones, v. seeds of Linus, i. ss, seeds of Myrtle, ii.
ss, Bole Armony, Hartshorne burnt, ana i. ss. boil all these in red astringent
wine, q. s. wash the fundament herewith.

A Liniment.
of Frankincense, ss, Aloes, ii. mix these with Eggs, and dip a pensill made
of the soft hairs of a Hare in them, and so apply them to the part affected.

Another.
oil of Myrtle, i. Vnguenti comitissa, ii. Bole Armony, Sanguinis draconis,
ana i. Hartshorne, white Lead, Lithargiri, Antimony, ss.

An Unguent.
ointment of Poplar, iii. oil of Violets, i. ss, Goose and Hens-grease, ana
ss, oil of sweet Almonds, vi. Saffron, ss, the yeolkes of two Eggs.

Another.
Vuguenti comitissae q. s. anoint the backebone herewith.

Another*
ointment of Poplar, i. oil of Linu^, ss, the yolke of an Egg, Opij, ss,
Saffron, i. This must be used in extremity of pain, or in stead hereof.

A Cataplasme.
leaves of Violets, M iii. Psyllij, M i. ss, boil these in Cowes milk, until
they be soft, add unto them, of Barley flower, ss, of wheat flower, i, two
yolks of Eggs, oil of Roses, Violets, ana q. s.

A Fomentation.
roots and leaves of Plantane, M iii. red Roses, M i. ss, flowers of
Pomegranats, ss, boil these in astringent wine. Use this about the part
affected.

An Emplayster.
the pulpe of Quinces roasted, iii. Bole Armony. flowers of Pomegranats, ana ii.
Oak Apples, and Frankincense* ana i.

A Suppositor.
of burnt lead, i. of white Lead washed, ss, Bole Armony, Scammony, ana ii.
juice of Plantane, white of an Egg, and oil of Violets, ana q. s.

A Cataplasme.
roots of Alth^a, seeds of Myrtle, flowers and rindes of Pomegranats, ana vi.
of the herb Longwort, M iii. boil these in astringent wine, then add hereto
the powder of Dates-stones* Oak-apples, Frankincense, ana i. ss, oil of
Violets, Roses, ana q. s.

An Emplayster.
Bole Armony, Frankincense, Aloes, Masticke, ana ss, Sanguinisdraconis, iii.
ss, Ossium mir^bal. Ind^rum, stones of Pine apples, ana i. mix them with an
Egg and Plantane water q. s.

Troch. de terra sigillata* i. ss, A Cataplasme.
of the white of an Egg beaten q. s. also an emplayster of Figs and Aloes
may be laid upon that vein that runs, that it may be kept open.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the HEMROIDS Overmuch flowing.
THat the liver be not cooled by immoderate euacuation of blood, or that the
strength of the body be not cast down, the course of the blood flowing too
fast shall be hindered. If sharp and thin humors be mixed with the blood, first
they shall be made obedient to nature, and then expelled by purging medicines.
After this a vein shall be opened, (if the patients strength will permit) partly
that the superfluity of the blood may be diminished, partly that the force of
the blood running another way, may be hindered. For this purpose Auerters are
prescribed. When all this is done, such medicines shall be prescribed, as will
cloze up the veins, and thicken the blood: and also the pain must be
mitigated: but if the Hemroids be not apparent, the belly shall be loosned with
fat flesh broth, or extracted Cassia, because the pain is caused by sharp and
hard dregs settled in those parts. And when they first break forth, the
first and chief care shall be, that the pain be assuaged, and afterward
that they be dried up, because this euacuation is unnatural: neither may it be
lawful to provoke the Hemroids, unless extreme pain or swelling forces us:
or unless a man be in danger of death by their not flowing, then it shall be
lawful to set bloodsuckers to the part affected, but first that part must be
washed with warm water, or else with a bloodsucker. A fine cloth dipped in the
white of an Egg, and laid to the part affected, will provoke them, but the
cloth must not be plucked from the place, until the moisture be quite dried
up. Or else Colocynth. ii. ss, Oil of bitter Almonds i; a little quantity of
Cowes-dung, make hereof a cataplasme. Or else, the pulpe of an Apple roasted,
Pigeons-dung ana i ss, juice of an Onyon q. s. make hereof an emplaister for
the fundament, which must be first washed, before the emplaister be laid on. If
the hemroids shall be dried up, Viridis aris ss, Pine-Apples, Mastike, Bole
Armony ana ii, water of Plantane or red astringent wi^e, xii, boil these
until they be boiled unto the thicknes of Honey, and then apply it hot to the
part affected. Viridis aris vsti ii, Alome burnt iij, boil these in astringent
wine, until it be as thick as Honey, and a piece of wool must be dipped in
it, and laid to the part affected. If it may be discerned that there is an
ulcer within, an unguent shall be made of black lead and Lithargirum. This must
be iniected very cold.

A method serving for the knowledge of the ouerflowing of the monthly terms.
THe superfluous flux of months is, when as it does tend rather to the hurt
then good of the women, because hereby they be purged more then they should;
but in such women that are of a moister constitution, because of their good
diet and much ease, the months may be suffered to flow more then ordinarily
they are wont^ wherefore not so much the quantity, quality, or kind of
substance must be observed, but rather whether they flow in season, or out of
season, or else for the good of the patients in such women that are with child,
or that do give suck, or are lately delivered of their child, they must stand
still; yet they break forth in the first month, when women be with child, and
not against reason, because the mouth of the womb is not so fast bound, as it
is afterward, when as the smallest body cannot get in. And sometimes in women
with child, after that the mouth of the womb is clozed up either months, (as
it does sometimes fall out in maids,) or somewhat like unto the months is
voyded through the branches of the hollow veins, which are fastened to the
neck and mouth of the womb, in such fort, as the Hemroids veins are
terminated in the end of the right guts.

The Part affected.
The womb is chiefly affected, when the months ouerflow, sometimes the whole
body simpathizeth, and is alike affected. This affect is an accident which
appertains unto immoderate excretion, and it is not altogether against nature,
as it is in the bleeding of the nose, or other bleedings, for herein only too
great a quantity of the month is unnatural.

Signs.
If the months flow immoderately, the appetite is taken away the digestion is
hindered, and crudities are in all parts of the body. The whole body is weak,
and a great feebleness of strength follows, and this is a certain sign that
the months flow too fast. The color of the face is changed, feauerish heats
arise in the body: sometime the whole body with the feet is swelled, and a
Dropsy follows.

The Causes.
Superfluity of months run out, first by reason of the heat of blood,
thinness, or abundance, more then is requisite: or else be cause of the
continual motion thereof, for when these concur, nature is defeated.
Sometimes there is such store of blood, that it does not only open the veins,
but does break them open by force, which sometimes happens by too violent
exercises. This does chance to those that are untimely, delivered and also to
those that are delivered with pain, whether it be by the infants cross
coming out, or else by his bigness: the hot season of the year, the use of
hot baths, and such like do cause the opening of the vessels. Sometimes this
flux happens, because some veins are open by a fretting exulceration, which
happens in the neck of the womb, by the sharpnes of blood: and this is known
by that which is voyded, because mattry and virulent matter is voyded with the
blood, and sometimes it is stinking. Also a greater pain is felt about the
womb: Sometime store of blood is voyded by the rupture of the greater veins,
whereof many are terminated in the mouth of the womb. The lesser veins void
but little, and that confusedly. Again this flux is caused by too frequent
copulation, as also by the weakness of the retentiue faculty; and in conclusion,
venomous, putrified and biting humors cause this flux.

Prognostiques.
Immoderate fluxes caused by the birth of a great babe, are less dangerous,
because they will stay of their own accord. If by untimely birth, the danger
is sudden, and therefore the greater: If it be caused by fretting or an ulcer,
it is hardly cured; because of the evil complexion of the humors which are
gathered about the womb, and because many superfluities are mixed with the
blood, medicines are prescribed in vain. And as by the utter stay of the
months, there is danger of a dropsy; so also by the immoderate flowing of the
terms, the same disease is also to be feared; especially if the body be
weakened, or the color of the face changed, because a woman is hereby brought
unto great coldness, faintnes of the heart, swounding; and sometimes death is
like to ensue.

A method serving for the cure of the ouerflowing of the months.
THe air must be somewhat dry and cold. Theie meat binding and thickning, and
such as will generate good blood, as the feet of beasts boiled, Partridges,
Pheasants, Black-birds, Larks, Rabbets, Fawnes, Hares; roasted meat is better
then boiled. They may drink water wherein the seeds, roots, and leaves of
Plantane* are boiled: exercise is altogether forbidden. Sleep must be
moderate; and all perturbations of the mind avoided.

Sir. of Endive Quinces, Roses, Pomegranates. Of the juice of Sorrel, the
juice of Barberries. Waters of Sorrel, Preparers.
Roses, Plantane, Purslane, Endive.

If the body be full, the inward vein of the right arm shall be opened, or if
the strength hold out, Emptiers,
and the months look red, this blood must be taken out by degrees. Rue,
extracted Cassia, Myrobal. Citrini, Kebul. Agaricke is also good, because
watery phlegm is mixed with the blood. Sir. of the manifold infusion of Roses.
Rhab. diaphaenicum. Elect. Indum, Hiera picra, Pillul. maiores de bdellio. A
decoction of the flowers of Violets, Roses, Buglosse, Water Lillies, Damsens;
Myrobal. Flauis. Rhab. iuiuba. to these also the sir. of manifold infusion of
Roses shall be added.

The Basilica vein shall be opened. Auerters:
Also painful frictions and ligatures of the upper parts shall be used: one
great Cupping-glasse shall be fastened to the right or left side under the paps,
and this shall be many days renewed. Also another shall be fastened to the region
of the spleen, and so be removed from thence to the belly, and also to the
shoulders, especially if a vein may not be opened, because of the ouerflowing
of the months, or weakness of the strength. A fomentation for the belly and
lower parts, with the decoction of Plantine, red Roses, rinds of Pomegranates,
Hypoc^stis, Long-wort, Pine apples, Bole Armony, Acatia, sanguis draconis. A
bath of the same decoction is good, wherein the patient must sit: in like
manner vomit is good. (...) the blood be watery, causers of sweat are good.

Thickners of the blood^
Diaolibanum, Triphera phenonis. Philonium Romanum, and Persicum, Athanasia,
Elect. Diatrim sandal. ^roch. de terra sigillata, Carabe, Spodio. Sir. of
Myrtle, Roses, Pomegranates, of the juice of Sorrel, Quinces. Conserve of dry
Roses, of the juice of Goos-berries, they may drink the water of Roses,
morning and evening. The pulpe of Quinces, Harts-horne burnt, Shepheards-pouch,
Balanstium, Calyces Glandium, Terra Lemnia, Polygonium, Hypocistis,
Pine-apples, Roses, juice of Plantane, or else the water hereof with the Troch.
of red earth, juice of Purslane, Millefolij Leaves of Oaks, sumach, Gum
Arabicke, Masticke, Olibanum, seeds of Coriander, burnt Alome. The waters of
Plantane, Purslane, Lettuce, Sorrel, Roses, with the troch of Carabe de
spodio, Terra sigillata* A bath of the decoction of the roots and leaves of
Plantane, Comfrey, Horse-tayle, Knot-grasse, Pine-apples, grains of Sumach,
the shell of an Acorne, rindes and flowers of Pomegranates, Roses, Rhoe
obsoniorum. The patient must sit up to the navel, and take the fume of this
decoction in at her womb. A fumigation may be made with the fume of
Mustard Seed. A Clyster with astringent wine, wherein Sage, Roses, Plantane,
Bole Armony Sanguis Draconis, are boiled. Or else the Clyster may be made with
the juice of Roses, Plantane, Eybright, especially if there be any ulcer. A
pessary must be made with Mummy, Tryphera, Mycleta, Bole Armony, juice of
Plantane, Roses, Eybright. Or in stead of this Pessa^y; a soft linen cloth
dipped in the juice of Plantane, and put into the privy parts. An epitheme may be
made of red astringent wine, wherein the roots of Plantane with the leaves of
Sumach are boiled. Apply this to the privy parts. Vnguentum comi^issae, Roses,
Myrtle: when the region of the reins must be anointed herewith, it shall be
then cold, but if it be used about the belly, it shall be hot. An Ointment of
the oil of Myrtle, Roses, Quinces, juice of Purslane, powder of Sandals,
Roses, rinds o^ Pomegranates. Ceratum sandalinum. An Emplayster of Roses,
flowers and rinds of Pomegranats, roots of Plantane, Pine-apples, Sanguine
draconis, Bole Armony, these shall be used at the first, for it is to be feared
that nature being accustomed to this immoderat flux of terms, then it will
prove too common and familiar with her. And the Orifices of the veins will
scarce be clozed up, and then it is incurable, if it does continue so very
long; and yet there be many that do then undertake the cure. Confectio
Athanasia, and many other medicines of this kind, though they stanch the blood,
may not be drunk, unless the strength will permit; or else they may be used
in a desperate case, when as other medicines cannot prevail.

A more particular method serving for the cure of the Inordinate flowing of
monthly terms.
sirupe of Roses, Myrtle, Quinces, ana i, ss, water of Plantane, v. of the
decoction of Myrtle, Sumach, A Iulep.
vi.

Diacath, iiii. Rhab. electi, i. sir. of Roses, A draught.
i. water of Plantane, iii.

Pillul. cochiarum, de Agarico, ana i. ss, Diagridij, Pills.
gr. iii. with a sufficient quantity of Artemisia, make hereof 8 pills.

roots of Plantane, i, ss, Rhab, A draught.
i. Myrobal. citrinorum, iii. boil th^se in water q. s. unto iiii. or v. add
to the strayning Rhab. electi, i. ss, sirupe of Quinces, i. ss.

Pills.
Pillul de Bdellio: ii, ss, sir. o^ Succhory with Rhab. q. s. hereof 8. pills
must be made.

A draught.
juice of Plantane, Mill efolij ana ii. Gum Arab. i. make it sweet with fine
Sugar q. s.

A drink.
Vini s^iptici, lb i. ss, boil a small quantity of dry Cheese herein; this is
good to stay the immoderate flux.

A draught.
red Corrall beaten into powder, i. Plantane, iii. sir. of Quinces, i.

A Potion.
roots of Plantane, iii. Bole Armony, i. boil these in red astringent wine
unto lb i, sweeten it with fine Sugar, q. s.

An Electuary.
Troch. de terra sigillata, de Carabe, ana i. Masticke, Harts-horne,
Frankincense, the rindes of Pomegranates, ana i. seeds of Roses, red Corrall,
ana ss, the conserve of old Roses, pulpe of Quinces, ana ^, sirupe of Myrtles
q. s.

Another.
conserve of old Roses, i. Olibani, Frankincense, Myrrh, ana ii. Bole Armony,
seeds of Roses, ana i. Masticke, i. ss, juice of Quinces, ss, make hereof an
Electuary with a sufficient quantity of the sir. of Quinces, and so give it to
the patient in the morning.

A draught.
Troch. de terra sigillata, iii. Athanasiae, ii. Give ^i. hereof with iii. of
Plantane water, and with i. of the sir. of Quinces.

Bolus.
Pills of Houndstongue, i. Philonij Perfici, ii. ss. Triacle, Bole Armony, ana
ss.

Pills.
Pills of Houndstongue, i. Philonij Romani, ss, every other day the patient may
take ss.

An Electuary.
red Corrall beaten to powder. Ambrae citrinae, ana i. Bole Armony, ss, seeds
of Roses, Plantane, ana i. sir. of dry Roses, i.

A draught.
tripherae, i. Pills of Hounds tongue, ss, sir. of Quinces, ss, red astringen
twine, iii.

juice of Plantane, vi. Gum Tragacanth. ss, An Iniection.
if the patient will permit, this shall be put into the womb.

Troch. de spodio, i. ss, juice of Plantane, Sage, Another.
ana ii. use this as the former is to be used.

Mellis rosati, i. Alloes, Frankincense, Bole Armony, Another.
terra sigillata, ana i. Corrall, Myrrh, rindes of Pomegranats, ana ii. ii. is
sufficient at one time. Use this as the former.

juice of Plantane, iii. Bole Armony, rinds and flowers of Pomegranats,
Frankincense, ana i. ss, Hearts horn burnt, A Pessary.
Pine-apples, ana i. ss.

roots and rinds of Plantane, Comfrey, ana M i. leaves of Sage, M ii. rinds of
Pomegranates, Roses, M i, ss, Sumach, A Fomentation.
Pineapples, ana iiii. ss, Hypocistis, Rhoe Obsoniorum, ana ii. ss, boil these
in red astringent wine q. s. until the third part be consumed. Wash the belly
and region of the reins herewith.

trypherae, ss, Pine-apples, Frankincense, A Pessary.
rindes of Pomegranates, ana i. Bole Armony, Gum Arabicke, ana ii.

Frankincense, Masticke, ana ii. Gum Tr^gacanth, A Suffumigat^.
iiii. dried Snailes skin, Horses hoose, ana ss. or else an equal quantity
of sheeps dung, and Frankincense* the patient must receive the fume in at the
privy parts. Also a bath shall be made of those that were prescribed in the
Fomentation: they must be boiled in the water wherein Iron has been
quenched. This is an approved medicine, especially if lb i, ss, of Bole Armony
be mixed with it. In this bath the patient must sit unto the thigh, and so she
may receive the fume into her body.

Vnguenti comitissae, i. ss, oil of Myrtle, Quinces, An Unguent.
Roses, ana vi. Bole Armony, Sanguinis draconis, ana i. rinds of Pomegranats,
i. ss, Acetirosace^, q. s. anoint the reins and privy parts herewith.

An Emplayster.
Maticorij, Balaustiorum, Hypocystis. Bole Armony, Eggeshe^s, Mummy, Olibanum,
ana i. red Roses, Pine-apples, ana i. ss, Frankincense, iii. Beans and Barley
flower, ana ii. ss, oil of Myrt^e, i. ss, of Wax, and Rosin q. s. apply this
to the region of the reins, and lower parts of the belly.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the ouerflowing of the monthly terms.
WHen it shall be perceived that the body is weakened by the ouerflowing of the
terms, then they shall be suppressed. If plenty of blood be the cause of it,
a vein shall be opened, and a slender diet shall be prescribed, and such meats
as do generate blood, shall be avoided: but if this disease be caused by
watery blood, or else the heat, sharpness, or thinness of the blood, first
the offending humors shall be digested, and then expelled by a purge. At the
length Cupping-glasses shall be used, that the course of the blood may be
turned another way* and then the course of the blood may be stayed, the
Orifices of the veins clozed, and the blood thickened, whereof some shall be
taken inward, and others outward; and because in all fluxes the heart and liver
are weakened, therefore both those bowels shall be corroborated. Iniections,
and pessaries of astringent things are herein of great force, because they come
sooner to the part affected, then they that are taken in at the mouth. If this
disease be caused by some eating ulcer in the womb, it may be cleansed with
water of Honey, and then healed with Frankincense, Aloes, Terra sigillata, and
other, which were formerly mentioned. The same also may be used, if it be
caused by a rupture. But they must be iniected with red astringent wine, and if
the body abound with ill humors, the body may be first purged. The juice of
Plantane, Shepheards-pouch, whether they be iniected or taken in at the mouth,
are very good, wherewith Gum Tragacanth or Arabicke may be added.

A method serving for the knowledge of the suppression of the months.
AS the ouerflowing is dangerous, so the retention on the contrary is as
dangerous. The monthly terms are portions of blood destined by nature for
generation, ouerflowing in the hollow vein, from whence it does slide into the
veins of the womb, and by the superfluity the mouth of the veins are opened,
and then dropping out from thence, they run out at the neck of the womb
once every month. But the staying of the months is altogether unnatural, if
they be of ripe age, unless they have conceived. This blood increases in
women rather then in men, because a woman is weaker, and of a colder
constitution of body then man is, and therefore also cannot so well digest the
nutriment, neither can they, by reason of their coldness, concoct the
nourishments in such sort as man can. Nature did order this for some special
cause, which is, that they should give plenty of food to their children when
they are with child: and as the months do begin at a set time, so they have a
time limi^ed for their end. But if they be with child, as was formerly said,
then they do not flow at all, lest that a passage being open the nourishment
which should preserve the child, might be avoided with the ill humors the like
also happens to those that give suck, because the blood is carried to the
breasts, and there turned into Milk: in some the months run at twelve
years, in other at fourteen, or twenty; and they cease about the 50 or 60
years of a woman's age: here is only mention made of unnatural suppression of
monthly terms, which brings great danger with it.

The part affected.
The womb is chiefly affected in regard of the fatnes thereof, whereby the
veins are crushed together, and so the flux is hindered. Sometimes flesh
growing in the womb, or else scarres left after an ulcer, are in fault;
sometimes it is caused by the default of the other parts, and sometime
superfluities are not conveyed to the womb, as usually they were.

Signs.
The forepart of the head is pained, and spreads it self unto the eye, neck,
shoulders, and ioynes; her appetite is taken away, and she is sad, musing, and
unquiet, the color of her face is altered, queisines of stomach, and loathing
of meat does follow. She voyds phlegm, and is for the most part taken with a
trembling, as though she were presently to be delivered. Her urine is thick,
red and muddy, and sometimes blackish, with a red mattery residence in the
bottom.

The Causes.
Gross and phlegmy matter mixed with blood^ is the chief cause of this
disease; because it stops the veins leading to the womb, whereby a thicknes
of the womb, and straightnes of the veins does happen. Sometimes it is caused
by the inflammation of the womb, or fatnes thereof. Sometimes they come not at
their accustomed season, because they are consumed by thin diet, fear, too
much thought, watchings, sadness, violent exercises, too much euacuation at the
stool, sweat, vomit, bleeding and long diseases. And in these causes it is not
good to provoke the months: sometimes it is caused by too hot or cold
distemper of the whole body, or of the liver, lungs, spleen, stomach or
womb. For by a hot distemper the excrement is dried up and consumed: by a cold
distemper it waxes thick and more tough, whereby the vessels of the womb are
stopped.

Prognostiques.
If the terms be too long suppressed, there is great danger of the dropsy,
stopping of the matrix, gowte, pains in the joints, head, back and loins,
difficulty of breathing, cough, melancholy passions, giddines of the head,
resolutions of sinews, trembling of the heart, swelling of the bowels,
swounding, collicke, pain in the reins; for hereby many corrupt humors are
generated, and then conveyed to the liver, spleen, lungs, heart and head: in
brief, unto every part of the body. But when the scarres of ulcers have sealed
up the mouth of the vessels in the womb, and for that cause the months are
suppressed, the disease is incurable. It is good for such as are troubled with
this disease, to bleed much at the nose: and if the month be too long at a
stand, the vessels by which blood is usually conveyed, are stopped, and so
hardened, that they will scarce admit of any cure.

A method serving for the cure of the too much suppression of the months.
THe air must incline to heat, and her meat must be heating: she may drink
sweet wine; labor and exercise is very good for her. She must not sleep so
long as usually she did; likewise she must avoid all passions of the mind.

Sir. de quinque radicibus, of Maydens-haire. Artemisiae, Preparers.
Byzantinus, Agrimony. Oxymel compositum, water of Parsley, Dodder, Fennel,
Baulme, Artemisiae, Sauine, Thyme, Wormwood, Penny-royall. A decoction with the
roots of Fennel, Parsley, Asarum, rubia tinctorum, leaves of Nepite, Origan,
Mug-wort, Sauine, Penny-royall, Saffron, Cinnamon, seeds of Annise, Fennel,
Carroots, flowers of Elders, Rosemary, Buglosse, red Ciches^ add to this
strayning Oxymel compositum. The thick matter shall be made thin by
attenuating medicines; the slimy matter shall be prepared by cutters; because
this matter is oftentimes caused by gross and slymy matter, which must in time
be prepared: and for this very cause, a woman had need to be purged with these
following medicines:

Emptiers.
The ankle bone must be opened twice or thrice in every year, especially if
the body abound with blood. For by great store of blood the obstruction is
nourished. But the part from whence blood must be drawn, must first be washed
with the decoction of Mallows, Cammomill, Mellilote, Lillies for by this means
the blood will descend to the lower parts. Pillul. de agarico, Mastichinae,
Alephanginae. Hiera simplex, Logo^ij, Dia^olocynth. Diacath. Diaphaenic.
Benedicta laxatiua, Electuarium elescopi, Indum maius. Pillul. Aggregatiuae,
Fatidae, de Sagapeno, Alephanginae. Agaricus.

Prouokers of the months.
The Triacle of Andromachus, Mithridate, with the decoction of Cinnamon,
Triphera magna, without any Opium, but with Cinnamon water. The Trochisks of
Myrrh are very good. Hyppocra^ shall be made with white wine and Cinnamon: allay
and mingle the decoction of Eringus herewith. Also the juice of Eringus, with
white wine is good. Sauine, and Dittany infused in wine. Millium s^lis Sauine,
with white wine. Cupping-glasses, with scarification shall be applied to the
share, hams, priuities or hips, and so the blood shall be drawn to the womb.
The lower parts shall be rubbed with a hot cloth, and the hips shall be tied very
hard: quilts, fomentations, and sitting in baths made with the decoction
formerly specified: also a bath may be made with the flowers of Cammomill,
Mellilote, Radice rubia tinctorum, Hyssop, Baulme, Nepit, Maioram, leaves of
Bays, and also Bay Berries, roots of Fennel, Parsley, Calamint, Origan,
Penny-royall, Rosemary, Artemisia, Berries of Juniper. A suffumigation of
Artemisia, Aristolochia, Bay Berries, Juniper, Cinnamon, Cloves, Cassia lignea,
Origan, Nepit, Frankincense, Storax, Galbanum. An ointment for the lower part
of the belly, of the mucilage of the seeds of Linus, Fengreeke, fresh Butter,
Marrow of the bone of a Heart, Oil of sweet Almonds, Lillies, Rue, Sauine. An
ointment of Arthani ta Oil of Lillies, Tiles, Pepper. An emplaister of
Southernwood, Sauine, roots of Cyclamen, Sagapenum, Myrrh, Galbanum,
Oppoponax, ^torax. A pessary ex oleo muscelino, Oil of Tiles, Harts-marrow,
roots of Broom, dip Musk Cotton in these. Another pessary may be made with
the herb Mercury bruised, Triacle, Mithridate, Gentiana, Beauer-stone, Myrrh,
Berries of Juniper, Tryphera magna, or else it may be made with Gum
Ammoniacke, Galbanum, oppoponax, Sagapenum, leedes of Melanthium, roots of
Cyclamen, rubia tinctorum, Nigella, Sauine, Harts-marrow. An emplayste^ may be
made of the same: and the pessary must be then used, when the plaster is laid
on. Such medicines as do provoke the terms, shall not be prescribed unto such
as are newly recovered of a disease, nor unto such as feel no pain by the
suppression; neither may they be brought down in those that are fat or under
14 years of age, or above 45, or in them that are with child, or that do give
suck: also in them that have an ill iuyced body, if it may be discerned that
they have small store of blood, or that they be weakened by daily diseases: also
if they have lost great store of blood by bleeding at the nose or some other
part: for then the blood shall rather be kept in: and if there be any humors
that do corrupt the blood, they shall be amended, if any of the former accidents
happen, the months shall not be caused to flow, by any of the former
medicines: but if there be plenty of humors, and that they are suppressed
because of thickness thereof, or a slimynesse, or stopping of the wombs
vessel, or parts round about it, or else by the thickness of the womb, the
months shall then be provoked.

Correctors of accidents.
Milk, the white of an Egg beaten; oil of Violets, and Roses, Rosewater.
These assuage the heat of the womb, if any be caused by Pessaries or such like
medicines, a linen cloth must be dipped in them, and so laid to the neck of
the womb when occasion shall require.

A more particular method serving for the cure of the suppression of the
months.
A draught.
Diacath. vi. Mannae Calabri^, i. sir. Artemisiae, i. ss, water of Artemisia,
iiii.

A Iulep.
sir. Artemisia, ii. sirupe de duabus radicibus, Byzantinus, ana i. water of
Fennel, Parsley, Matricaria, ana iiii.

A Potion.
roots of Asarum, ss, Fennel, Parsley, ana i. ss, Sauine, M ss, Nepite, M i.
ss, of Maydenhaire, p i. boil these in water. q. s. unto lb i. add to the
strayning sir. de quinque radicibus, iii. This does loosen the obstruction, and
prepares the matter.

A Potion.
roots of Fennel, Parsley, ana i. Aristol. rot. ii, seeds of Annise, red
Ciches, ana ii. ss, Raysins the stones being taken out, i. ss, Sauine, i, ss,
flowers of Borage, Buglosse, leaves of Nepite, Artemisia, ana M i. flowers of
Elder, M ss, Licorice, ss, Polypodij quercini, i. white and light Agaricke,
iii. ss, Ginger, ii. boil these in water, q. s. unto lb i. ss. add to the
strayning Elect. elescopi, i. sir. Artemisiae. Byzantini, ana i. ss.

Elect. elescopi, vi. Benedicta laxatinae, A draught.
ii. sir. Artemisia, i. water of Nepite, iii.

Pillul. de Sagapeno, Mastichinarum, Faetidarum, Pills*
ana i. Cinnamon, ss, Beauer-stone, Sauine, ana gr. xii. sir. Artemisiae q. s.
make hereof 7. or 8. pills.

Trochisc. de Mirrhae, ii. Cinnamon, Beauerstone, A draught*
ana i. sir. Artemisiae, of sweet white wine, ana ii.

Boracis, Corticum Cassiae Fistulae, ana ii. ss, A Powder:
roots of Cyclamen, Cinnamon, ana ss, Myrrh, i. Give ii. hereof with white
wine.

Triphera magna without Opium, Troch. de Myrrh^, A mixture.
ana ii. ancient Triacle, i. Beauerstone, i. ss. M^astri, roots of Dittany,
Sauine, Cinnamon, Cassia lignea, ana i. conserve of Buglosse, ii. ss.

Troch. de Myrrha, iiii. roots of Dittany, ii. ss, A Powder.
Sauine, ss, Beauerstone, ii. Give i. hereof with the water of Artemisia.

roots of Asarum, i. Cyclamen, iii. leaves of Nepite, M i. ss, Sauine ii. seeds
of Parsley, Milij solis, ana ss, A Potion.
Carrowaies, ii. Licorice, v. boil these in a little white wine, add to lb i.
of this strayning sir. Artemisiae, de quinque radicibus, ana i, ss.

roots of Fennel, Parsley, Sperage, Ruscus, A Bath.
Rubi^ tinctorum, ana i. the flowers of Cammomile. Mellilot, Elder, ana M ii.
ss, leaves of Rosemary, Artemisia, Sauine, Nepite, Bays, ana M ii. ss, Baulme,
Origan, ana M i. seeds of Linus, Fengreeke, ana i. ss, seeds of Carrots,
Ammi, ana ss, boil these in water q. s. until the third part be consumed.
The patient shall sit herein up to the navel, without provocation of sweat,
because it does hinder the purgation of the months. A Quil^ shall be filled
with Artemisia, and applied to the privy part. And after she comes out of the
bath, she may take the following medicine.

An Electuary.
of Beauerstone, i. Cinnamon, i. Mithridate, i. ss, decoction of Cinnamon with
Hyppocras, iiii. or else give it with the conserve of Rosemary-flowers.

A Fomentation.
roots of Danewort, lb i. Elder* v. roots of Rubiae tinctorum, Flower-de-luce,
ana ii. leaves of Sage, Artemisiae ana M iii. boil these in an equal quantity
of wine and water, until the third part be consumed: the hips shall be washed
herewith morning and evening: the continual use hereof is very good.

An Ointment.
oil of white Lillies, i. ss, of sweet Almonds, ii. Cammomile, Hens-grease,
ana ss, roots of Asarum aristol. ana i. ss, anoint the lower region of the
belly, and that part of the side where the reins lie.

An Iniection.
roots of Dittany, Cyclamen, ana iii. Fennel. P^^sley, Rubia tinctorum ana i.
leaves of Sage, Nepit, Artemisia, ana M i. boil these in water q. s. until
the third part be consumed. Give iii. hereof with i. ss, of Beauerstone, and
gr. i. of Musk.

Another.
Triacle, ss, Saffron, ss, juice of Sauine, Danewort, with the water of
Artemisia, ana iiii.

A Pessary.
Harts-marrow. i. ss, roots of Rubia tinctorum, Nigella, Bayberries, ana i.
Myrrh, Beauer-stone, ana ii. Cyclamen, Sauine, ana i, ss. oil of Lillies, q.
s.

Another.
Colocynth. Cyclaminis; ana ss. Nigella, Genti^n^, ana ii, Triacle, ss. make
hereof a Pessary with the juice of Sauine.

A Suffumigation.
troch. gallia muschata, roots of Rubi^ tinctorum, aristol. rot. ana i.
Cinnamon, Cloves, ana ss, Artemisiae, Nepit, Baulme, ana ii. Frankincense,
Storax, Galbanum, ana i. ss, This must be received into the womb by a pipe.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the too much suppression of the months.
IF the months be stayed, and the health is thereby impaired, we will go about
the cure, otherwise not. If it be ca^sed by slimy and cold humors (as commonly
it happens) such medicines that do heat and dry, shall be prescribed, but
first of all, the superfluous humors shall be assuaged with lenitiue
medicines, and then made obedient unto nature, and expelled by a purge. Then
such as provoke the terms, and open the mouth of the veins, shall be
prescribed. After all this is done, the blood shall be brought downward by
opening of the Saphena vein, or by Cupping-glasses, which shall be fastened to
the hammes with Scarification: the like may be also done with Baths, Lotions,
and Pessaries, whereto such medicines shall be added as do assuage the pain,
and allay the heat, if the patient do complain thereof. And that the
Pessarie do not make an ulcer in the womb, it must not remain long in the
body. After the Pessary is taken out, the place shall be washed with white
wine, wherein Baulme, and Pennyroyall have been boiled. The cure must be
begun with gentle medicines, and then stronger by degrees shall be
administered: if an obstruction be caused by too much fatness about the womb,
she must eat sparingly, and use violent exercise; if the terms be
suppressed because of sickness, or too much euacuation, or too long fasting,
or spare diet, they shall not be provoked, except the former diseases be first
cured. The best medicines for the provoking of the months, are i. of
Beauerstone, drunk with strong wine, after she comes out of the Bath:
Diacalaminthes Fernelij, troch, de myrrha, tryphera magna without Opium.

A method serving for the knowledge of the MOTHER.
PRaefocatio vteri, or Mother, is a running back of the womb, or of malign
vapors bredde in the womb, unto the higher parts, whereby the bowels,
midriffe, and stomach, are sometimes so crushed, that they cannot be widened
by breathing: for it seems in this disease, that the womb is lifted up so
high, that it drives the other members above it, unto the higher part;
sometimes also the womb is drawn toward one side. This disease has some
affinity with the falling sickness, swounding, and apoplexy, because the speech
is often taken away, and the party falls to the ground, or at the least cannot
endure to stand long: yet herein they differ, for in this disease there is no
foaming at the mouth, neither are the eyes turned, or the sinews stretched,
which is never perceived in the Mother. And as in this disease they have the
sense of hearing, so they do in like manner understand, and feel the least
pain that does touch them, though but very dully: yet in the falling sickness,
they are destitute of all these. This disease also differs from the Sincope or
swounding herein, because the pulse holds out, though it be but little, thin
and faint; but in the Sincope the pulse beats not, and besides she that is in
a swound, looks paler then they do that are troubled with the Mother, and a
colder sweat ouer-sprreads their bodies. If sweet odours be put unto her nose,
they do much annoy the patient, but if they be laid to the womb, they are
present remedy.

The part affected.
The womb is chiefly affected; for menstruous blood, or some other humor,
oftentimes the seed it self is corrupted, and then draws a corrupt quality to
the place; sometimes it is affected by the consent which the womb has with
the principal parts of the body, as with the brain, by the films of the back
bone, and sinews: with the liver by the means of the middle veins, but with
the heart by means of the arteries, neither may it seem strange that the whole
body is ill affected, when as the principal parts are affected.

Signs.
For the most part queisines of stomach and loathing of meat follows, and yet
without vomiting; because an evil vapor is conveyed from the womb unto the
bowels and stomach, which causes all this; from hence also comes thick
breathing, and if the vapor be carried to the midriffe, or if the womb be very
much swelled, it does crush the midriffe and guts, by which crushing the parts
are straightned, and there is danger of suffocation; in conclusion her heart
does fail her, her looks are heavy, although the pulse be nothing altered: if
the pain get up into her head, sometimes she is disquieted with anger,
sometimes with fear, and sometimes a deep sleep does concur; the patient,
is on a sudden dumb, her face looks pale, and she presently falls to the ground
with her eyes shut. And although they have sense and motion, yet neither of
them can be easily discerned, for they lie on the ground speechless, and move
not at all. The extreme parts of the body are cold, which seems to be caused
by the head, from whence it falls down into the shoulders, neck, arms, legs,
and feet. Difficulty of motion comes withal, and a kind of resolution, yet it
is soon shaken off when the disease declines; and their eyes after much
heaviness are opened, their che^kes grown red, and the body waxes strong, the
womb by little and little is loosned, and some moisture runs out of the
privy parts, their guts rumble, their mind, sense and motion is as perfect as
ever they were: when the fit is coming, a feeblenes of the legs takes her,
drowzines, lazines and palenes of the face, and by degrees greater accidents
come upon them. And then when these symptoms do appear, then it can easiest
be discerned what the disease is. For the milder symptoms have some affinity
with the cardiacall passion, and melancholy, and therefore it cannot be
rightly discerned what the disease is: both these kind of symptoms accompany
this disease.

The Causes.
The cause of the Mother is menstruous blood corrupted, and an evil vapor
breaking out from the womb, or else some impostume in the womb. For the most
part it is caused by the seed that is sent to the womb, and therein detayned
and corrupted. Sometimes it is caused by corrupt humors which remain there;
for when these do putrify in the womb, they do breed a noisome, and venomous
quality. And it happens that from whence life arises, from thence also the
deadliest bane of venom springs, and then is it an easy matter for venomous
matter to be carried not only by veins and arteries, but also by secret
breathing holes into the upper parts, and so disturb their functions.

Prognostiques.
If the affect be long, and often comes upon the patient by fits like to the
falling sickness, although there be no apparent danger, yet every fit brings no
small danger with it. It is confessed that many have recovered of this disease:
yet most die either in the fit, or presently after the ft. Then the fit did
last long, the sense and motion was taken away, the pulse did beat swift and
disorderly, and at the length it cease: lastly, a cold sweat is spread over the
whole body, the breath fayles: then a swounding and death follows. The danger
is not so great, if the spirits be not hurt; and there is less danger to be
feared, if with their breath they have motion and sense. Even as the falling
sickness comes by fits, so does the Mother.

A method serving for the cure of the stopping of the MATRIX or MOTHER.
THe air must be temperate, not cold or very windy, they must abstain from
such meats as do increase the blood and seed, also they must eat sparingly.
In like manner such meats as do generate windiness, malign and melancholy
humors, must be voyded. They may not drink wine, except it be allayed with
water. And yet if there be danger of swounding, they may drink wine. Moderate
exercises are good, their sleep must be shorter then ordinary, the excrements
must be avoided by art or nature, sadness must be avoided.

Sir. de quinque radicibus, Preparers.
Oxymel squilliticum. decoction of petasites, Briony, artemisia, Aristol. rot.
Syrupus artemisiae. water of Nepite, Mug-wort, Dittany, Petasites.

Benedicta laxatiua, Electuarium elescopi, Emptiers.
Agaricus troch. Hiera picra, Diacoloc. Pillul. de Agarico, Faetidae. Likewise
a Clyster is good.

Painful ligatures of the lower parts, Auerters.
chiefly of the legs and hips, even until they be nummed. The sides must be
crushed hard with the hand downward, for by this means the womb cannnot get
up. Also she shall be bound about with scarfs, frictions of the same part, and of
the soales of the Feet, that the Spirits which are stirred up, might expel
the obnoxious humors. Cupping-glasses shall be fastened to the share, and hips,
but not to the upper parts of the belly, for then the womb would either be
detained there, or else drawn thither. Bags and fomentations of Wormwood, Mug
wort, Camomill^, Penny-royall. Suffumigations of the feathers of Partridges,
the soales of shoes, Goats-horne, Beauer-stone, Pitch, the wicke of a candle
newly put out: for these stir up the expelling faculty, which does shorten
the fit by expelling the hurtful matter. Odours shall be put under the nose,
being made of Assa fatida, Beauer-stone, Sagapenum, Galbanum. These drive the
womb downward, because the womb cannot endure any stinking smell, when as a
sweet smell refreshes it, and therefore Lignum-aloes, Cinet, Gallia moschata,
Alipta moschata, Cloves, Oil of white Lillies, wherein some Musk is put, do
comfort the womb: therefore the fume of these lastly mentioned, shall be
received into the womb by a tunnell. Sneezing medicines of Helle-bore, and
Beauer-stone, do suddenly break off the fit: for the womb returns to its
proper seat, because the upper parts are too much stirred up and down: the
patient may hold her breath, or else sombody should blow up into her nostrils;
in the suppression of months, the inward vein of the arm shall be opened, and
then her ankle vein, or at the least bloodsuckers shall be used, or
scarification: frictions of the inward part of the womb, as well in the time
of the fit, as when it is quite over, with a midwifes finger anointed with the
Oil of white Lillies, wherein some Ciuet, and Musk is dissolved; for hereby
the obnoxious matter is expelled, and the matrice is drawn down to the lower
parts.

Strengthners.
Diacuminum, seeds of Carrots, Beauer-stone, with the decoction of Mug-wort in
thin wine, shall be given at distance of time. Sometimes her nose shall be
stopped, and the breath kept in: for hereby the natural heat being gathered
together, does comfort the part affected, and scatters the malign humor. A
pessary of Cummin, Agaricke, Hiera picra, Triacle, Mithridate, Pepper, Ginger,
Ammoniacke, Goose-greace, Storax, is very useful and necessary. A
Suffumigation of Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, Lignum aloes, Ladanum, Troch. aliptae,
Gallia muchata: this must be so conveyed to the womb, as the former was.
Oils of Spike, and Flower-de-luce shall be iniected into the privy parts. An
ointment for the belly and loins, of the oil of Lillies, Nard, Gallia
muschata, Cinnamon, oil of Amber. A Pessary of Ladanum, Alipta moschata,
Musk, Storax, Amber, Cinnamon, Cloves, Lignum aloes, oil of Spike, Rosewater.
An Emplayster of Ladanum, Gallia aliptaque moschata, whereto a little musk
shall be added.

A more particular method serving for the cure of the MOTHER.
roots of Angelica, Bryony, A Clyster.
ana vi. Aristol. rot. iii. leaves of Mercury, Mugwort, ana M i. ss, flowers of
Cammomile, Mellilot, ana M i. boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss, add to
the strayning Hierae logod. ii. Electuarij elescopi, i. oil of white Lillies,
Keirini, ana i. ss, of strong wine iii.

sirupe of Mugwort, sir. de quinque radicibus, Oxymellis simplicis, ana i. ss,
the water of Mugwort, Nepite, A Iulep*
ana v.

roots of Angelica, ss, Bryony, v. Fennel, Parsley, ana i. the seeds of
Annise, Piony, ana ss. Nepite, Mugwort, A Potion.
ana M ss. Raysins the stones being taken out, i. Licoras, iii. Damask
Pruines, Sebesten ana no vi, Polypodij quer^ini, senae Alex. ana i. white and
light Agaricke, ss, flowers of Borage, Buglosse, ana M i. Ginger, i. ss,
Cinnamon, ii. boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. add to the strayning
Benedictae laxatiuae, Elect. elescopi, ana ss, Give the patient iiii. here of
in the morning.

A draught.
Electuarij elescopi, iii. Agarici troch. i. water of Dittany, Nepite,
Petasites, sirupe of Mugwort, ana i.

Pills.
Pillul. faetidarum, Hierae diacoloc. ana i. ss, sirupe of Mugwort, q s.

Pills.
Pillul. de sagapeno, foetidarum, ana i, ss, of Beauerstone, ss, with the sir.
of Mugwort, q. s. make hereof 8. pills.

Pills.
Hieroe diacoloc. pillul. aggregatiuarum, i. Assae foetidae ss, of Beauerstone,
gr. vi make hereof 8. Pills, and give them to the patient once in every week.

A draught.
Triacle, Mithridate, ana i. ss, Assoe faetid^, ss, the decoction of the seeds
of Carroots, iiii, Also the decoction of P^tasite^, Bryony, Licorice, roots of
Angelica with Sugar may be drunk very often, because it is an especial remedy
against this disease.

A Vomit.
oil of white Lillies, ii. the decoction of cleansed Barley, ii. Oxymellis
squillitici, i. ss. Give this lukewarm in the morning.

An Electuary.
Diamas^i dulcis, Diambrae, Aromatici rosati, ana ii. Mithridat, i.
Beauer-stone, ii. ss, roots of Dittany, i. conserve of Buglosse, i. sir. of
Mugwort q. s.

A Powder.
white Pepper, white Hellebore, ana ii. Beauer-stone, i. seeds of Rue, i. ss,
put a small quantity hereof into the patients nose.

Calami aromatici, wood Aloes, ana i. Salis gemmae et nitri, A Pessary.
ana i. ss, dry Storax, ss, Musk, gr. ii. Rosewater and Vinegar ana q. s.

Troch. galli emuschata, i. alip^a muschat^, i. Calami aromatici, Trochisks.
dry Storax, Cloves, Mace, wood Aloes, ana iiii. Musk, Ciue^, ana gr. vi.
Rosewater q. s. make hereof Trochisks for a perfume. When necessity requires,
one of these shall be cast into the fire, and the fume shall be received into
the womb by some convenient instrument for that purpose.

A Liniment.
oil of Lillies, Spikenard, ana i. ss, Keirini, i. Musk, gr. v. of Galliae
muschatae, Storax, ana ss, mix these, and use them about the privy parts and
inward parts of the womb.

Emplastri ceronei, ii. Troch. galliae muschatae, i. ss, An Emplayster.
Cinnamon, leaves of Bays, i. Ladani, i. ss, oil of white Lillies q. s. apply
this to the place about the privy parts. Also twice in every day, that place
and the womb it self shall be anointed with the oil of white Lillies being
first heat.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the MOTHER.
IF there be any danger feared by the accidents, before the cause of the
disease be opposed, they shall be taken away, the patient may be relieved
partly by unsavory odours made with Assa faetida, Brimstone, Pitch,
Beauerstone, snuff of Candles, Feathers, and Asses hooues burnt, and partly by
Pessaries, for either of these remove the cause. The like also may be effected
by sweet perfumes received into the womb: for although evil savors are good
against the disease, if they be received in at the nose, in like manner they
are hurtful, if they get into the womb. For some of these cause the womb so
to swell, and lift it self upward, that it flies to the midriffe for succor:
and so by crushing the midriffe does, hinder breathing. Also the chiefest part
of the cure does consist in hindering the malign vapors that ascend not to the
heart; for this purpose Frictions, and Ligatures of the lower parts are good.
When the fit is over, then the cause of the disease shall be enquired after:
for if it be caused by the suppression of months, they shall flow in their
due season: If it be caused by being detayned in the womb, and therein
corrupted, such things shall be prescribed as will hinder the generation of
the seed, or she may enjoy the company of man, or else the neck of the womb
shall be tickled with a woman's finger, which must first be dipped in the oil
of Lillies. If it be caused by other corrupt humors in the womb, they shall
first be digested, then made obedient unto nature, and at the first expelled
by a purge, and the body strengthened. And for the better preservation of women
from this disease, they must fast often, and exercise themselue in serious
labors; they may likewise use Cummin-seed, Saffron, Cinnamon, seeds of Carroots
and such like with their meats.

A method serving for the knowledge of ARTHRITIS, or Joint- GOWTE.
THe Ioynt-gout is a feebleness of the joints, and pain coming upon them at
certain distances of time; for the most part it is caused by a flux, which
winds it self between the ligaments, filmes, and tendones of the joints: for
in this disease the joints do first receive the humor, which at the length
does insinuate into the filmes adjoining. If the Gowte happen in the wrist, the
joints of the fingers, or else in the Ligaments and brawne, it is called
Chiragra or finger-Gowte, if it does stick in the knee, then it is termed
Genogra, or knee-Gout, but it is called the Gowte of the hips, if the patient
be pained above the hips, from whence it does spread it self to the thigh,
calves of the legs, and unto the end of the feet: yet this Gowt sticks not
in the hippe, but it is fastened above the hippe, at the top of the buttocke. If
the Gowte does stick in the feet, it is called P^dagra, the feete-Gowte,
whether it be in the ankles, soales of the feet, or the great to^s joint,
wherefore every pain of the joints shall not be called the ioynt-Gowte, but
only that which is caused by the feebleness of the joints, by reason of their
loosnes, or wideness of the passages, or defluxe of the humors: sometimes
seizes on the shoulder joints, and turning joints of the back bone, or chine.
Sometimes not any knitting of the bones is free from this pain. Every other
pain of the joints has one general name, Athritis, or the joint gowte, and
from hence may be gathered, that the affects of the joints differ (...) in
their whole kind, but only in diversity of places affected.

The part affected.
The joints, tendones, ligaments, and filmes of the parts of the body, which
either knit o^ else enuiron the bones, are here affected, and sometimes the
membranes are filled and stretched.

The Signs.
The patient is extremely tormented for along space, when the disease does
first surprise the patient, yet the pain is but little, and arise the four
formerly specified; and then by the use of the evil diet, almost all the
joints of the body do suffer alike, sometimes not one part of the body is free
from this disease. In the feetgowte, or hipgowte, for the most part no swelling
does appear; but in the hand gowt, and kneegowte, a swelling, rednes, and
heat by extreme pains are easily to be perceived. Sometimes an inflammation is
caused, and the appetite is overthrown, and the patient is troubled with
watchings, and a Fever.

The Causes.
The cause of every ioynt-gowt is for the most part great store of phlegmy
humors, or some other humors ouerflowing in the greater veins, the Liver,
and Head, so that the parts are therewith surcharged; and that these parts may
likewise be freed of this burden, they do cast these excrements upon the
joints, ligaments, and tendones, and filmes, whereby they are filled, stretched
and weakened: Sometimes these humors grow thick, and by the reason of the heat
that is about those places, or by the force of medicines, they are as it were
baked, and resume the nature of a sand-stone or gravel; and then a knotted
gowte is caused, wherein the joints are wrested, and grow so crooked, that they
cannot move. There be four causes of this superfluity of humors, the immoderat
use of strong wine, Venery, crudities, and feeblenes of the parts. To these may
be added the relinquishing of accustomed exercises, and the suppression of
usual euacuation. This disease is an hereditary disease.

Prognostikes.
The pains of the feetgowte trouble the patient at the spring time, and
Autumn. If this disease he not cured before the patient comes unto his perfect
growth, it will not be perfectly cured; yet in the younger sort there is some
hope, if they do use a moderate diet, and keep their bellies loose, and do
keep themselves in action, but then the knotty gowte must not be grown,
because it will not admit of any cure. In this disease if a dissentery, or
laske does happen to the patient, he is presently eased. In the hipgowte the
pain is greater then it is in any other kind of the ioynt-gowte, and it will
last so much the longer, by how much the numnes, cold in the hips, legs and
loins is; also if they be costiue, and well grown in years* the disease will
scarce shake hands with them. It is a good sign in this kind of ioynt-gowte,
if the pain fall into the lower parts from the loins and hips. These two
kinds of gowts bring with them the dropsy, and Asthma; and then these diseases
are incurable. Also both these kinds of gowtes will return again, although
the patient may judge himself to be altogether freed of them.

A method serving for the cure of ATHRITES, or joint- GOWTE.
THe air must be temperate, and rather incline to heat and dryness. Such
meats as do moderately nourish, are good, and of these they must eat but
sparingly. They may drink the water of Honey, or water wherein Cinnamon, or
seeds of Annise have been boiled; they must avoid wine, especially strong
wine. When the disease has left them, they must use exercises, otherwise not.
Their sleep must be moderate, for too long sleep does cherrish the disease.
Their bellies must always be kept loose. The use of Venery is hurtful; and in
conclusion, let them avoid all perturbations of the mind.

Oxymel simplex, Preparers*
Mel rosatum. Sir. Staechados. Sir. of the juice of Borage. Waters of Betony,
Wormwood, Borage.

If there be too much blood, Emptiers.
and at the first time of the diseases seizing on the patient, the vein of the
shoulder, on that side the pain is resident shall be opened but if it be in the
lower parts, then the hamme or ankle vein shall be opened: for this takes away
the pain of the hips. Also that vein that goes to the ring finger or little
finger, shall be opened. Yet if the hands and arms be pained, the hamme vein
of the same side shall be opened. An electuary of the juice of Roses, Benedicta
laxatiua, Elect. Elescopi, Diaturbith with Rhab. Diacath. Pillula cocciae,
Faetidae, Aureae, de Sagapeno, de hermodactylis maiores, Artheticae, de
oppopanace, Arabic. Hiera picra, Agaricus, Troch. Rhab. myrobal. Kebuli,
Turb^th. Conserve of the manifold infusion of Roses, a decoction of the roots
of Asarum, St^chas, Herba paralitica, Iuy, Seen, Polypody, Agaricke, Myrobal.
Citrini, Kebuli, Centory thelesse, seeds of Annise, Fennel, to these Benedicta
laxatiua and Elect. elescopi shall be added. Clysters are effectual in the pain
of the hips, and of the upper parts, because they do draw back the humors, and
do refresh the part that is faint, by gentle oils communicated to the members.
And seeing this disease is not only caused by on humor, therefore the cure
ought to be answerable to the humors.

Auerters,
A vomit with the decoction of Radish roots, Orage, seeds of Asarum, Broom
flowers, Sir. Acetosi simplicis, Oxymelle simplici, squillitico, and lukewarm
water. Cupping-glasses are good for the pain in the hips, if they be first
applied to the upper parts, from whence the humors did fall into the hips,
after that the Cupping-glasses shall be removed to the part affected, Frictions,
Ligatures, prouokers of urine and sweat, potentiall cauteries of unslaked lime,
Mel anacardinum, Soap, Niter, Euphorbium. Or else of Cantharides the heads and
wings being cut off, Staues-acre, leaven, Mel anacardinum; or else a plaster
made with the roots and leaves of Ib^ris, and grease. All which are effectual
for the cure of this disease. Repelling medicines must be shunned, because they
strike the humors inward, and there de^aine them, whereby the disease is
caused.

Asswagers of pain.
Oil of Elders, Almonds, Cammomill, Mulleyne flowers, and man's grease are very
good in the hip-gowte. Or else the roots and flowers of Mulleyne macerated in
red wine for the space of 24 hours and then distilled; after this a wet cloth
shall be dipped in the liquor, and shall be applied hot to the part affected. Also
the part may be anointed with the aforesaid Oil; likewise the Oil of Spike is
very much commended. An unguent of the former Oils, the fat of a Fox, Swine
grease, Butter, Oil of Turpentine. Cataplasmes may be made with the roots of
Althaea, Barley flower, and swines grease, or else with the roots of Althae^,
meal of Linus, Fengreeke, Barley, flowers of Mellilote, Cammomill, Wormwood,
Iuy, crummes of Bread, Oxes-dung, seeds of Poppy, a small quantity of Opium,
Oils of Cammomill. Foxes, Roses, with goats Milk. Or else the seeds of Linus
and Fengreeke may be boiled in water and Vinegar, and a small quantity of the
Mucilage shall be extracted, which if it be mixed with Honey, shall be applied to
the part affected. A cerot of Frankincense, Galbanum, Saffron, Ammoniacke,
Vinegar, Rosin, Wax, and Oil of Roses. The medicines that assuage the pain
must be stupefies, unless the pain be very great. And after the use of
stupefactiue medicines, moderate heaters shall be used, otherwise the member
would be too much weakened by the distemper that is left behind.

Triacle, Mithridate, Daiacorallum, Strengthners.
the decoction of Broom, roots of Cyna, Guaiacum. An ointment of the Oils of
Foxes, Spikenard, Cammomill, Lillies, Bays, Roses, Tiles; de euphorbio. An
unguent of the decoction of earthwormes, Sage, Nepite, Tormentary, Broom,
Aristol. Fox. Vnguentum Agrippae, Martiatum, Aregon, Goosegrease,
Swines-grease, Oils of Foxes, Cammomill. A Bath of the fruits of Juniper,
flowers of Cammomill, Mellilote, roots of Dane-wort, leaves of Bays, Sage,
Rosemary, Origan, Wormwood, Betony, Roses, Dane-wort. The part affected shall be
washed with a sponge dipped in this liquor, and afterward it shall be anointed
with mans-grease and Petroleum. A cerote may be made with the Oils of
Cammomill, Dill, Worms, Beauer-stone, whereto some Brim-stone shall be added.
Cataplasmes also may be made of the flowers of Cammomill, Mellilote, leaves and
roots of Althaea, Fengreeke, Cummin, and Lin-seed, and the aforesaid Oils. An
Emplaster of the flowers of Cammomill, Mellilote, Sage, Penny-royall, flower of
Fengreeke, Gum Ammoniacke, Oppoponax, Sagapenum, Oils of Elder, Rue, Foxes,
Cammomill, Bays, Turpentine, Pitch and Wax. Emplastrum Iohannis de Vigo. Such
medicines as do resolve too much, must be avoided; lest the thin humors being
scattered, and the thick left behind, it be turned into a hard substance.

A more particular method serving for the cure of ATHRITES, or Joint- GOWTE.
A Clyster.
Radicum Asar^, Polypodij quercini, ana i. Agarici, ss, leaves of Sage, Bays,
Mallows, Rue, Centory the less, St. John's woort, ana M i. ss, flowers of
Cammomile, Mellilote, ana M i. seeds of Annise, i. boil these in water q. s.
unto lb i. ss, add to the strayning Electu. elescopi, Diaturbith, with Rhab.
ana vi. oil of Rue, Cammomile, Elder, ana i.

A vomit.
Oxymellis simp. et squillit. ana ii. lukewarm water, iii. common oil, i.

A Iulep.
Oxymellis simplicis, sir. ^taechados, Mellis rosati, ana i. waters of Fennel,
Parsley, Betony, ana iiii.

A Potion.
roots of Asarum, iii. Parsley, ii. Chammaepitis, Endive, St. Iohns-wort, Sage,
ana M i. seeds of Annise, vi. seeds of Melons, v. Hermodactylorum, i. ss,
leaves of Seen, bastard Saffron bruised, Polypodij quercini, ana v. of white
Ginger, ii. boil these in water, q. s. unto lb i. ss. add to the strayning of
fine Sugar, ii.

Pills.
Pillul. Faetidarum, de Sagapeno, Cochiarum, ana i. Rhab. electi, Mirobal.
Indorum, ana ss, make hereof 7. or 8, pills.

A vomit,
roots of Asarum, ss, seeds of Orage, Watercresses ana iii. seeds of Asarum
Rocket, ana ii. roots of Radish, i. boil these in water, q. s. until half
be consumed, add unto v. of this decoction Oxymellis squillitici, i. oil of
Cammomile, vi. Give it lukewarm.

An Electuary.
of preserved bastard Pellitory, iii. preserved Ginger, i. ss, Diatrion
pipereon, iii.

Bolus.
Elect. elescopi, Diaturbith with Rhab. ana iii. ss. Electuary of the juice of
Roses, i. of fine Sugar q. s.

roots of Ruscus, Sperage, ana i. Stoechados Arabicae, A Potion.
Herbae paraliticoe, Iuie, ana M i. seeds of Annise, Parsley, ana ss, Licorice,
iii. ss, senae Alex. Polypodij quercini, bastard S^ffron bruised, ana v. boil
these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss, add to the strayning Elect. elescopi*
Benedictae laxatiuae, ana v. Electuary of the juice of Roses, i. ss.

roots of Danewort, lb i. Sage, M iiii. Hysope, A Bath.
Penny-royall, Wormwood, ana M ii. one or two roots of Rape, flowers of
Cammomile, M ii. seeds of Linus, ii. fruit of Juniper, lb ss, boil these in
water wherein a Fox has been boiled: add hereto Brimstone, Alome, ana vi.
after the patient comes out, he must sweat.

of Mithridate, Triacle, ana ii. water of Cinnamon, A draught.
q. s. the patient must drink hereof before he comes out of the bath.

the oil of Tiles, Petrolei, ana ii. oil of Cammomile, Foxes, Turpentine,
Elder, An Ointment.
ana iii. Vnguenti Agrippae; fat of the Cat of the Mountains, ana ss. fat of a
Dog, i. ss.

oil of Worms, i. Galbani, i. Beauer-stone, Another.
ii. ss, Nutmeg, Sage, ana, ii. ss, Mans-fat, oil of Turpentine, ana ss.

oil of Elder, Another.
lb ss. herein boil of the roots of Danewort bruised, iii. add to the
strayning of Mans-fat, ii. oil of Foxes, Petrolei, ana ss, Galbani, Ammoniaci,
ana vi. Hens-grease, ^. ss. Wax and Vinegar q. s.

roots of Danewort, iii. three roots of Rape, A Cataplasme.
seeds of Fengreeke, i. ss, boil these in water q. s. until they be foft;
then add hereto, Cowdung, iii. Honey q. s.

of Pitch iii. Brimstone, i. ss, oil of Roses, q. s, An Emplayster.
spread this upon a hot sheeps-skinne.

roots of Althaea, ii. flowers of Cammomile, A Cataplasme.
M ii. red Roses, leaves of Wormwood, Maioram, Cabage, ana M i. two roots of
Rape of an equal bigness, boil these in Veriuyce q. s. add of wheat and
Barley flower, seeds of Linus, Fengreeke, ana ss, oil of Tiles, iii. oils of
Foxes, Cammomile, wherein Worms have been boiled, ana q. s. the yolke of one
Egg, Saffron, ss. This does assuage the pain.

An Appendix serving for the cure of ARTHRITIS, or Joint- GOWTE.
FIrst, the ill humors shall be euacuated by a Clyster, and they that remain
behind, shall be made obedient to nature, and then driven down with a purge:
but they must be hindered from running to the part affected; for which purpose
a vomit given two or three days together is good: but before they do take
these, they shall use sundry kinds of nutriment, especially such as are liquid
and fat. Then if the pain continue, it shall be assuaged, but stupefactiues
shall not be used, unless great necessity do require, when as too much heat
and pain afflict the patient, and then an ointment shall be made with the oil
of Roses and Cammomile, ana i. Opij, gr. ii. Wax and Vinegar q. s. after that
the stupefactiue medicine is taken off, the grieved part shall be washed with
hot beer, and he shall drink the sirupe of Roses and Quinces with Plantane
water: for these do hinder the humors running to the part affected. At the
length the brain and part affected shall be strengthened, and the distemper
that is left behind amended.

A method serving for the knowledge of the FRENCH POX*
THe French Pox is a contagious disease, which for the most part comes by the
immoderate use of Venery. In former times it was not known, but now it rages
and reigns in most parts of the world. The beginnings of this disease are
small, but in time it does increase, and does not only vitiate the humors and
spirits but also the sinews, membranes, tendons, flesh, and bones. In brief it
does pervert the temperature and substance of the whose body, whereby diversity
of excrements are generated. This disease has taken its name from the
efficient cause thereof.

The part affected.
The liver is chiefly affected, as may appear by the natural actions that are
hurt; for the concoctio^ of the stomach is evil, the brain and other parts
are corrupted, whereby the color of the body is changed, and the whole body is
made unable for any exercise. And besides, they have not that propension to
Venery as they formerly had. This disease does assault rather the natural
spirits then the vital or animal: and these being corrupted, the liver must
needs be corrupted. In this disease, the hairs do fall from the head, although
the patient have no scabs about the privy parts, or ulcers, or running of the
reins.

Signs.
In the beginning of the disease bo^ches do grow in the groines: in the privy
members, and passages of the urine, there be l^ttle pushes, which in time do
send out clammy corrupt blood, and do cause heat of the urine, and strangury.
Also the seed does shead of its own accord. Sometimes very small spots,
sometimes yellow, another while red and wan, like unto a lintle, does appear
in the upper part of the body, which will stick as close to the patient as the
disease does. A pain in the sinews, heaviness of the head, a ^oading pain in
the shoulders and neck, does accompany this disease. Sometimes the aforesaid
spots go away for a time, but return again, bringing with it such virulent
matter, as does eat into the flesh, whereby foul and poisonous matter runs
over the whole body. Likewise these kinds of stinking pushes do grow in the
mouth, throat, nose, and jaws, and in time these parts are exulcerated,
because they are tenderer then the rest: afterward the head, arms, and
thighs are extremely pained and exulcerated; the hairs of the head and beard
do shead, and they take no rest in the night. These pains are rather felt in
the limbs, then in the joints; in the aforesaid places likewise hard swellings
arise, which cannot easily be dissolved especially they do: appear in the
forehead, the head, the middle part of the shoulder, and forepart of the leg,
which at the length become great ulcers, which do corrupt the bones, and
trouble the patient in the night season, because the sinews, membranes,
ligatures and bones are diminished; the bones also sometimes are in like manner
eaten up as the flesh is, and the membranes are plucked from the bones, and are
pricked by the sharpnes of the humors. All these signs do not meet in every
one.

The Causes.
The cause of this disease is a malign and filthy quality, which is
communicated to other parties, only by a touching; but for the most part, it is
communicated to the patient in the act of Venery, because the privy parts have
a thin and rare substance. Also this quality is communicated to the mouth and
skin by the clothes. And by how much the liver is weaker, by so much is this
disease more vehement; whereby it happens, that when as many do couple with an
infected person, all are not for alike tainted, they that have their natural
strength perfect, are not so suddenly corrupted with this contagion. For even
as it is in the Plague, every man sucks in the infected air, yet all are not
alike infected, because the vital spirits are stronger in some then in others.

Prognostiques.
At the first the disease will admit of cure, but afterward it is incurable.
This disease is contagious, and may be gotten only by touching an infected
person. They that are troubled with this disease, are at the length consumed
with too frequent watchings, continual crosses and Feauers. This disease is
hereditary, and does bring with it a consumption, dropsy and Asthma, if the
Liver be very much affected.

A method serving for the cure of the FRENCH POX.
THe air must be moderately hot, for cold does hinder the operation of the
medicines. The patients must eat sparingly, and their bread must be twice
baked, or else the crust of bread. They may eat the flesh of Hens, Pullets,
Larks, Pheasants, and they are better roasted then sodde. But when they take a
purge, sodde is best. Such meats as do breed cold and gross humors, winds, or
that do inflame the blood, are forbidden. They must exercise themselves until
they sweat, for hereby the moist matter is expelled, their sleep must be
moderate; the belly must be purged once in every week, especially if the
offending humors be gross; for thinner humors will be avoided by sweat. They
must shun all perturbations of the mind, and also abstain from Venery.

Oxymel simplex, Sir. Acetosus, Sir. of Fumitary, Endive, Preparers.
Violets, Buglosse, Hops* Waters of Succhory, Violets, Borage, Endive,
Buglosse. Sir Staechados. Oxymel simplex and Squilliticum, a sir. compounded of
Fumitary. The former shall be used, if the abounding humors be choleric, which
does happen unto those that have virulent ulcers. If the humors be phlegmy, the
latter shall be used.

Emptiers.
Pillul. aggregatiuae, Artheticae, de hermodactylis, Cocciae, de Fumaria, de
agarico, de colocynth. Faetidae, fine quibus esse nolo, Aureae, assaieret, de
Rhab. de quinque generibus myrobal. Hiera pacchij, Elect. elescopi, Lapis
lazuli, Diasena. Confect. hamech, Electuarium de spyllio. Electuarium Indum
maius. Diaprunum simplex* A decoction of Sena. A potion of the roots of Asarum,
Flower-de-luce, Sperage, Fennel, Dittany, Tormentill, Aristol^chia, Succhory,
Bettony, Fumitary, Agrimony, Scabious, Scolopendria, Dodder, rinds of
Dane-wort, Thyme, Epithymon, seeds of Annise, Fennel, flowers of Borage,
Buglosse, Violets, Seen, Agaricke, Polypodium, black Helle-bore, Rhab,
Hermodactilis, Myrobal. Citrinis, Kebulis, Licorice, Raysins, Cinnamon, Cloves,
Ginger, Sir. of Fumitary, de Epithym^ Oxymelle simplici. Hermodactyli,
Colocynthis, Agaricke, Seen, Epithymon. A Clyster of the decoction of Nettles,
Buglosse, Althaea, Mallows, Fumitary, Hops, Cammomil, Mercury. If the body be
full, and the disese is newly come upon the patient, the liver vein shall be
opened, especially if the patient be very much pained. Purging medicines must
be often reiterated, because there is great plenty of vicious humors. Give this
potio^ for the space of four days in every week, and that for the space of
seven weeks. The other days they may use the electuary appointed in the
potion.

Expellers of the contagious humors.
A potion to provoke sweating, of the wood Guaiacum, is a sovereign remedy
against the French pox. A decoction of the roots of Cyna, Sarsaperilla, Apios,
is good. Annoint the v^cer with the froth of the decoction of Sarsaparilla,
Guaiacum, and Cyna. Triacle water, or Triacle distilled with Aqua vitae. An
Electuary of Triacle, Mithridate, roots of A^gelica, Tormentill, Pimpernell,
Wormseed, rinds of the wood Guaiacum, seeds of Juniper, Piony, Carduus
Benedictus, Scabious. St Iohns-wort, Dittany, Gentianae, Orange-pee^s,
^amariscus, juice of Scordium, Cnnamon, Myrrh, Frankincense, Cionserue of
Buglosse, Saccharum rosatum, sir. of Orange-peels. An unguent to cause sweat,
may be made of Myrrh, Masticke, Frankincense, roots of Elecampane, Triacle,
Mithridate, Bdellium, Galbanum, Gum Ammoniacke, Vnguentum martiatum, oil of
Bays, Lillies, Cammomile, Almonds, Turpentine, Butter, Hens and Swines-grease.
A Cerote of the former matter, wherewith the body shall be clothed if
occasions draw the patient forth of the dorers. An ointment of the former
ingredients, with Quicksiluer, oil of Turpentine, Philosophers, Petroleum, and
Aquae vitae. Vnguentum Iohanis de Vigo, is very good against this disease. A
perfume of Ladanum, Olibanum, Masticke, Frankincense, Aloes, Storax,
Sandaracha, Cynabrio sublimato, roots of Dittany, Wormeseed, Mace, Cloves,
Calamus aromaticus, Guaiacum, Bay Berries, Triacle. This may be applied unto
certain parts of the body, namely, the legs and arms, if they be pained, or
ulcers arise into those parts.

Laetificans Galeni, Triacle, Mithridate, Strengthners.
with the conserve of Buglosse, Diatrion sandali, Diamargaritum frigidu^,
Diarrhod. abbatis, Orange-pills preserved, Myrobal. conditi, Conserve of
Buglosse, flowers of Sage, roots of Elecampane, Acorus, flowers of Rosemary. An
Epitheme for the heart, Ex speciebus Diamargariti frigidi, Sandalis, Baulme.

A more particular method serving for the cure of the FRENCH POX.
of common roots, ana ss, seeds of Parsley, Alisander, A Potion.
iii, Calamint, M ii. Licorice, ss, boil these in water q. s. unto lb i. ss,
add to the strayning Oxymellis compositi, iiii. Give this before the patient
does enter into the Bath.

sir. of Fumitary, iii. of Hops, Oxymellis simplicis, A Iulep.
ana i. water of Fumitary, Hops, sour Sorrel, ana iii.

A draught.
leaves of Seen, Polypodij quercini, ana ii. ss, Myrobal. Indorum, ii. Raysins,
i. boil these in xvi. of Buglosse water, until the third part be consumed.

A Potion.
of sour Sorrel, Elecampane, Danewort, ana vi. Wormwood, p i. Succhory,
Buglosse, Borage, Fumitary, Scabious, Dodder, Maiden hair, Betony, Sage,
Agrimony, ana M ss, Maioram, Rosemary, ana p i. Epithymi. ss, St^chados
Arabici, bastard Saffron bruised, leaves of Seen, Licorice, ana vi. Agaricke,
i. ss, seeds of Melons, Annise, Fennel, ana i. boil these in posset drink,
unto lb i. ss, add to the strayning Oxymellis simp. iii. of fine Sugar q. s.
the passages shall be opened by this potion, before they take any stronger
medicines.

Another.
roots of sour Sorrel, iii, roots of Elicampane, i. Betony, Dodder,
Scabious, Agrimony, Borage, Buglosse, S^olopendria, Cetrach, ana M ss, seeds of
Annise, Fennel, ana iii. Polipodij quercini, leaves of Seen, bastard Saffron
bruised, ana i. of black Hellebore, ii. ss, Thyme, Epithymi, ana ss, Raysins
the stones being taken out, i. Licorice, ss, boil these in water q. s. unto lb
i. ss, add to the strayning fine Sugar q. s.

A draught.
Electuarij elescopi, Cassiae, ana ss, Electuary of the juice of Roses, ss,
water of Fumitary, iii.

Diacath. Confect. hamech, ana iii. Sp. Diacarthami, ss Electuary of the juice
of Roses, i. sir. of Fumitary, i. water of Hops, iii.

Pills.
Pillul. Ind^rum, de Rhab. aggregatinuarum, ana i. Diagridij, gr. iii. sirupe
of Fumitary, q. s. make 8. pills hereof.

Pills.
Agarici troch. Pillul. aggregatiuarum, de Hermodactylis, ana i. Diagridij, gr.
v. sirupe of Fumitary, q. s.

A draught.
of Triacle, Mithridate, ana i. ss. sir. of Orange-pills, i* the decoction of
water-Germander, iii.

A Bath.
flowers of Cammomile, Mellilot, Maioram, Pellitory of the wall, Fetherfew,
Mugwort, Fennel, Calamint, leaves of Bays, ^uy, Agrimony, Horehound,
Rosemary, ana p i. roots of sour Sorrel, Danewort, Fennel, ana iiii. fruits
of Juniper, lb i. Fengreeke, lb ss, seeds of Annise, Fennel, ana i. the seeds
and roots must be bruised, and the herbs chopped small.

scrapings of the wood Gu^iacum, A Potion.
lb i. water lb xii. after the wood is macerated herein for the space of 24.
hours, it must be boiled and then strayned, this must be their drink at
dinner and supper.

of the former decoction, whereto iiii. of fresh scrapings shall be added,
boil these in lb xii. of water, Another,
unto lb ix. This drink they may use for the space of 20.40, or 60 days:
sometimes in this space they shall be purged, and the wood Guaiacum,
Colocynthis, and Hermodactyli, shall be mixed with it.

of swines grease, Vnguenti martiati, Hens-grease, An Unguent.
ana i. oil of Lillies, Bays, ana ii. Quicksiluer, vi. Olibani, Masticke,
Sage, Staechas, Lithargy, ana i. ss, Aqua vitae, ii. oil of Bays, iii. the
Quicksiluer shall be beaten in a mortar with the grease, and the rest shall
then be added to them.

oil of Cammomile, Spike, Lillies, ana ss, A Cerote.
oil of Saffron, ii. Swines-grease not salted, ii. Euphorbii, i. Frankincense,
iiii. oil of Bays, ss, worms washed in wine, i. juice of the roots of
Danewort, sour Sorrel, Elecampane, ana ss, Squinancy, Staechas, Fetherfew,
ana p i. of the best wine, lb i. boil these over a gentle fire, until the
wine be consumed: add to the strayning of the Lithargy of Gold ii. Turpentine,
i. Wax, q. s. make hereof a Cerote, add at the length to this Cerote, of the
decoction of Storax, iii. then take it from the fire, and stir it with a
stick, until it be lukewarm, then add hereto Quicksiluer ii. and stir
them until they be all very well incorporated.

oil of Bays, ii. Petrolei, ss, Quicksiluer, ii, An unguent,
Cina^rij, ii. Swines-grease neither salted nor melted, lb ss, dissolve first
the grease, and then Cinabrium, and the rest.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the FRENCH POX.
IF the patient were never troubled with this disease before, the cure is with
more ease performed: First therefore a vein shall be opened and the gross
humors made thin by preparers, and the pores of the body shall be clozed up,
and afterward expelled by a purge. And then they shall go into the bath, and
there sweat continually, wiping off the sweat as it does come out of the body;
but before they enter into the bath, they must drink a potion which does open
the pores wherein the matter of this disease does lie; the decoction of the
roots of Fennel, Elecampane, Lintels, Raysins and Figs: add unto iiii. of
this decoction* of Triacle or Mithridate, ii. they must sir in the bath for the
space of three hours, sweating continually, and wiping it off as fast: at the
prescribed time they must go to bed, and there sweat, and if noe good can be
done on the patient this way, because the disease has taken too deep root, a
vein shall then be opened, and after they be purged, the decoction of the wood
Guaiacum, or Sarsaparilla, or roots of Cyna, shall be given unto them, this
decoction must be given unto them hot. After the receiving of this, they must
lay them down to sweat, and be covered very warm with cloths. After they
have well sweat, they may walk in a chamber, but must not eat any thing for
the space of five hours after. If by reason of poverty they cannot buy this
decoction, or because of urgent occasions that may call them abroad they cannot
use them, unctions with Mercury shall be used; sometimes this disease goes away
in a fume, being opposed by perfumes; yet they shall not be used, unless the
other will not prevail. If there be any that cannot stay at home, because of
some urgent occasion, an ointment shall be laid upon a linen cloth, and so
laid to the joints, which shall be renewed twice in every week. For this
purpose therefore, Emplastri de Mellilot^, lb ss, Quicksiluer, ii. oil of
Bays, Petrolei, Turpentine, ana q. s. make hereof a Cerote; If the tumors that
be swelled are hard, roors of Altha^, Figs, Fengreeke, boiled in wine, and a
small quantity of Hens-grease added thereto, will make a good plaster for to
soften it, and assuage the swelling.

A method serving for the knowledge of the PLAGVE.
THe Plague is a disease which does seize upon many, and is caused by an
unusual, and pernicious putrefaction; sometimes the constitution of our bodies
is so different from the natural temperature, that it is changed altogether
into a pernicious and poisonous quality. Sometimes the disease is caused
outwardly by some cause, viz. by corrupt and putrid exhalations, sometimes by
dead carcasses unburied, or by standing pooles, which stink above measure.
Sometimes it is caused by the influence of the stars, and then it is the
immediate hand of God, and then it is properly called the pestilence: when it
is caused by outward causes, it is called a pestilent fever, or plague. Those
feauers which are caused by venom, are mortal, but not pestilent, because
they are not infectious.

The Part affected.
The infectious air first gets into the heart, sucked in thither by the
breath, because the air is subtle and thin, and apt to get into the pores.
First this air does infect the vital spirits, and then the radical moisture,
and at the length the whole substance of the body.

Signs.
When these corrupt humors do disturb the patient, they do toss themselves
very unquietly up and down, and will not abide long in one place: Their
appetite is taken away, and the members are very dull and heavy: also the head
aches, for the most part head and stomach are both pained, and in breife their
strength fails them, and the spirits are decayed, especially the vital
spirits. The extreme parts are cold, but the inward parts, namely the heart,
stomach, and lungs are very hot; they are for the most part very dry, and
watchful; yet they have a great inclination to sleep: they loathe all kinds
of meat, and vomit up choleric, and diverse kinds of humors; their tongue is
very foul, and their mouth bitter; their countenance is like theirs that are
drunk, the urine for the most part is thick and smells not well; also a
hicket does disturb the patient, the pulse does beat swift and faint; madness
also and talking idly with amazednes does follow, and the forepart of the
belly is stretched: but the most assured sign of the Plague is contagion,
which because it cannot at the first be perceived, the other signs must be
observed, especially it will be worth the observation whether there be any
botches in the groine, behind the ears, or under the arm holes. In some,
purple color spots, or else little whelks arise, sometimes they be black,
sometimes skie-coloured, especially when the disease is grown ripe; all these
signs seldom or never meet in one and the same body. If the diseases cause
be supernatural, these signs are so gentle, that a man can scarce perceive
himself to be sick: for their appetite remains perfect, they are not thirsty,
no Fever seizes upon them, and yet their strength does fail them on a
sudden. The pulse is swift, little and faint. They vomit much, and by too
frequent vomiting death ensues.

The Causes.
The air tainted with a corrupt air, and conveyed to the heart by drawing of
breath, is the cause of this disease. For the infected air does not only
weaken the humors and spirits of the body, but also the solid substance of the
heart, because we are compelled to suck it in, and to entertain it in the
inward clozet of the heart; where first the spirits, then the humors, and
lastly, the solid substance of the heart, by the corruption of the venom is
destroyed: and at the length the whole body. This corruption of the air is
also caused by the stench of dead carcasses, or by the excrements of men and
beasts, or by standing stinking pools, or ill vapors, which arise out of the
earth. Sometimes the disease it self is caused by some venomous quality bred
in us, by corrupt, choleric, melancholy, and phlegmy humors; and then the
disease is somewhat like a tertian, or quartane, sometimes a quotidian Fever;
and then beside the corrupt humor of the body, they have a venomous and
pestilentiall humor lurking in some parts of the body: and this is the cause
that some one man amongst a thousand, that lives in a clear air, is not sick
of the Plague.

Prognostiques.
The Plague of all other diseases is most dangerous: for although the signs be
good, yet suddenly the patient dies. The danger is the greater, if no pushes,
or carbuncles break out in the body. And though they do break out, yet if the
patient be not thereby eased, nothing but death can be expected. It is also as
dangerous, if the pushes having broke out, do run in again. This disease is
consummated and brought to its full ripenes in 24 hours, but is not so soon
cured; if a cold sweat arise on the body, and the face and eyes do look
black, and the spirits are cast down, and the patient vomits extraordinarily,
and the excrements that are voyded be diversely colored, it is a sign of
death. They which talk idly with amazednes, a kind of conuulsion and
phrensy, for the most part die.

A method serving for the cure of the PLAGVE.
THe air must be rectified by sweet perfumes every day. They must eat
sparingly in the beginning of the disease, besides, that which they eat must
be cooling. The broth of Hens and Pullets are good; the congealed Broth of
Capons, Veale, with Raisins and Saceharum rosatum. They may drink water,
wherein juice of Lemmons, and Vinum granatorum is dissolved. They must not by
any means drink wine. In their broths, Borage, Buglosse, Carduus benedictus,
flowers of Violets, Roses, seeds of Sorrel must be boiled. They must sleep
with moderation; for by sleeping long, the corrupt matter and venom runs
again to the heart; the belly must be kept loose, and they must abstain from
Venery. Lastly, all perturbations of the mind must be avoided.

Emptiers.
Sir. Rosarum solutiuus, sir. of Succhory, with Rhab. Diacath. Electuary of the
juice of Roses, Diaprunum solutiuum, Pillulae pestilentiales. Triphera Persica,
Rhab. infused in the water of Endive, and the cream of Milk. Agaricke,
Diasena, Cenfectio hamech. A decoction of Thyme, Epithymi, leaves of Seen,
Polypody, flowers of Violets, Borage, Buglosse, Angelica, with the sir. of
manifold infusion of Roses. A Clyster of the broth of Hens, Capons, Veale, with
Mercury, Mallows, Althoea, flowers of Violets, leaves of Lettuce, Cassia
fistula, Melrosaceum, and Oil of Violets. A vein shall be opened in the
beginning of the disease, or when there is any suspicion of it. If the blood do
offend in quantity or quality: it may the better be permitted, if the corrupt
matter be not settled to if the patient be tormented with such a pain and
inflamition of the sides as if the breathing were hindered, or the breast much
stopped but if the venom have corrupted the blood, and so it is spread through
the whole body, a vein shall not be opened. But if it be lawful to open a
vein, as in some cases it may be permitted, a vein on that side where the
pain is, shall be opened. If the pain be about the head, face, or neck, then
the Cephalica vein shall be opened. If under the armepits a dull pain be felt,
the Basilica vein: or if that appear not, the median vein shall be opened, if
a heaviness and loading pain be felt in the share, and thighs, the ankle vein
shall be opened. At one time iiij. of blood shall be taken from the patient, if
the humors are yet free from venom. Neither is there any danger of the
exagitation of the humors, because this only happens, whenas greater store of
blood is taken out. If the disease begin with a scowring, or with vomiting, a
vein shall not be opened. The body shall be emptied by a gentle Clyster, if the
disease be not caused by plenty of blood: for it is then better to open a
vein. And because the greater part of the humors are corrupted, as was
formerly declared, therefore such purging medicines as are fit for the
expelling of those humors, shall be prescribed. But loosing Medicines that are
strong, shall in no wise be administered, because it would too much disturb
them.

A vomit is good in the beginning of the disease, Auerters.
especially if the stomach be too full, and corrupt humors are there in great
abundance. Cupping-glasses and Horsleaches shall be laid to the thighs, privy
parts, shoulders, and back bone, and unto those places where the pushes do
break forth; and then especially shall this be prescribed, if a vein may not
be opened; by this means there is some hope of drawing the pushes unto those
places, where for the most part they do break forth; also unto the places that
swell very much, great Cupping-glasses shall be fastened, that the force of the
venom may be turned from the heart, and that it run not in again, as
sometimes it does. After a vein is opened, the patient shall be caused to
sweat; and this may be effected with the dedecoction of Petasites, Carduus
benedictus, Scabious.

Expellers of the Venom.
Diatragacanthum frigidum, Diamargaritum frigidum, Diatria, sandali, Confectio
alchermes. Triacle and Mithridate are good to prevent the danger. They that are
affected, may drink the water of Sorrel and Carduus benedictus* Conserve of
Borage, Buglosse, Roses, Sorrel, Water Lillies, sir. of Violets, Lemmons, the
juice of Goose-berries, Sorrel, Buglosse. Pestilentiall Pills. Electuarium de
gemmis, Latificans Gal. Diascordium Tracastonij, Tryphera saraceneca.
Electuarium de on^. A potion of Scabious water, Pimpernell, Borage, Dragunt,
Mithridate, Triacle, Saffron. They that are infected, may drink the juice of
Carduus benedictus; in like manner the juice and seeds of Oranges, and the
rinds preserved are very good. If they be newly infected, a medicine to cause
sweat, may be given them, of Triacle, Mithridate, Beauer-stone, Bay Berries,
water of Tormentill, Scabious, Dragunt, Pimpernell: this must be given after
Phlebotomy. A potion of the decoction of Lentils, Saffron in Honyed water, with
a small quantity of Oxymel is good. A potion of the water of Endive, Fennel,
Sorrel, Parsley, wherein the seeds of Parsley, dry Figs, and Lentiles have
been boiled: add hereto the sirupe of the juice of a sour Orange: this
potion drives the pushes outward. The waters of Angelica, Tormentill, Sorrel,
Pimpernell, Dittany, Serpentaria do effect the like. Wash Bole Armony with
Vinegar, the roots of Tormentil, Angelica, Dittany, Wormwood, Bitter-wort,
Pimpernell, Betony. Mastike, Saffron, Aloes, Myrrh, Scabious, Sorrel, Rue.
Macerate these in wine and Vinegar, and cast the Vinegar upon a hot stone. The
party infected must be ready to receive the fume hereof. Vnicornes-horne,
Harts-horne. An unguent of the Triacle of Andromachus, Oil of Scorpions. St
Iohns-wort for the pushes and swellings. A Cataplasme of Barley meal, Honey,
Triacle, roots of Lillies, Tormentill, Dittany, Figs, Salt, Leaven,
Pidgeons-dung, and Oil of Lillies. An Emplaster of Triacle, mixed very well
with the juice of Rue. A caustike of unslaked lime, Soap, Leaven, Figs,
Vitriolo Romano, Turpentine, Wallnuts. An Epitheme of the water of Buglosse,
Baulme, Sorrel, Roses, Aceto rosato, cold water, Lettuce, Gourd, Endive,
Plantane, powder of Roses, French Wheat, Diamargariti frigidi. An unguent for
the heart of the Oil of St Iohns-wort, Cinnamon, seeds of Oranges,
Harts-horne, Roses. A quilt of the flowers of Roses, Violets, Buglosse, Keiri,
Oranges, Harts-horne, Cinnamon. Many of these formerly recited, do cause
sweating, and when he has laid himself in the bed, hot Tiles also may be
laid to his feet, a bottle with hot water may likewise be laid unto the
armeholes of the infected, but the bottle must be wrapped in a linen cloth,
that it burn not: an ox bladder with hot water will effect the same. This
kind of sweating shall be used for the space of three days, but especial care
ought to be had, that they sweat not too much; for that is dangerous, and
sweating too little, is no jot auayleable; whilst the patient is sweating, he
must not sleep, or eat any thing. There be many more remedies, that do expel
the tumors that do scarce appear, but especial care must be had, that
medicines heating too much, be not administered, if the patient be already hot:
for at that time Triacle is prohibited.

Confectio. Liberantis, Laetificantis Gal. sp. Diamargariti calidi et frigidi,
Diarrhod. Abbatis, Diamuscum dulce. Strengthners.
Sir. of Endive, juice of Orange, Sorrel, Lemmons, Pomegranates, water of
Borage, Buglosse, Violets, wherein Bole Armony, red Corrall and Perle have
been infused for the space of one night. This does moderate the heat of the
bowels. Conserve of Roses, Violets, Buglosse, Saceharum rosatum, Manus Christi,
perlita, juice of Lemmons, Acetositatis citri, Barberies. Cinnamon water
distilled.

An ointment of red Corrall, red Roses, juice of Oranges and Lemmons, Triacle,
Saffron, Camphor, oil of Roses, Violets: this is for the region of the heart.
An Epitheme ex. sp. de gemmis, the rindes of Oranges, Rozen, French-wheate,
wood Aloes, Wormseed, the bone of a Hearts heart, red and white Corrall,
Saffron, Mace, Musk, Cloves, strong wine, water of Sorrel, Roses, Baulme,
Acetum rosaceu^* Carduus benedictus, Parsley; also a Quilt may be made with
the same that the Epitheme is.

A more particular method serving for the cure of the PLAGVE.
A draught*
sir. Rosarum solutiuus, i. of the decoction of Rhab. Myrobal. citrinorum,
Cardui benedicti, Angelica, ana iiii.

Another.
of the Triacle of Andromachus, ii. Mithridate, i. Bole Armony, ss. water of
Scabious. iii.

A mixture.
roots of Angelica, Tormentill, Dittany, ana i. Petafites, ss, Orange-pills,
Cinnamon, Myrrh, Saffron, ana ii. Aloes, ss, give hereof i. with the decoction
of Roses, Sorrel, Carduus benedictus.

Another.
roots of Angelica, Dittany, ana i. ss. powder of Unicorns horn, ana gr.
viii. the Triacle of Andromachus, Mithridate, Bole Armony, ana i. ss, Sacchari
rosati, i. Give hereof ii.

Another.
roots of Angelica, Diptamy, Pimpernell, Tormentill, Gallingale, Wormeseed, ana
ii. Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, ana i. ss, Myrrh, Frankincense, ana i. Triacle of
Andromachus, iii. ss, eeds of Carduus Benedictus, berries of Juniper, ana i.
Macerate these for the space of 24* hours in equal portions of wine and
Angelica water, and then distill them. Give iii, of this distillation with ss,
of Triacle.

A draught*
Triacle of Andromachus, Ginger, ana ii. Sugar Candy, ss, Dragunt water iii.
Bole Armony, i. of the former distilled water, two or three spoonefuls.

Bole Armony prepared, roots of Tormentill, A Powder.
Diptamy ana ii, Wormeseed, i. ss, seeds of Citrines. Carduus benedictus, ana
i. scrapings of Iuory, Orange-pills, Galingale, Cloves, ana ii. Cinnamon, i.
ss, Sacchari rosati q. s. Give i, hereof with the water of Carduus benedictus.

Triacle, i. ss, Mithridate, iiii. Sp. lib^rantis, i. ss, A mixture.
Beauerstone, gr. vi. Camphor, gr. ii. Bayberries, ss, Give i. hereof with the
water of Tormentill, Pimpernell, Scabious, after that a vein is opened, for
this will cause sweating.

roots of Angelica, i, ss; Triacle, i. water of Angelica, A draught.
Dragunt Rue, ana i.

conserve of Buglosse, Roses, preserved Orange-pils, An Opiate.
ana ss, manus Christi, i. Diamargariti frigidi, i. ss, sir. of the juice of
Oranges q. s.

conserve of Roses, Violets, ana i. Orange-pills preserved, ss, red Corrall,
Bole Armony, A mixture*
ana ii. sir. of Buglosse, Violets, ana q. s.

conserve of Roses, i. sir. Acetosi simp. i. ss, A draught.
Rosewater, iii.

sir. of the juice of Lemmons, of the juice of Sorrel, A Potion.
Suchory, with Rhab. ana i. ss, water of Violets, Roses, Sorrel, ana iiii.

roots of Angelica, Tormentill, A draught.
ana ii. white Diptamy, iii. Triacle, vii. Give i. hereof with the water of
Violets, Roses, Sorrel, this may be given to the patient, either when they are
infected or before.

roots of Bitterwort, Angelica, Tormentill, ana ii. Aristolo^hia rot. Myrhe,
Beauerstone, Bayberries, A mixture.
ana i. Saffron, i. ss, as much Triacle as all these weigh together, Give i.
hereof with Acetum rosatum, but before they be infected, twice or thrice in
every week is sufficient.

water of Buglosse, Roses, Violets, Sorrel, An Epitheme.
ana iiii. Sandalorum purpu. Sp. e gemmis iiij, rinds of Oranges, * ij.

Another.
Bole Armony, Terrae sigillatae ana i ss, juice of Lemmons, Pomegranates, ana i
ss, of white wine iij, water of Borage, water Lillies ana iiij, Roses viii. use
this about the heart.

An Appendix serving for the cure of the PLAGVE.
THe best medicines ought to be prescribed with all speed; because the disease
does infect the heart chiefly. Yet a vein should be opened ^f ^ime will
permit; afterward that may be given that as will expel the poison, for this
purpose medicines that cause sweating may be given. And because men do so delay
their coming unto the physicians, until the patients be dangerously sick,
therefore the Physicians are compelled to begin the cure with sweating. The
patient may take the syrup of Lemmons, Violets, Oranges. At the last, such
medicines shall be prescribed, as do turn away the venom from the heart, and at
length expel it. If the patient be weakened by the euacuation of blood, a
gentle Clyster may be given, which may expel the corrupt humors that remain,
always provided, that inward and outward medicines be given to strengthen the
heart: also one especial care ought to be had that the air and place* where
the patient abides, be wholesome, and if they be not naturally wholesome, they
must be rectified by art. viz a Perfume of Juniper wood, Rosemary, Sage,
Cloves, Frankincense, Masticke, Myrrh, Rue: the patients may carry a little
Rue in his bosom, that the smell thereof may get into their nostrills.
Rosewater and vinegar is good for the smelling, and they may wash their eyes,
face, and hands in them. They must eat such meats as nourish well. But as
they are forbidden to glut themselves, so they must not be altogether fasting.
Twice or thrice in every week, they may eat the Pills of Ruffus. They may
also chew Angelica, Zedoaria, and Elecampane roots, when they go abroad, or
when they do intend to visit the visited. For this purpose also Aloes i ss,
Gum, Ammoniacke i, Myrrh ss Pollul. de agarico ii. Sir. of Orange Peels q.
s. make hereof Pills, and they may take ss, hereof in the morning. Or else of
Orange Peels preserved vi, Conserve of Rosemary flowers i, Mithridate i ss.
Triacle ii, Aristol. Longa, Zedoariae, Diptamy ana i. roots of Angelica* ii,
Aromatici rosati, ss, sir. of Orange peels q. s. This is an approved remedy.

FINIS.
A Table of such Diseases as are contained in this Book.
A Nasarca, the general Dropsy. p. 319 Angina, the Squinancy. p. 160
Apoplexia, the Apoplexy. p. 77 Arthritis, or Morbus articularis the Ioynt-gout.
p. 380 Ascites, the Dropsy, by plenty of wind and water. p. 319 Asthma,
difficulty of breathing. p. 178 Auditus grauitas, difficulty of hearing. p. 156
Aurigo, the yellow Iaundise. p. 280
C
Calculus renum, the Stone of the Kidneys. p. 329 Capitis dolor, Pain in the
Head. p. 1 Cardialgia, The pain at the stomach. p. 239 Catalepsis,
Congealation. p. 96 Catarrhacta, the Suffusion. p. 119 Catarrhus, the Rheum.
p. 151 Cephalagia frigida, the cold Headache. p. 1 Chiragra, the Gowte in the
fingers. p. 380 Cholera, Choler. p. 223 Collica passio, the Collicke, p. 309
Cordis palpitatio, Panting of the heart. p. 207 Coxendicis dolor, Pain in the
hips, p. 380 Cruditas stomachi, rawnesse of the stomach. p. 239
D
Debilitas hepatis, weakness of the Liver. p 263 Diabetes, inuoluntary
Pissing. p. 339 Distensio neruorum, stretching of the sinews. p. 67 Dysenteria,
the Bloody flux. p. 298 Debilitas ventriculi, weakness of the stomach. p. 246
E
Epilepsia, the Falling sickness. p. 56
F
Faucium inflammatio, inflammation of the iaws, p. 160 Fluxus mensium nimius,
the ouerflowing of the months, p. 354 Fluxus mensium suppressus, the
suppression of months. p. 363
G
Gallicus morbus, the French Pox. p. 388 Genogra, the Knee-gowte. p. 380
H
Hemorrhagia, bleeding at the nose. p. 142 Hemroides nimium fluentes, the
Hemroids flowing to ^ast, p. 345 Hemecrania, the Megram, p* ^ Hepatis
obstructio, obstruction of the Liver, p. ^^5 Hydrops. the Dropsy, p. 3^6
Hypocondria melancholia, Hypocondriall Melancholy. p. 34^
I
Icteritia, the Iaundise. p, 280 Iliaca passio, the Iliacall Passion, p. 309
Imbecillitas venticuli, weakness of the stomach, p. 246 Incubus, the
Nightmare. p* 50 Lethargia, the Lethargy. p. 87 Lienis tumor, the Tumor of the
spleen. p. 271 Lippitudo, Pain in the eyes. p. 127
M
Mania, Madness. p. 10^ Matricis praefocatio, stopping of the womb* p. 372
Melancholia, Melancholy, p, 24 Morbus Regius, the Kings evil p. 281
O
Opthalmia, Inflammation of the eyes. p. 126
P
Paralysis, The Palsy. p. 12 Peripneumenia, impostume of the lungs. p. 152
Pestis, The Plague. p. 397 Phrenitis, the Frenzy. p. 108 Pleuritis, the
Plurisie. p. 186 Podagra, the Feete-gowt, p. 381
S
Sanguinis sputatio, spetting of blood. p. 198 Singultus, the Hicket. p. 231
Spasmus, the Conuulsion, p. 66 Syncope, Swounding. p. 214
T
Tussis, the Cough. p. 169 Timpanites, the Timpany. 320 Tumor splenis, swelling
of the spleen. p. 271
V
Vermes, the Worms. p. 289 Vertigo, Giddiness. p. 43
FINIS.
That every one may know how to compound these medicines, without the help of
any other man, therefore the notes of all the weights which are used among the
Apothecaries, are placed underneath.

Grain^ has this mark gr. Scruple has this mark. Drach^e has this mark.
Ounce has this mark. Pound has this mark lb. Quart has this mark qr. A
small handful has this mark p. A great handful has this mark M. Hal^e has
this mark ss. Of each has this mark ana. Receive has this mark.
As much as i^ sufficient q. s.


