The Gratulation of the most famous Clerk M. Martin Bucer, a man of no less
learning and lyterature, then Godly study and example of living, unto the
church of England for the restitucion of Christ's religion. And His answer
unto the two raylinge epistles of Steue^, Bisshoppe of Winchester, concerning
the unmarried state of priests and cloysterars, wherein is evidently declared,
that it is against the laws of God, and of his church to require of all such
as be and must be admitted to preesthood, to refrain from holy matrimony.

Translated out of Latin in to English.

Hebru. xiij. Wedlock is to be had in price among al men, and is a chamber
undefiled. As for hoore keapers, and adulterers, God will judge them.

To his right worshypfull Brother Sir Philyppe Hobye knight, M. of ye Kings
majesty's ordinance, Thomas Hobye wishethe grace and peace throught our lord
Jesus Christ.
EMonge the sundry and manifold benifittes, which from my tender childhod I
have found in you, and received at your hands (most especial good brother)
this is not the least: that ye have now af late days, of the good zeal ye
bear to Gods word (which at all times has been most fervent in you) caused
me to be sent not only in to such a regio^ where as florissheth Gods word, all
good letters both holy and profane, all honesty, and purity of life, and
men in all arts and sciences most cunning and expert: But also to such a man
who is of no less wisdom, knouledge, and godliness, then of fame, report and
renoune, and by all godly men's judgments, one of the perfectest, and greatest
Clerks now lyuinge namelye M. Martyne Bu^^^, in whose daily conversation and
company, and by whose wisdom learning, and docume^tes, I should receive and
learn, that should belong not only to mine own fu^^herance and profyt, but
also to the consolation and comfort of you, and all my friends, who^ hitherto I
have found most beneficyall toward me. Sithe therefore it has thus chanced
by your most godly procurement and provision, that I should for a season here
remain with this profounde and famous Clerk, ye might not unworthily and in
deed, with just cause, impute unto me, either the vice of igname, or else
oblivion and forgetfulness of your most large and ample benefittes, if I should
let slip such a mete, apt, and necessary epistle of his, and especially
being written and indicted to the whole church, or congregation of England,
both learned and unlearned, and in the which he expresses not only the
assured and unfeigned love that he bears, and at all times has borne
toward this realm, and rulars and ministers of the same, but also very
euidentlye declares, and with most manifest testimonies of scripture,
sets furthe at large such things as may be to the profitt and furtherance
of many, and wherein he has confuted (not al, for it were in manner an infinite
work to stand about all, but) as many sophistical and wranglinge schoolishe
reasons, as are of any probability or likehoode, which my lord of
Uvynchester (far unseemly for a sober Bisshoppe) has expressed and set
forth in his two most co^tumelious and railing epistles against him, winki^g
at, and ouerhippi^g his well most innumerable opprobrious words, checkes,
tauntes, rebukes, quarellinges scoffinges, reuili^ges and scoldinges railinges,
wherewith they are filled as full, as they may be heaped to gether. In the which
are so few arguments or reasons of any probability: that had not the vrge^t
and instant request of his friends, certain of our cou^tray men bien, he would
never once have put penn to the paper, nor yet have made any a do about them,
but would have left them to the judgment and arbitrime^t of the reader,
notwithstanding now of late days it chanced that he gate a little vacant time
to do the same (seeing he promised it to certain) from his manifold
impedimentes, and necessary ecclesiastical business (where with we know such
men are no small dele let) and to reconcile him self (which the Bisshoppe
scornfullye, after his old wo^te, casts in his tethe) to his brother, before
he ^^ay his offringe upon the altar. The which though it be brefe, and
co^pencious and not set forth to the largeste, yet is it very dilucidious,
pithie, and full of arguments concluded not only upon ye holy gostes unfeigned
decrees, apoi^tmentes and ordinances, but also the old and holy doctores of
the church, and for the brefnes of time sufficient enough. The which when he
had finisshed, I furthe with took in hand acording to my childishe talent, to
translate into our vulgar and common speech, and have sent it unto you to
then^ent some well disposed and better learned which purchaunce will not
bestow so much tym as the translation thereof requires, may yet at the least
wise peruse it acording as he thinks best, so that at length it may be
worthy to come abroad for the profit and instruction of the ignorant, which
have not received the knowledge of the Latin tongue, because it is written to
them, as well as to the other. Wherein I will desire you to accept my good will,
as thought it cold extend farther and do much better, which if ye do, it
shall be a great encourage and urgent cause unto me to employ and bestow the
rest of my study, dilygence and labor herafter in other affairs, which I
trust shall be no less acceptable unto you, then great furtherance to mine
onne profyt and utility. The spirit of treuthe be with you, who guide you in
all your paths, acording to his will, and lead you into all go^tlye knowledge.
Amen. At Argentyne, Kalendis Februarij.

To the holy church of God, the church of England, and ministers of the same
our lord Jesus Christ give increace of this grace and spirit.
WE give thanks, and that not without cause to God and the father our lord
Jesus Christ, through this his son and our savior (most worthy and
louinge brethren) for that marvelous consolation, which of his infinite
bounty, he brings at this present time unto us, because that emonge you he
repaireth and renueth ye foundatio^s of his kingdom so excellentlye, so
perfecctly, and so luckylye. For it chanced now of late days that your
sermons or Homelies came unto our hands, where with ye godly and
effectiouslye exhort your people to the reading of holy scripture, and
therein expound to the same the faith (whereby we hold our christianity, and
justification whereupon al our health consists) and other most holy
principles of our religion, The restitutio^ of Christ's doctrine through England
with a most godly zeal. For these foundations truly laid, what may then
long after want in your churches to the full perfection of Christ his
doctrine and discipline* For when such as will be of Christ, shall read the
holy scriptures (as you most godly instruct and suade) and prefarre them so
much before all the decrees of man's wisdom, as God is greater and higher then
man. Our especial and most bou^teful heavenly master Jesus Christ, will so
largely power his spirit (the only guide unto al verity) upon them, that
hereby instructed to health by faith, they may be daily more perfect and apt
to all good works, as Gods servant, according to the promise of the holy
ghooste, manyfested by the Apostle Paul.

To the which felicity, ij. tim. iij
ye prepare away for them, The true and lively faith is well separated from
the dead and false.
and specially in expoundynge so plainelye and substancially the nature and
efficacye of the true and Christian faith (which first of al, must be learned
by ye scriptures) and separate it so religiously from the dead faith. Here
also ye declare, and with most euydent testimonies of scripture confirm,
First into how great myserye and death we are al cast headlo^g through the
sin of our former pare^t Adam. Afterward how we are delivered from this
perdition by the only grace of God, by the merytes and resurrection of his
son, and justified in Gods sight, taken by adoption of him for children and
heirs. Finallye what the study and works of the^ ought to be, which are so
justified and renewed: By this so happy and perfect a restitutio^ of Christ's
doctrine ye so enlarge al christ's kingdom with your me^, yt there can remain
for no long season any remnant of the old leven in any part of the
ceremonies or discypline.

For which your men can be ignorant from hensforth, that Gods sacraments
ought so whollye to be mynystred, as Christ him self left, add gave them unto
us: so that through them, his grace and health some partakynge may be preached,
^et forth and signed unto al most plainelye and godly, which ought to be
partakers of them, so that they may profitte greatly to the undoubted setting
forth and reedifyenge of faith, and all godlynes? Uvho also can not know, that
all the ceremonies of the churches and al discipline, as well of the Clergy and
the laytye should be so repaired, retained, and daily had in practyse, that
the gospel and Christ's sacraments may be ministered and received with so
much the more dignity and holiness.

The which happy obtaynynge of Christ's gifts and works the old adversary
of mankind, bearing in mind, goes about with toothe and nail, as in fore
times, so now also to bring to pass, that men should either not read the
scriptures at all, or at the least wise not read them as things that might
teach and instruct us suffiefficie^tly for our health, or else not be
understood of themselves without the traditions and interpretation of the
church, as they falsely name it: For whom he can persuade, that those which
are called the traditions of the church, should be had in like estimation and
honor, with the very scripture of God, and that there is no right
interpretation of the scripture unless the Romish seat has approved it
under the name of al Christ's church: Those can he also easily afterward make
believe, and cause to receive any of his iuglinges, cloked with the titles,
other of the traditions or interpretations of the church: and so withdrawn by
a little and little from Gods lively word and governance, addict them
altogether unto his most detestable doctrine and tyranny.

For unto those furthwith (as we see experience) he establyssheth this his
determination of dead faith, that they think, that who so is endued
therewith, that is to wit, who so say and affirm that they observe all
things what soever the Romysh seat gives furthe to be believed, whether it be
of ye scriptures or their fayninges, they are straight furthe and must be
counted (notwithstanding though they deny apparently in their deeds, Christ's
true and lively faith) not only to be of the commune sort, but also the
chief rulers of the church (if they once come into that place by the
permissyon and favor of the Romysh seat). Uvherevnto immediately he adds
another, one of the chief^st snares of souls the determination of the infinite
dignity, immunitie, and power of his cleargye, Of the infinite power of ye
cleargye and the Bishop of Rome.
but chiefly of the Bishop of Rome, which he beats into men's heads, that al
those whom the Bishop of Rome once admits, and acknowlegeth in his
cleargye, must be judged and corrected of none, but only of the Bishop of
Rome, and he, of no living creature, no not of the very counsayl, though he
draw with him many milians of souls to hell.

Also that heaven gates can be open to no man, Distinctio.xl. li. Papa
which comes not thither favored of him and purged with his ceremonies.
Finally that he has in his keapinge the keys of heaven earth and hell, so
that it is in his power to bind and to ^oule at his will and pleasure al laws
and Empires. And that he is the veraye Lord of the whole world, and true
possessor of all the riches thereof, and yet another man, nor God. Yes truly a
God of ye earth

The life of the^ that put more trust in the Pope then in christ
Uvith these snares meny entangled and kept, follow most communlye their life,
whom they suppose are appointed guydes unto them to the blessed and happy
life. And albeit they tread under foot the Son of God with their manifest
mischeues, and flagitiousnes, and count his blood profane, notwithstanding
they promise that God will be merciful unto the^, and at length after
tolerable purgation obtain the happy and blessed life, so that persevering
in the obey^aunce toward the Romyshe seat, and communicatynge of the
ceremonies, how soever they be approved by the same seat, get and obtain the
i^dulgenties of the same seat, and intercessyon of the saints, by those
ways, which the same seat has prescrybed. This is the cause yt al they yt
be are the name of Christians, few except, have been seduced, and gone headling
into so much ungodliness, and abomination, yt we are therefore abominable even
unto the Turks. Thanks giving for the restitutio^ of christ's kingdom in
England.
Uve ought therefore of bound duty to thank God greatly and our savior for
you, whom he has minded, breaking so happilye these, which were ones most
strayte bonds of ye devil, and driuyng away that darkness, to bring your
selves and youres under ye happy and plesaunt yoke of our Lord Jesus Christ,
into a kingdom of light and everlasting liberty, for because ye restore and
praise unto all the readyng, and authority of holy scripture on this manner, as
we se by these hedde princyples of al christian doctrine, and expound the^ so
godly and holy. Concerning yt true and li^ely faith in Christ. The perdition of
al mankind by the former and ^arthlye Ada^ The rest^ tution and renouation of
the elect, by the other and heavenly Adam, And then duties which are so
restored and renewed. For now your men (who so will thankefully receive these so
great benefittes of Christ at your hand) shall be instructed daily more and
more by these holy letters to all godlynes and health: and framed to all good
work both openly and privately: And that not alonelye the strong in faith,
but also the weak, for hereof, as ye declare agreyng with S Fulgentius,
Christ's suckelynges may suck no less their milk, (...).
reason and simplicity, then the strong in faith comprehend sound meat,
the meat of everlasting life.

U^herfore we will continually pray God, and our father through his Son our
savior, yt he will vouchesafe as soon as may be to make perfect the good work
grounded in you, to restore his sons kingdom, and so to keep it perfect
unto the day of his son.

Of the which work of the Lord so luck^ly begone among you. I thought
best in this place to make some mention, for two causes, the one is, that I
may some what call to memory, that wondrous beneficence of God, and worthy
great renoune among all Christians, which he has showed unto you, for the
comfort and consolation of many of Gods children. The other is, that I may
speak unto you familierly of your country man Steven, my Lord of Winchester,
and so take my beginning of a more acceptable place and not far from the
purpose.

Uvithowt fa^le many of you hawe read the two epistles which this man writ a
pretty while a go against me, as full of reproaches as they may be thruste: And
not a few of you have wondered (as I have been often certified) why hitherto I
diferred to make hi^ answer, the cause of the which differring or prolonging of
time, I thowght mete here to declare, esspeciallye seeing in the reueylinge and
dis^losinge of our disputation begone at Ratisbona about the nature and
disposition of faith which justifies (that is to say) which attacheth so
perfectly the mercy of god that iustifyeth us in Christ our Lord, that it
makes us assuraunt of everlasting health) I disclosed and confuted certain of
his deceytfull arguments, wherewith he went about to disprove our right
confession and very apostolic doctrine.

Causes why Bu^er differred in answer Wynchesters ca^illations.
True it is, I took in hand often times to answer him as towehinge the unmarried
state and other places, which he laid so spitefullye against me, and to
paint his sophistry, and quarellinges in their colors, but ever some business
was in the way, which I knew par^eyned more to my ministerye, then to
confute his sophistical and captions reasons, no less vain and trifling, then
ungodly and full of reproach, how so ever he stand in his own conceit.

For I thought thus with my self: They that shall read these so great
reproaches, which proceed of such an impotent hatred and such sophistical
cauillations will know the cause which is in cotrouersye betwixt us, or will
not* if they will not, they shall still remain in their pleasant ^ies, and
reproaches, and is not fet that they should be any more offended with the
defense of the truth: But if they will and are favorers of the tre^the and
rightousnes, they may sone perceive by Uvynchesters very writings, and such
places as he brings out of my book, that he has ons decreede to peruerte
with his scholishe reasons, and to debilitate with his euel reports, what so
ever I have spoken, thowgh it be Godly and a right. Uvherfor they will i^ no
case permit them selves to be lead in to any prejudice or foreiudgeme^t
against me by any of Uvynchesters rayli^ges, before they have in like case read
my book against the which he is in such a rage. The which if they do, they
shall know for a certaynitie, that this man of an obstinate and stubborn
mind resists Christ's doctrine and the sincere restitutio^ of the churches:
And that, when he cold bring no probabylitie against it, he went about
(pretermitting therein our perfect demonstratio^s, which were concluded upon
the authority of God and all the Apostolic church) here and there in my
books to scrape together certain words, and to take some doubtful places and
of an uncertain sense wherein he might manifest his wit ^ profoundnes in
perverting the treuth and conuitiating them that have not deserved.

For in that book unto Latomus (wherein I noted certain provisions of the
Apostle, which U^ynchester went about to destroy and to confute so wooddilie) I
declared by Gods manifest words and co^sente of the true apostolic church,
that the same which Latomus took upon him to defend as the law of the
church wherbye prestes are forbid to mary, is not the law of Gods church,
but rather the pestilence and plage of the laws, Tractatus de celibatu Buceri
ad Latomum.
which after an horrible fassio^ brings to decay all the holiness both of
the Cleargye, and of the people of God as many as follow the chastity of their
shepherdes, because this law reiectethe and sets a side many apt to
redress gods churches: and has oppressed the churches with such me^ that
turn up set down, and utterly bring to confusion the doctrine and
discipline of Christ.

I showed that marriage of it self is a holy kind of life, Principles whereby
the Popish law concerning the abstine^ce and chastitye of priests is confuted.
and that therein is some thing contained which cold help no small dele the
ofice and ministerye of a priest: and yt for the self same cause the holy
ghoost set in the first and chief place among the gifts and veriues of a
Bishop, that he be an honest married man, and a godly and profitable householder.

I taught furthermore that the matter it self gives euydent judgment how so
many ministers of religion are not found, that make them selves chaste for the
kyngedom of heavens sake, as there should be, which abstinence is only meat
for preesthode.

Afterward I made plain that ye holy ghooste wills them ^^at burn, and are
in ieopardye of vnpure chastity, to marye without any let, other of vows or
man's laws.

Finallye I laid against him with the scripture of God, both the decrees and
aucthorities of holy fathers, and of such fathers as sought by all means to
have priests unmarried, whose decrees and sentences, if they be had in any
estimation, as they ought to be (for they hang upon Gods very word and law)
prove that of a thousand priests at this day, scarce on can be found which
may remain in this holy ministerye: and that not allonlie for their vicious
and filthy castitie, but also because they be entangled in the business of the
world and are another learned nor diligent to feade the lords flock, so that
they take not their v^maried state upon them for the kingdom of heavens sake,
but for fat benefices and ecclesiastical dignities.

And so by these undoubted principles of holy doctrine, The demonstration of
his confutation
and concluded by gods very decrees, I declared that, for so much as it is
earnestly sought for in them at this day, which must be admitted to take
cure of the churches, to vow chastity, else must be co^straynid to forsake
this ministerye, in case (that they may the better live) they take wives
acordinge to the lords commandment in their preesthood, or after they have
vowed their solitary life: it can be attributed to no church, but must be
worthily counted the doctrine of dyuels, wherbye they bring to ^ecay, and
throw under foot, after a most miserable fassion the laws of Christ and
the church, and by the which the whole order of the Clergy has made exile,
and banished all holmes and godliness of the life.

But what (I beseech you) does Uvinchester bring against these things?
Wynchester brings nothing against the foundations of the cause.
Uvhich of these pri^ciples whereby my purpose hangs together and is most
euidentlye concluded, has he labored to confute? Uvhat should the cause be
then that in answeringe so ungodly and spiteful schoolishe reasons and
checkes I spent not good hours well and more profitablye? Notwithstanding as
I fore said (le^^e I should deceive the expectation of my brethern requiringe
mine answer so feruentlye, I purposed with my self eft sons to set it a side,
which I began a good whiles paste. For all I coinected with my self that these
brethren which were so instante upon me in this behalf were more moved with
a certain indignation against Wynchesters most importune boastindes, then yt
they perceived my silence to be any great hinderau^ce to gods church. But I
minded in mine answer unto Wynchester to entreat of more at large by the
opinyons of holy fathers, ye place concerning the unmarried state of priests
and professors of solitarines, which I spoke of before unto Latomus in a manner
altogether by the holy scriptures (although also here and there I added the
authority of holy fathers, and of the church) and to publyshe al such things
as before I declared by ye scripture now in the more frequent testimonies of
the old church. An Argument of his just defense against Wynchester.
And besides that to confute not Uvy^chesters sophismes only, but al other
men's, which in this behalf have been at any time objected against us, as many
as were of any apparaunce of truth or probability. But when about the edition
of this work sone after I had caused the most royal and puyssant Prince of
most famous memory, King Henry the.viij. of ye nam^ to be made priuy^, who
made answer again that he had rather I should differ for a season the
publisshinge a broad thereof, King Henri ye viij. his first purpose.
for he trusted to come to pass that I should speak of this and other
controuersyes in relygion at some time peacablie with winchester, and other
learned of his realm, to thentent a godly concord and unity in religion
might be sought forth, and a farther iustauration of the churches, which his
purpose I might have hindered, if winchester (whose bitterness in writing he did
in no manner wise aloue) should have byne provoked to writ any more openly
against us, And so this the kings godly and prudent answer receued, when
else (as I tought with my self) I should not seem by this my labor to profyt
the churches any thing: my work which I had in mind to go forward withal I
laid aside again: for all in the mean season therein I bestowed very much
diligence and in manner to the hindraunce of the necessary busynes of my office.

But now saying I have set abroad in the treatise of the question of
iustifycation, Uvicester crafty and subtle reasons, which he with his great
bragges, after his accustomed arrogancye objected against me, and not so much
against our catholic and right opinioned doctrine, The cause why here he
makes answer of the o^maryed state also.
as the holy fathers (for I thought not best to escape ought which seemed
any thing probablye laid against us of our adversaries) I thought it
convenient ^ow at this present time to add something there unto to you,
concerning the unmarried state, and the false lie which the same Wy^^heste^
has forged upon me, test he (...) ^hold be a grievous to the good brethren
with his our ragious boasti^gs, and reproaches yt I dare not contend with him
in writing of these places, (...) I perceive my self throughlye (...) of him,
to remain in the^ still. (...) show mine (...)

(...) chapters of this present defense and answers
Nanswere of (...) of this, because I affirmed god^^ and truly that God calls
and gives many me^ne to marriage, which therefore can not take upon them very
holy abstinence, to say for to obtain therbye the kingdom of heaven.

Secondarilye, that though it were

Thirdlye of the false lie which Uvinchester has wronghfullye forged upon me.

Last of all, of the natural interpretation of this place. Nevertheless he
that purposes suerlye in his heart, and has no need, but has the power
over his own will, and has so de^red in his heart that he will keep his virgin
^oth well. Uvhich done, I will also breiflye touch these places, It is not good
for a man to be alone. And, It is good (...) to touch a woman. Also to (...)
e^erie man ha(...) eschew (...) ^e his wife. etc.

First therefore, yt I may teach with what wicked tyranny the state unmarried is
so required of all, none except which are either thruste in to monasteries, or
compelled unto presthoud, which all me^ perceive to be no other thing, the^ a
pernicious snare of Satan, where with he has overthrown in to such horrible
uncleanness of lyuinge in a manner the wholle ecclesiastical and monastical
order, which emonge all other have wrested and writthed this the Lords
s^iuges: mat. xix.
All men can not away with that sainge, sauinge they to whom it is given. Also,
he that can take it, let him take it. And the Apostles saing: I would al me^
were as I my self ame, i. cor vij. Of the proper interpretation of christ's
sainges, all men can not away this sai^g saving they to who^, etc. And, he
that can take it let him take it.
but every man has his proper gift of God, on after this manner, an other
after that.

This foundations therefore of our trenth, Uvinchester going about to
vnderminde, first has taken upon him to defend that interpretacio^ of
Christ's words, All men can not away with that saing etc. And he that can
take it, let him take it: wherein not a few would have this words (take, and ca^
take) to be of like signification with (will take) as tought the lord would have
said: All men will not take this sainge, and he that will take it, let him take
it: and hereof he picked a quarrel that I would have this the lords sainges
spoken by a figure in Rhetorike named Ironia, no otherwise then it is communely
said of a thing which is impossyble to be gotten. Let him take it, In priore
Wyntonien: epistola contra Bucerum ca. ij.
that ca^ get it, as who should say, no man can wyn or overcome it.

For soethe (as all men may read in my book unto Latomus) I spoke not a word
of Ironia, but have therein manifefflye confessed that it is granted to many
to take this sainge, yet not to al. And I go about there that which the lord
spoke evidently: All take not this saing. And let him take it that ca^, for he
said not, all will not take this, and he that will, let him take if.

Uvho doubts that Christ our lord the only geuer of true and holy
chastity, and chief alower of the same, if he had put in every man's will to
take it, and had not thought to permit many more to receive copled chastity,
then abstinence, at the sai^g of his disciples, if it be not lefull to put
away an unthankful wife, it were better to marie no wife at al. Uvold haus
ansured that it were far better, if it be done for the kingdom of heavens
sake. But that he would not have all to folwe this kind of living, yet that
they should which are willinge, and he will not fail to help such as secke
and labor for it. But now it is not so, for he said on this manner. All can
not away with that saing, sauinge they to whom it is given. By the whith words
(if ye wreste and writhe them not) what other thing I pray you may a man
gather, but that the lord said: All take not this thing, because it is not
given to al, but to certain men only, elect from above to this kind of
lyuinge.

But Uvinchester ^aithe to my charge, yt this interpretation is taken of mine
own brain, and yt he has his which he alleagethe of me^ yt were of ye right
opinion and faith. Which how vainly he has written I report me to ye
witness of ye faithful and right opinioned fathers and such as affirm truly
and godly the vnfainid and holy chastity.

S. Hierom in deed a great defender of the solitary life writ against
Iouinianus, S. Hier.
in that book wherein he defends to the utter most, the diguitie of true
chastity. If al might be virgiues the lord would never have said, he that can
take it, let him take it: And the Apostle would never have sticked to swade the
same. Also he writtinge upon the self same place of Mathewe, after he had
denied yt this the lords sainge (they alone take that saing to whom it is
given) should be referred to destyme, fortune or chance, but must be
vndrstanded that it is given to such as pray, make dilygence inquisytion and
labor to get it, showed this reason of that his exposytyon. Because all that
ask, do receive, and that seek, do find, and to them that knock, the door is
opeind. Notwythstandynge sone after he expounded (he that can take it, let him
take it) he added this whereupon (he says) the lord brings in. He that can
take it, let him take it, that every man should look upon his possybylitie,
wether he be able to perform the precepts of virginity and chastity. For
chastity of her self is amiable and entiseth every man unto her. Mark, he yt
ca^, and not he that well.
But he must consider his strength, that he which ca^ take it, may take it,
this is his sainge. Uvherfor he percea^ethe yt the chastity taken for the
kingdom of heavens sake, is not given to every man, but to whom it is given, it
is not given by destinye, fortune or chance, but by the gift of GOD, and by
such a gift that must be received and kept with prayers, diligens and labor.
And therefore upon whom so ever God inspirithe his spirit to pray and to s^ke
for this gift by faith, they pray for it and obtain it. But God inspirethe
this spirit upon those only, who^ he has called to chastity, as he inspirethe
with his spirit to pray and to labor for copled chastity, those whom he
has called to holy matrimony. For God brings to effect in every one by
his spyrite that he has decred, and distributeth his gifts to each o^e as he
thinks belle, and to each one acordyng to his vocatyon.i. Corinth.xij.

And for this cause Sanctus Hilarious upon the self same place of Mathewe write
the, S. Hila.
that the lord would therbye admonish us to be like unto him, which has
willingly decred to be unmarried, if we can: he says not, if we will So S.
Austine also where as he writteth. S. Augustine.
De adulterinis nuptijs.xix. capi. ad Pollentium, speaks of that the Apostle
writ (he that joins his virgin in marriage* does well, but he yt does not
join his virgin in marriage, does better) and says, he is provoked yt can take
it.
who so can take it, is motioned unto the better by the Apostles counsel.
Mark, he says not, that every man is motioned to chastity by the Apostles
cousayll, but they only which can take it.

Upon this S. Gregory also in his book De pastorali cura, S. Gre.
capi. xxix. Part. iij. writes that the faithful and godly shepherdes should
admonish the chaste, that if they sustain the storms of temptations with the
diffycultie of their health, they should draw to the haven of matrimony. And
in the chapter followinge of the same book he wretteth: Leth the ignorant of
sinners flesh give ear, because treuthe spea^keth of him self concerning
this integrity and pureness: All men can not a wye with this saing, which he
sygnifyeth to be the chefeste thing of all, in that he put a negative. Christ
denied yt all men take the word of chastity.
Behold he witnesses, how God says plainlye, that this gift is not in
every man's power.

Also S. Bernarde writ unto the clearkes which then in his time began to
run to take holy orders without reverence or consyderation, I would God
(says he) that such as are not able to abstain, would not be so bold to
profess perfectness or to take upon them to live vncorruptely. For it is a
sumptious bulwark, All can not take it.
and a weighty word which all can not take. In sermon ad clericos, de
contempt^ mundi cap. 29.

Ye se therefore (most deuowte brethern) how many of the holy and faithful
fathers understood and expounded those the Lords saying that all take not holy
chastity, after the sa^e fassyon, as we. Yet is not Uvynchester ashamed to
affirm, and write that we interpreted it of our own brain, and otherwise
then the right opinionid have done. And therefore ye see by this one place what a
thankelesse thing it is to answer such manifest, and impudent quarellynges,
and brablinges. Yet do I not gainsaye but Uvinchester has certain of the
old writers whom he recitethe for the authors of his interpretation, though
they be very few, and in this exposytyon not to be compared with ours. And
besides that, the lords very saing makes with us. Ye se therefore by what
audacitie Uvynchester has written that we brought this interpretation out of
our own brain, and contrary to the meaning of the right opinionid.

And when I had confyrmed our interpretation which we brought, by S. Paul's
anthotitie, alleaginge this place: I would all men were as I my self ame. But
every man has his proper gift of God, one after this manner an other after
that. Uvynchester went about to wreste and writhe this place also. For he
says: In that, some men have not the gift of Chastity it is by their own
defalt, for God offers this gift equally. And of this his saying he brings
three reasons. One because Saint Paul says. Uvynchester takes it to be spoken
vndeterminatly, though it be spoken determinatly
It is good for a man not to towche a woman: and says not, it is good for him,
or him, but vndeterminatelye for all. And for a more probation thereof he
adds. I would all men were as I my self am, but the Apostle would not have
wysshed for all, the thing that cold by no means agree to al, or disagre to
Gods bountyfull goodness, that he should give it to some only with respect of
parsonnes, which he spoke by the Apostles mouth to be expedyent for all men.

Because ye Apo. wisshed all to be chaste, it is not concluded, ye chastity is
profitable for all.
Do ye not se (most devout me^) how much this Bysshope presumes upon Gods
word? Did the Apostle then speak universally and vndeterminatlye (It is good,
and to be desires for of all men not to touch a woman) because he said I
would all men were as I my self ame? Did he not furthwithe add a contraction
and exposition of his saving. But every man has his proper gift of God, one
after this manner an other after that, and immediatlye after. They that can not
abstain, let them marye. Also, It is better to marie, the^ to burn. As to his
forsaing, It is good for a man not to touch a woman. He added incontinently
his exposition. But for to avoid fornication, let uery man have his wife?

Uvhich when Uvinchester interprets of him yt is now already married, and
says that it is good for such an one to touch his wife, if she also agree not
to unmarried state. Notwithstanding every married man ought to render mutualle
benevolence of wedlock to his wife, agreeable to the holy ghost. How dare he
be so bold to say that God speak by the mouth of Paul that it is
convenient and good for all universally and vndeterminatlye, not to touch a
woman? Uynchester therefore after his accustomed manner understood it here to be
spoken universally and vndeterminatlye, which is spoken particulerlye and
determinatlye. And so of a false argument a man may bring in what he list.

Also if Paul had not added such an evident and often recited exposytyon after
this his saying vndeterminate. Yet by these words (I would all men were, as I
my self ame) it cold not be gathered, that abstinence therefore should be such a
gift which God of his infynyte bounty should give unto all, unless he wylbe
counted parciale, and to have respect of parsons. The self same thing does
he write to the Corinthians in the same Epistle, xiiij. chap. (I would ye all
spoke with tunges, Because the Apostle said, I would yt ye all spaeke with thu^gs
and prophecieed, it follows not yt it is good for all to speak with tu^ges.
bnt rather that ye propheryed) and adds to this his wyshe no contraction, as
he did before concerning chastity. Hereof therefore (if Uyinchesters argumet be
true) we may conclude that all they which only put to their will and pray,
may receive the gift of tunges and prophecy of GOD. And that it is contrary
to Gods bountyful goodness to give that thing to certain with respect of
parsons, which he has spoken by the Apostles mouth so manifestlye to be good
and worthy to be desired for of all men. But the holy ghost spoke by Paul yt
he distributeth his gifts as he thinks mete and that without respect of
parsons. For he has respect of no parson, but only his holy and just will,
and vtylytie of his church, when to one he gives the gift of prophetye, to an
other the gift of thunges, to an other the gift to discern spirytes, to an
other the gift to heal, to an other the gift to govern and rule. So in like
case does he give to an other the gift to lead a solitarye life, to an other
to ^e coopled in holy matrymonye, regardinge no parson, but only according
to his vocation, and commodity of his church.

Uverfor as by ye sai^g of ye apostle (I would ye all prophesied) is it not
concluded that this gift is therefore given of Gods immunifycens to all, or that
there is respect of parsons before God So may it be much less concluded,
that because the Apostle wisshed all to be unmarried as he him self was,
chastity should therefore be good for all men in this present life, and given of
God, or that God has respect of parsone. For when the Apostle had wisshed
chastity unto all, he added a moderation of this his general wish, which
after the wyshe of prophecye he did not. Also it is manifest that the gift of
prophecye, of it self, brings a little more profyt to the churches, then
does the gift to be unmarried.

But what need so much a do? Did not the Apostle plainly say, and without
any exposytyon, the first Timothe. fyfte, I will the younger we, men to marye?
May we therefore hereof conclude taking for example Uvinchesters argument, that
it is good for all younger Uvomen to marye, and evil, if any unmarried keep her
self chaste in the lord? And when the same S. Apostle said: Romans ix
I have wysshed my self to be cursed from Christ, may we conclude that it were
better for him to be cast out of Christ's favor, the^ reign with him in
heaven? Ye se therefore (Christian people) yt so much erudition and foresight is
not in this Bisshoppe, as furiousnes and crakyng against us.

Let us now come to Uvinchesters other reason wherewith he goes about to
prove, Uvynchesters second reason*
that God gives the gift of chastity equallye to all men. He says, there
are only two conditions of our life, Iu. i. Epistola Uvin toniensis Ca. 4
the married and the unmarried state, and God gives to every man the
possybylytie of them both. And there for offers unto every man the election of
them both also, and al necessaryes appertaynyng there unto. Uvhich if he
should not, to ye one condition should pertayne no will, election or
possibility agreeable to his gift: but rather compultion, and should ryghtlye
to the one part be named constraynt, which is far alienate from the gift
and vocation: Uvynchesters two false principles that God of what things he
leaves fre election, he gives also the faculty of the same things, and
except he do so, he compels them.
and that God should not seem to be liberal toward some. This is
Uvynchesters second reason, wherein he declarethe again his stiff audacity in
taking principles which God neither granted him, nor we. Uvhereof the one is,
That what things or conditions of life, god has granted every man in
generallye to chose which of the^ he will, thereof also he gives every man
power to take which he will and to use it to him self. The second is For all
that god by his Apostle offerithe to every man fre election of Chastity or
matrimony: and if he give not power acordinglie to each one yt he may receive
whether of the^ he willi yet does he not in deed give yt fre election, though
in words he sets it forth by yt Apostle generallye, but every man must be
dr^ue^ to the one kind of life: And that he seems not to show like
liberality to all men. By these arguments Vvynchester concluded his second
reason, which are both false.

The falsenes of the first proposytyon every man may know hereof: GOD has
pu^te all good arts in man's fre power, no less then chastity and matrimonye.
For if any man chose to him the art of tyllynge the ground, or any handy
craft, or any art which has the use of reason in it, God gives not furthe
with the power of these thi^nges, whereof he has made fre election.
in that forsoeth by it self he sins not. For good never prohibited any to
learn these arts. Whereof truly can not follow that God therefore gives to
every one the very faculty, that what art soever a man has chosen to him,
the same also he may throughlye learn, and that without God give it, he
should seem not to be liberal toward some. As for example, if any be made
and borne to the works of the body, and very unapt to those arts,
whereupon the exercise of the mind consists, but if he put his will to, and
will pray that he may be endued with the facultye to learn many tunges, and
the Philosophycall arts must it therefore be granted that god (if he will not
seem to show more liberality to some then to other) will grant him that
faculty that he may be shortly cunning in many tunges and arts? But to
spread abroad and to furnish Gods kyngedom, the knoweledge of tunges and good
arts are of more effect, then to be without a wyfte: which thing chauncheth
both to children and fools, and yet by their chastity may they not profit
the church, as the other can that are endued with good arts.

God in very deed has left to men fre chose of al things, conditions of of
life, and actions, whereof he gave not precepts expressedly. And this chose he
will not have done rashely, and unknown to him, but circumspectely and godly:
that is to say, making diligent inquisition therefore (after the invocation of
his spirit) whereunto God has created every man apt and called him. For we
must with diligence search out in all things, what pleases the Lord and
look that we live circumsyectely not as fools, but as wise: not as unwise,
but as understanding what the lords pleaser is. Ephesians. v.
And by Gods very gifts and faculties, which he has given to every man, it
must be known, to what kind of life, to what arts and actions he has
destyned each one. For to what kind of life so ever god has destined every
one and made him, to the same also gives he unto every one abundantly gifts
and facultyes, which the wise men emonge the Heythen acknowleged. And therefore
in the educatio^ and bryngyng up of youth, they gave commandment first of
all to look unto what art and estate every one seems to be borne and made.

Another may God therefore be counted to keep back his liberality from some, if
he give not to al like gifts, seeing he gives very many to all men: i. Co.
xij
although to some one and to some other. Another may it therefore be said,
that God hears not the prayers of some contrary to his promise. For God
promised not to give ear to our prayer, whatsoever we ask of him: God will
give all things which we ask in the name of his son, but by his name we
can ask nothing perfectlye, but such things as belong to his glory.
but if we ask ought of him throwghe the name of his son, by whose name we
ca^ ask nothing perfectlye, and without this condition, if the father will
have that we ask to be of any valu to sanctyfye his name, granishe and
advance his kingdom, sauinge those gifts, whereof we have received his
expressed precepts, that we should desire them. If that be true we have no
precept to require of him any power to live without a wife. as we have to pray
for the increace of faith and love, and all things in general which the
father would have to prevail any thing to the sanctifiynge of his name, and
advancement of his kingdom. Therefore Whynchesters first principle of his
second reason is false. that is to say. That God geuethe to every man the
faculty and gifts to obtain and perform al things whereof in his scriptures
he has left fre election. or that he semethe to withdraw his liberality
from some.

And no less vain is Uvynchesters other principle, That God has not left to
man fre will to chose chastity or marriage, but every man must of necessity be
compelled and constrained to the one, God therefore compels not to any kind
of life, because he callethe theyder, and leads with his gifts.
If God give not like facultye to every one, to take either, whether it be
chastity or matrimony. For Christ's spirit (whereby al gods children are
lead) brings to pass, that every one which is willing takes the kind of
life, whereunto he feels himself to be called from above by the same spirit
and gifts given to the same. And seeing that God distributeth to his children
his gifts and spiritual facultyes, for this only purpose, that they should
take in hand the functions of life, which he has appointed before unto
every man with a more sure judgment of mind, and a more ready and constant
will. In very deed Wynchester brings in this very vncircumspectlye and to
baselye for a divine, that men stopped from free will and election, should be
compelled to chastity or matrimonye. If it be true which we affirm, that
one receauethe of God that gift of matrimony, and an other the gift of
chastity, and that no man can take upon him holy chastity, but he to whom it
is peculierlie given: like as he ca^ not also take holy matrimony, which
has not received the gift thereof. God leaves unto his the fre election of
many things but that he rules according to his arbitryment.
And God does not so distribute the fre election of things, conditions, and
actions, of this present life to his, that when as he has given to every man
some certain kind of life and actions, he should so much the less lead and
guide him with his spirit and instruct him with his gifts. And barrethe
them not therefore from their fre election and arbitrime^t, nor co^straineth
them, because he leads his in all paths to the which he has chosen,
destined, and made each one, and distributed his gifts, for he brings to
effect in his, both to will and to do what so ever shall be for their profit,
acordinge to his fatherly benevolence toward the^.

In his law has set furthe life and death to every man, and thereof gives
fre choice. Yet does he effectouslie move his elect to chose life, that is,
the obedience of the law, God draws his to his son, yet for all yt they
come unto him of their fre will.
and to refuse death, that is, the disobedience of the law, and mouethe not
the other so effecteouslie, which also the better schoolme^ knew. And by this
means it is that as they another hear nor learn of the father, and he
drawethe them not to his son, so may they not come to Christ our lord:
Yet are they another compelled to death, nor the other to life: Another may the
other boaste that they have received life, without the peculier gift of God,
and such a gift as is not showed to some: nor they complain that they have
iniurye, if owght be kept from the^, that is given to other. Of this point s.
Austine speakethe very wisely in his book: S. Austyne concerning the gift of
continence.
De sancta virginitate, cap. 40. And the Apostle speakethe of Continence it
self (but I would al me^ were as I my self ame, notwithstanding every man
has his proper gift of God, one after this manner, an other after that) who
therforgeuethe these things? Uvho distributeth his owe^ to every man as he
thinks best? Truly GOD, with whom is no parcialitie. And hereby to know
by what equity he distributeth to one after this manner, to an other after
that, it is other impossyble for man to know, or very hard. Yet is there no
doubt, but he does it with equity. For what have thou, which thou receaueste
not? or by what frowardnes will thou love him less, of whom thou have
received so largelye? These are his words, In the which mark how this man
of God grants that such as make them selves chaste for the kingdom of
heavens sake, receive a far greater gift of God, then other, and that of
Gods very fre will, who distributeth his own to every man, as he thinks
best, and not for their powers and facultyes which they have received
equallye with other. It is therefore manifest, by that we have here alleged,
making with us the better part of the holy fathers, that some are so endued
with holy matrimonye, and other with holy chastity, that the one can not
commodyously receive matrimony, nor the other chastity for their furtherance,
and therefore it ca^ no^ be gathered how the one should be compelled and
constrained to chastity, or the other to matrimony, having their fre will and
election barred from them: so that therbye the clean contrary may well be
concluded: that is to say. That every man should take and follow the kind of life
destined unto him, with a sure and Godly election, and a pure and fre will,
seeing he has received of God gifts, and spiritual faculties to the same.

The third reason he says he bringethe against me because that in his
opinion, Uvynchesters third reason.
I denied the extremity of his induction against reason, saying I granted
the first part. For belike he supposethe that God geuethe the gift of
chastity to all, by such an inductio^: God gave this gift to Paul, he gave it
to S. Johan, and gave it to many a thowsande in times paste both Monks and
Nuns: Another has he at this day withdrawe^ it clean a way. There for he
geuethe it to all desiring it hartelie, and laboring greatly to obtain the
same: Uvhich when I deny, he requires of me an expressid testimony of
scripture, whereby the largenes of this gift should not extend so far as to
al: and accuses me of vnshamfastenes and rashenes for denijnge I knew not
what. To say, because I denied without an expressed testimonye of scripture,
that God gives the gift of chastity to all willing, and to such as labor
for it, seeing I granted he gave it to some.

Uvynchester layth to Bucer, that he speaks without scripture, yet does he
himself recite the scriptures which he follows in this behalf and teaches
not whether they be well recyted or no.
But when Uvynchester had bethawght him self that I denied not without
authority of scripture, that God gives the gift of chastity to al: at
length he him self recyteth the testimonies of scripture, which I follow in
this behalf, after he had sufficientlye refresshed him self with his ^aylynge
words: namelye this.i. Co. iij. Every man has his proper gift of God, one
after this manner, an other after yt. And that one is called to matrimony, and
an other to chastity, as god calls one to bondage, an other to liberty. But
when he sees yt these testimonies of scripture are more euydent, then he can
confute, he passes them over stoutlye, and in the mean season makes an out
cry, that I am a stowte defend, and says. I had not in mind by these
things, to debilitat and overthrow my reasons, which I bring concerning
Gods diverse gifts, and vocation. But he brings no other argument of this
his crakynge, saving allonely that schoolishe reason, which right now we
confuted. That both gifts are offered unto all men, else should there be no
chose of the one because of one part there is no chose, and it can not be well
said, yt he may take chastity, which may not also leave it.

But we have showed that because God has offered to his in his scriptures the
fre election of diverse things, it follows not therefore that he gives to
every one like power for both parts, and for every thing like gifts. For
God has set forth (as I foresaid) to all men death and life, and the fre
election, which he has left of them both: But for so much as the help
chose life, receauynge Christ in faith, that can they not do without they be
endued with the spirit of faith: and they can not sin, that is chose
death, because they have remaining upon them the seade of God, that is to
say, the efficacye and strength of faith, and blessed regeneration, and yet
by this gift of faith it is so far of, that ye fre will is taken from the
godly, In so much that by this gift their will is made fre in deed at the
first, Ioh. viij.
as the true liberty comes of the Lord only and of his spirit. ij. Co.
iij.
These things which he brings out of his philosophye. This is false if a
man can do any thing by the gift of god, that he may as well not do the same.
He that can take, may also leave, else were it false, that he can take,
pertayne nothing at al to this present disputation, and are very vain, in
this ow^ matter. For we entreat of here Gods gifts and faculties which are not
given to both parts, but to one. For he that is endued with the gift of
wisdom or faith: we say with good reason that he may be wise, and not as
well, that he may be foolyshe, That he may believe and not as well that he can
not believe. And so after the same manner, he that has the gift of holy,
chastity, we say with good reason that he can live a solitary life with
godlynes: and not as well that he can receive the contrary way of living. Ye
se (most devout men) into what scoolyshe reasons (unseemly for our
profession) we are wrapped, whiles we will answer this Bishop to every
point? Uvho so has any good thing above other, yt has he not but by ye
peculier gift of god wherewith those other are not endued.


Yet would I, that Uvynchester would made answer to this, whiles he contendeth
that the gift of chastity is given equally to all men, and that they which
burn in the unmarried life, and are destitute of this gift are destitute of it
by their own ignauye and sluggyshenes. How comes this facultye and will to
receive and to use this offered gift of chastity to other, who lay^ge a side
al ignauie and sluggishnes receive yt gift of chastity offered the^: whether
have they it of them selves or of God? A sect of heretics,
If he say of the^ selves, he shall affirm with the Pelagianes, that a man may
have some good thing, which he receaueth not of gods free gift. But if he say
of God, the^ must he needs grant that they which burn not, and upon that
receive the word of chastity promptlye and stedfastlye, have received a gift
from above, which is not given to such as burn and thereupon refrain not
the^ selves, how soever their ignauye and sluggyshnes be in the cause. And so
let Uvynchester turn him which way he will, yet shall he either fall to the
Pelagyans, or grant that such as make them selves chaste for the kingdom of
heavens sake, receive a gift, which is not given to other, that refrain not
themselves, but burn, and therefore are licensed to marye.

Manachei, a sect of he retiques whereof the head was called Manes who him took
upon christ's shape and spirit Eusebius ecclesias hist.
But if he go forward now to impute the want of this gift unto sin, and
specially in those which as they have received their gift, so frame them selves
to holy matrimony: let him know that he makes with the Manacheis, yea with
the doctrine of dyuels, forbedding holy matrymonie, and gaensaynge the holy
ghost, which shows euidentlye, that matrymonye is a holy thing, and that
they syn not which receive it, but do well, and that such as burn should marie,
and therbye do better, then if they remain unmarried.

In this point Uvinchester laiihe against me, that I dream certain vocacions
in chastie, In his first Epistle D. i. and. ij
and that I retain with my self a sense in the word of vocation, which is
far alyenat from the trenth of the catholic church. As thought God had
feigned to chastytye certain bodies of me^, Bucer never spoke nor writ no such
thing therefore Uvynchester makes a lie upon him.
and those by the moderation of humors, wherewith he should be pleasyd and content
to receive this gift, that they should retain and keep it without all striving
of nature and without al force. These he says are my words.

Truly seeing the holy ghost by his servant Paul settheth Godly matrymonie
emonge Gods holy vocations, Christian men can not cast me in the tethe, for
gladly using this word. Uvhereby unto god and our maker with a more full
confession I may refer all good things, who brings to effect al things in
all men. Another do I retayn with my self any sense of this word contrary to
the treuthe of the catolyke church. For those things, concerning the moderation
of humors, which should bring to pass that such as are endued with the gift
of abstine^ce should retain and keep this gift, against all strife and force
of nature. Uvynchester has brought furthe of his own, and not of mine, for he
never read the^ in any of my writtynges.

god makes and apointeth his, yeuen from the mothers womb unto those things
whereunto he has destined every man
But this (taking for example the eternal word of God, set forth in the
holy scryptures) I confess not without cause, that God, who brings in all
men all things to effect by his everlasting wisdom, reachinge mightylye
from end to end, and guidinge all things plesently, like as he calls his
elect, being nothing, to be somwath so calls he them also to their being,
and to those things whereunto he has destinid every man. And that he
fassyonithe the^ to these gifts assigned of him to each one, in their mothers
womb. And also that from the mothers womb, he seperateth them to him self,
and that he makes apt and instructed them with the gifts both of body and
mind to the self same offices, that they may receive them well and happilye
to the glory of his name and edifijng of his church.

Notwythstandinge God has the hears of our head numbered, and not one of them
perissheth from our head without his sure prouidens, and should he not then
certainelye determine before, in whether kind of life every man should serve
him, other in the state unmarried or married?

Every wise workman in his work forcasteth and shapeneth all things to the
end, which is appointed in the same work. And should we doubt that god (who
alone shapeneth all our members in ye darkness of our mothers womb)
forechasteth and apointeth all parts and possibilities both of body and
mind, to ye self same functio^s of life whereunto he has chosen each one
before the creation of the world.

Dionisius Bisshope of corinth writ an Epistle to ye Guosians, wheryn he
admonissheth and instanly exhorts there Bishop Pinitus that he will not laid
the brethren with the great burthe^s of co^pultion to vow chastity for so he
might chance to put ye i^ firmite of many in a hasarde. Eusebeus de
ecclesias. Histo. li. iiij. Ca. xiiij.
But because our flesh and Satan do ever strive against gods spirit with in us,
as long as we live here, in all vocation and commandment of God, we
acknouledge and that gladly, that in receiving and retaining godly chastye we
should strive and fight against these our perpetual ennimies. Yet
notwithstanding, because the holy ghost him self wills them that can not
refrain to be copled in matrimonye, and declarethe openly that this is better
for such as burn: and willethe those weme^ that are in ieopardie of vnpure life
to marie, we affirm hereof that the vocation of matrimony should be observed
and proved, if any feel him self to be in a hasarde by the reason of to
fervent burning. yet not furthwithe. For we teach that first of al christ's
spirit must be called upon, which is the guide unto all verity, and wherewith
Gods children are lead in all points. Afterward that counsel must be
demanded of godly and wise men, and specyallye of such unto whom the Lord
has peculyerly committed the charge of them. Last of all, that it must well
be consyderyd by the same spyryte of Christ, what those office and functio^s of
life be, where unto God has called enerye man, and whether kind of life
chastity or matrimony (in going about those gifts Godly) is most commedious
and profitable, or incommedious and unprofitable. For he is a very fool that
consyderithe not Gods work in other, but he is more fool that consyderith
them not in him self. Uhich the wise men of the world knew so, that they
judged them not without cause to strive against God, which go about to apply
them selves to other actions of life, (...).
then they perceive them selves to be borne and made unto. Upon this ye holy
fathers also, as it is to be seen by the places above rehearsed, gives them
counsayll that will take upon them the unmarried state, first of all devoutly
to examine them selves, and to know whether they have received strength and
gifts of God to this kind of life.

Emonge all these things, what is not taken out of the holy letters, what is
not agreeable to the catholyke consent often he holy fathers, what fynallye does
not condescende to the true holiness. And by this ye perceive how ungodly
Uvinchesters quarelli^g is, Uvinchesters notable quarelling.
in that he lays to us, that we make such a gift of chastity, which may now
be properlye named n^ther continence, nor abstynence, nor impotence, nor yet
the unaptness of the body to filthy lusts. And that we make the tokens of
these gift, to be moved by no prickingges of nature to filthy lusts: like as
the tokens of the vocation to matrimonye, if men (after they have lost with
riatousnes and excess in carnal pleasures, the gift of chastity) feel them
selves to be inclyned to matrymonye. But where has he read these things in
any of our writtinges, or in what communication has he ever hard the^ of
us? Saying therefore he has replenisshed his writings with such manyfeste and
open lies, ye perceive what credit a man should give to their testimonies. Uve
following our only M. Jesus Christ in heaven, what ye gift of chastity is
called and of what effect it is
name the gift chastity, abstinence for the kingdom of heavens sake and a
spirit of chastity and vncorrupt holiness, whereby they may that are endued
therwithe, being fre from matrymony, cleave so much the more without
separation unto God, and receive so much the sooner and stedfaster the holy
ministeries and offices, to the which matrymonie should be a hinderance and
impediment. As for impotence, and the unfitness of the body to filthy lusts,
are mete names for him, that makes a sport of such things, for the which the
son of God was crucyfyed. So therefore we make not that, no man or some man
feleth motion unto fylthie lusts, or tokens of the offeryd gift of chastye and
matrimony. But as I said, the counsayles of parents, and of godly and wise
men in Christ, Signs of ye gift of chastity.
and the very functions of the life offerid from above, and the Godly affairs
ready at hand, which in chastity or matrimony may co^modiously be taken to
gods glory, and to the furtherance of the church. Also the Godly propentions
and inclinations of minds to either kind of life, and the facuties both of
body and mind. Certainlye the unmarried state of it self pleases not God, and
they receive the reward of the fooliysh virgins which take and keep it not
for the kingdom of heavens sake that is to say, that they may be the more
ready, steadfast, and frutfull to serve the lord in more large charges and
duties, then the married life can sustain, and whose utility extends
farther. These tokens therefore would we have such to observe, that make
inquisytion whether they are called to the state unmarried or no. burning is
also a token of the vocation to matrymonie.
But because (as I have said) the holy gooste, the thief teacher and
distributer of true holiness pronunceth euidentlye him self that such as
burn, that is, (as Chrysostom expounds) such as sustain much force and
burninge, and for that cause are in ieopardie of falling, should put them selves
out of such a dauniger be matrimony. Uve ca^ not gain say nor ought nor, yt
they which sustain such force and burninge, and can not avoid it by prayers
or true mortifying of the flesh, and also perceive that they have more
occations offered unto them to serve God according to his precepts in
matrymonye then castitie, do well and Godly seeing these tokens declare their
vocation to matrymonye.

Now have I sufficiently spoken concerning the first place of our defense,
wherein I purposed to prove, that certain are so called and given from above to
holy matrimony, and emonge them, not a few endued and given to the holy
ministerye of the churches, that they should frustrat their labor in praynge
for the gift of chastity, and should never lead this kind of life godly nor
yet happily. The which things (most devout men) I commit to yowr judgment, and
all other men's that will read and ponder godly what the holy letters in all
places both teach in precepts and set forth in examples. of what principles*
man may decerue and judge of ye present disputation.
First concerning Gods ^^nipotent power, godnes and wisdom which, brings to
effect all things in all men. Secondarelye, concerning the vacatio^ of the
children of Gods reuocation, and certain motion in all me^ through his
spirit. Last of all, concerning the very matrimony and chastity, and the
use of them both in the church. Besides this consider ye, what that greatly to
be lamented experience of so long time, teaches, monissheth and vanquisseth,
which the holy ought never to contemn, because it is a token of Gods works
and gifts. Another do I doubt but who so knows and wayeth all these things
Godly, shall thoroughly perceive, that the far greater part of men, and among
them, very many holy and Godly, which are by all means prepared and
ordained of god to minister ye churches are so made, called and given to holy
matrimony from above, that they can not demand of God, nor yet use the gift
and use of the acceptable chastity unto GOD, that is to say, which avails
to ye fetting forth of his kingdom, seeing that his pleasure should be altogether
by faith prefarred before all man's judgment and vow. And that all things
what so ever Uvinchester has brought to the contrary ar vain ungodly, and
brauling scholishe reasons.

Now therefore will we pass over to another place of our present defense, and
teach, that what so ever be in the offerid gift of chastity given other to
all me^ indisserentlye (which Uvinchester will have) or to certain only, and
men chosen from above for the same purpose, (which we have proved and
vanquisshed by the word of God and authority of the holy fathers) And other
place of this defense, what so ever be of ye gift of chastity, yet y^ this is
against ye laws of god and the church, because ye abstinence from holy
matrimony is required of al priests and solytarye parso^s.
Yet that this is clean contrary to the laws of God, and of the church, and
against the authority of holy fathers, to require at this day the
foreswearinge of matrimony and abstaininge from the same, of all such as must
be admitted or are admitted into presthood or professyon of solytarines. First
therefore I exhort all me^ that love christ's kingdom, and that desire the
comelynes of Gods house, and the true holiness of priests to be restored again,
that it may be Godly pondered what God him self (who alone konweth what gift
he has given or will give to every man, and what is more deceut and
furtheraunce to the prystlye life teaches and commands concerning the
marriage of prestes, in that he does it in two places by his Apostle Paul, and
in those places where as he speaks euidentlye of the holiness and virtues of
priests, that a pressed should be the husband of one wife, and a good
instruct^r of his children, This does he set to be the chief of those virtues
which he requires in a Bishop and other ministers.

Then do I desire them to confert Godly with this holy precept, ye law of ye
romish seat (whose defense Uvinchester has taken upon him) wherbye no man be
he never so holy in all his time, or furnisshed with all gifts of the holy
ghost to the ministerye of the holy church is admitted in to the order of
prestes, without he vow him self to be the husband of no wife and is put
beside his presthod, who so ever marieth a wife therein, and then let them judge
whether this law of the pope of Rome, be not clean contrary to the law of
God? For God as well in the order of priests as of Bisshops does both require,
and also plainlye admyt, a married man. But the pope of Rome ^oth another admit
a married man in to this order, nor yet bye any means sufferith him therein. Let
Uvinchester therefore expound unto us, how the pope of Rome, an erthly God,
therein speaks not clean contrary to the heavenly, and true God?

Here if Uvinchester fly to the authority of those fathers which would have
this precept of God so to be understood, that therbye they should be excluded
from presthoode, which have more wives then own, and yet they should not be
admitted to presthod which have one, and will keep her in the use of
matrimonye, and lay against us the church of Egypt, of the chaste, and of the
apostolycall seat, which now in S. Hiero^s time were wont to receive for
prestes none, except they were other no married men, or else had resigned it. Uve
again lay unto him. First the saing of the holy ghost, in the which is not
one word wherbye may be gathered, that he only should be admitted to
presthood which was, and is not the husband of one wife. Further more
Uvinchester is not ignorant, that no law, necessary for our health, can be
appointed by the authority of holy fathers. Also he can not deny that S.
Chrisostoms authority and others yt make with us, should be any less set
bye, then the authority of his holy fathers, yea theirs should be so much
the more set by, as their interpretation is more agreeable with the words of
the holy ghooste. But they understood and expounded this saing (the husband
of one wife) in the same meaning as we, and tawght plainelye that the holy
ghost by this precept, that a Bisshope should be the husband of one wife) would
comme^de the dignity of matrimonye, and condemn before those heretics,
which blasphemed that there was some vnpurenes in matrimonye, and that bicawse
he teachethe in this place, that matrimonye is such a holy thing and honest,
yt therewith a man may ascend, yeuen unto ye holy throne, that is to say, the
seat of a Bisshoppe. In fine Uvinchester knows also this, yt S. Chrisostoms
interpretation, and others making with us, is rejected of none of the holy
fathers, that it should not be counted to be of the right opinion, no truly not
of S. Hierom, who notwithstanding alleged it in expoundinge this place. Let
winchester therefore now declare, by what authority ye romisshe seat
prohibiteth to follow S. Chrisostoms opinion, and other fathers that agree with
us, and constrains (leauinge this as erroneous) to follow the interpretation
of S. hierom, and such other that make with him. Let him show, why it is
thrust forth unto us for a catholic law which was never catholic, no not by
those fathers yt allow it. 1. Tim. 3. Act. i.
Furthermor Uvi^chester knows that the holy fathers made fyrme with many
laws, and that with the laws of God, that no man, what so ever he be, should
be admitted in to any degree of the Clergy, or else if any be admitted,
should be sufferid to remain therein, if he be found to have lived or do live,
of any likelihood, with impuritie and uncleanness of life: much less if he be
found to live dishonestly in the face of the world. And so therefore let him
make answer, what spirit the Romans follow, and such as make with them,
when they exalt to the chief orders of holy ministerye, and suffer therein to
remain, and that now such a long continuance of time, them that live with open
dishonestie. Let him also show what spirit should be thanked for this, that
they not contented to cast from holy ministeries, but besides that punish
cruellye prestes that marie wives, against diverse laws, and those apoi^ted by
man, live they never so Godly and holyly, and be they never so studious and apt
to edify Gods church. And in yt mean season prestes and Bisshops implicated
in manifest hoar huntinges, defyllinges of virgins, adultery, and other
greather myschewes, and which newer came to the perfect knowledge of any part
of the pastoral mynystery, and much less purposed by all means to go about
it, they do not only leave vnponisshed, but also eft sons adorn them with the
chief and highest degres of ye ecclesiastical dignity and power.

Besides this Uvynchester knows also that all the fathers acknowleged that
chastity, Chastity if it be not taken yt thou may have the more leser ^o
godly deeds and ministeryes, is abominable to God.
thowghe it be purelie kept for as much as pertayneth to the body, yet that
the hypochrysye of it is abominable before God, if it be not taken and kept
for this intent, that every man may cleave so much the more without
separatyon unto God, and exhibit his mynysterye unto him the more perfectely
to the edifyenge of the church. It is known unto him well enough, as I
suppose, yt Saint Chrysostom writteth upon this place of Saint Paul. (This
do I say for your profitte, not that I should tangle you in a snare, but for
that which is honest and comely unto you, and which hereunto conduces, that
ye may perfectely, and without separation stick unto the Lord) that she is
another virgyn, nor yet honest, which is wrapped, and tied fast in the cares of
the world. For the Apostle when he said, that a woman and a virgyn are
separated, in so saying he set the difference betwext them, that is to say,
because the one takes care for the things of the world, and the other for
the things of God, and gave a definition of a virgyn, not maringe nor
continence, (...) other to be delivered from the cares of the world, The holy
fathers had rather have had shepeherdes married me^ given to holy things, then
unmarried, implicated in the cares of ye world.
or to be wrapped in them: Uvherfore the holy fathers made never so much of
chastity, for all they counted it of great valu, but that they supposed married
men should rather have the governance over the churches, which setting a part
a worldly business, should be more given to heavenly cares? then virgynes and
unmarried, which should be slacker in the true study of religyon. Uvherof S.
Hierom writ these things against Iouinianus. And how comes it to pass (ye
will say) that the unmarried eft sons in ye prestlye ordinance is not
regarded, and the married chosen? Because purchaunce he has no other works
agreeable to his unmarried state. Or else is thought to be chaste and is not, or
else his chastytye is slanderous, or else at the least wise by his chastity
he waxes hye minded, and whiles he stands in his own concept of the only
chastity of the body he neglects other vertewes: Nouryssheth not the poor,
is greadye of money: these are his words. Behold this man of God grants
worthilye to be secluded from holy ministerye, not them all only whose
virginite is feigned, slanderous and suspicious: but they also whose virginite
wants other virtues and works correspondent to virginite: which nouryshe
not the poor, which are covetous or gready of money.

Here let Wynchester make answer by what face or audacitie, That which should
be chiefly saught for in the chastitye of priests the abstinence from ye
busynes of the world is clean neglected of the Romans.
the Romysh seat and such as make with it, may in this cause bring forth
against us the authority of holy fathers, which require not of their
priests so much as the chastity of the body, and much less such a
chastity, which (al worldly cares set a part) should be only given to
Heavenly things, by such severity and such cruelnes, as they make diligente
search that no man have a leaful wife? And here let Uvynchester also examyne
his life, his deeds, and his Episcopalle governance, and acknowelege him self,
how far wide he had declared him, to be from such an one as the holy fathers
confess to be only a Christian, much wyder from the chastity that ought to
be in a preeste. And that first of all perform in him self: then require and
put it from other, whether they be of the Cleargye or of the Laytye, which at
some time were fruetful unto him. How vacant Wynchester is from the cares of
the world
I call not here to remembrance how he refused or took upon him worldly
busynes, and functions which pertayned not to a Bysshope: how he diminysshed
or increaced the po^pious court in his family. Let him be his own accuser and
judge: but according to the laws of God and the church. In very deed I
chatter not furthe as he reproved me in his last epistle (if he have done his
prince any service to the weal public, and edifiinge of the church: For I
know what ambasages S: Ambrose has gone for his rulars: and business S:
Gregorye has done for the Romans. And what other most holy fathers took
upon them at the present necessities of their princes, and of Christ's people,
and for the commune weal and tranquillity? But for all that what a cross it
was to them to be absent the space of one hour from their proper ministeries,
they have witnessid in very deed: and not in words only.

But Uvynchester doubts not of this also, The old ancient judged it a mad
thing if the churches had be^ sooner ministered by no pastores or else very ill
unmarried,
that emonge all the old antiquity of the church it has been counted a mad
thing, if any had rather the churches should be destitute of all pastoral
cure, or destroyed by manifest wicked shepeherdes: then to be ministrede Godly
and helthsomlie, by godly and apt ministers, thowghe they were married.

Epiphanius writethe that when in his time the laws were purelie observed,
there were none taken in to the order of elders, deacons, or subdeaco^s but they
that were either withowt a wife, or else had refrayned the^ selves from their
wife: yet does he grant that at the same time in certain places, the custom
was to chose those, that as yet begat children in to this order. And writes
that the cause thereof was emo^ge some of the multitude of churches that wanted
ministers, and the lack of very chaste men, which notwithstanding should have
byne instructed in other necessary gifts also of holy ministry emonge other
the fainte observation of the law, Epiphanius was in opinyon, that whereas
want mete ministers, there should married me^ have the governance over ye
Churches with good right
and the proper mind of tho^ churches and bisshopes which received in to the
higher orders of holy ministry, such that as yet, begat children. For all
that, this man of God is not in opinion that those churches, or bisshops shall be
excluded from the ecclesiastical communion, or that they should be barred from
this liberty.

It appears also ye S* Hierom was in the same opinion. wherefore Epiph.
reputethe it not unto them for any reproach, which received married men in to
the order of priests driven by the want of unmarried ministers, which had been
apt to feade the Lords sheep. For he acknowleged to be far better to have
apt shepeherdes of the people, though they be married men, then none and
unapt. Epiphanius and Hierom count not the^ flagitious, which by no
necessity made married men the gouernars over the Churches.
Albeit he judged them, which did it, other by the want and imperfection of
more severe or sharp disciplyne, or else because they supposed it to be more
fyt and co^modyous, to have declyned by so doing from the received discyplyne
of the church, yet does he not count the^ scismatyques, nor writ ought
vehementer against the^. He notes them only to make a certain declination
from the more sincere discyplyne.

He that shall now read with a good zeal and depelye consider these
things, which the holy fathers have left in writings, partly concerning
the relygyon of holy ministry, and the holiness of ministers, and par^ly also
concerning chastity. He shall never stand in doubt, that those very holy
fathers, thowghe they praised the unmarried life. The holy fathers would at this
day cast forth the unmarried yt take the cure ever the churches: and would set
married men in their place.
If they were now present, and saw those unmarried me^, which now many years
have had the governance over the churches, would by all means exhort that, by
admitting marriage of prestes. Yet some regard of godlynes, and disciplyne
might be renewed in this order, and that (setting a side those unmarried men,
which now destroy the churches so miserablye) married men, if they were
endued with any godlynes, and knowelege and cure of Christ's kingdom, should
very sone be received to take the cure of the churches. And married men (if
they be godly, and instructed to Christ's kingedome, and of a good judgment)
may edifye Gods churches: whereas ungodly men, and such as have another the
study nor intelligens of Christ's kingdom, may rather destroy the churches,
then edifye them: Though they be more chaste then stones. They are ungodly and
without all knoweledge and study of Christ, whosoever persiste in their
manifest mischeues. Here therefore let Uvynchester answer what authority of the
old ancient, the Bishops of Rome with their adherentes follow, The old
fathers suffered the churches to be ministered by lay me^ and that in their
presens.
for so much as now of late they have sufferid Christ's people not only to be
robbed of all apt and mete shepeherdes (which how great a damnage it is, ye
most devout men, now perceive and feel, whiles ye go about to repair emonge
you the ecclesiastical business) but also to be dissipated and oppressed in the
stead of shepherdes, with so many reproaches of men, and to be without all
Christian religion: and that at this day they had rather all christian
religion, should go to wrack, then to suffer such afflicte and decaide
churches to be ministered by married me^, that are godly and instructed to Gods
kindome. The old Bishops received both the lay men and also husban^ men, and
prefarred the^ before them selves to teach ye people when they found the^ more
mete thereunto then themselves.

Eusebius de ecclesiastica histo. Li. vi. Ca. xv.


Moreower ancient true bisshops received to teach they people in their
presens lay men, and those also married: whereas they found them to be more apt
for this office then themselves. But our bisshops (which in the^ selves and
theirs no less conte^ne the authority of the old ancient then object it
odiouslie against us (before they will lice^se married men, be they never so
holy and apt to teach Christ to bestow the talentes they have received of
the lord in feadinge the lords flocks, suffer rather that the lords flocks
want not only the pastores of everlasting life? but also be scattred abroad,
torn, and lost by manifest thieves and robbars, that is to say. such as come
up some other way, and feed the^ selves, For how many devout me^, and such as
were called of the lord him self to feade Christ's people, have byne dryue^
from this ministry, by this forbeddinge of matrimony, y^ greatly to be
bewailed want of good pastores declarethe more the^ so much, And this seeing
Uvynchester perceaueth sufficiently, why does he not suppose and thinck yt
therein the authority of the old ancient should be follow, to thentent he
should judge that princes and bisshops owght most especially to regard this,
that Christ's doctrine, and discyplyne may therebye be purelye and faithfully
ministered to his people: and that they should admit to this office, whom so
ever it appeared were made and instructed of the Lord thereunto: and therefore
also called: whether they live holilye and godly in matrimonye or chastity:
seeing that the true chastity which the holy fathers sowghte for in the
ministers of the churches, and which alone is acceptable before GOD, has a
good while a go ben left of to be searched for: and that which is accustomed
to be searched for, has brought such a great stynkynge puddle of impuritie
into the order of priests. For that the Churches should have very holy and
profitable priests. Uve know it must needs be profitable to all men's health.
But that priests should only be without lefull wives, whom I pray you
does it profyt a pynne: No constrained vows please God.
yet what a ruin and decay it has been and is to the churches, who can
express it, as it should be? Fynallye this is also manifest unto Uvinchester,
yt a vow can not be acceptable before GOD, Uvhat vows are acceptable to God
without it be taken by the faith of his word and be of power to sanctifye
his name. And he knows how vncircumspectlye, and constraynedlye and how
many times ungodly vows are made of diverse priests, and monastical parsons,
which emonge a thousand, truly scarce one has in mind to keep, especyally
godly, to say, to serve God therebye, and to execute the ministerye of the
church so much the more holy and fru^tfully. Uvhiche they all declare to
grosselye, who are by no external compultyon restraynt, and had rather take
upon them any labors or pains, then those that properlye pertayne to the
monastical and priestlye order.

How gentlye God and ye holy fathers remytted rash vows.
To be short Uvynchester knows this also with what clemencye God him self and
the holy fathers remitted them the vow of chastity, that observed it evil.
The holy ghooste planelye commanded the younger weme^ to marye, which had
broken their first promise, after they were in ieopardy of uncleanness and evil
report. These, seeing they are Gods words, both belong unto all, that find
themselves in that ieopardye, that is here expressed, and also are greater then
all the exception of man's vow or decre. Saint Cyprian perceiving this,
Ciprianus.
writ concerning the vyrgynes, which professed chastitye, and that not of
his own opinyon only, but also of certain that were of the same order, yea
and of the whole church to. If they will not continewe, or can not, it is
better for them to mary, then to fall into the fire, by their deliciousnes:
Truly they should offend another brethren, Epiphanius. It is better in
taking a wife after the vow, and to fall in to judgment. then in
nor systerne. So Saint Epiphanius declares also that it is better for him
that leaves the iournaye, and vow of chastity to marie a wife openly
agreeable with the law, and so to fall (...). that is, as he him self
interprets it, into the judgment of repentance done for a season, which
fynysshed, he may be brought into the church again, then under the
dissimulation of chastity, to be dayelye wounded with priuye darts, and so
for fornication to fall (...), that is, into condemnation, wherebye such are
clean expelled out of Christ's kyngedome.

Augustynus de bono viduitatis. Ca. v. and xx. In distinction xxiij. queda^ ^.
xxvij. ij. Nuptiarum.
For this cause also were not the maryages in Saint Austines time, which were
made after the vow of chastitye dissolved, nor yet counted damnable. And the
great assemble at Calcedonia licensed expressedly Bysshoppes to remit the vow
of chastity. Also Galatyus the Pope left the women, that married after they
professed and vowed chastity to God, to their own conscience.

Here therefore let Wynchester answer fro whens he and his fellows have so
much the more severity and cruelnesse granted them to make inquisition for
vows, then those holy fathers had? But what say I? to make inquisition for
vows? To seek, I should have said, that no man after he ha^he vowed
chastity be lefullye married. For that the vows of holy Chastity should
excel: that is to say: that they who so have made such vows, should cleave
so much the more without separation unto God, and serve the church more
fruetefullye, who makes inquisition? Another may that feigned matter concerning
the simple and solemn vow make any thing against this. For the religyon of
all vows made unto GOD is equalle, so that the godly should observe it, if it
agree with the law of God: and forsake it, if it disagre to the word of God.
It is also euydente enough, that no greater thing can be in such vows, as the
authoures of that feigned matter make solemn, then is in the other, which the
holy fathers (whose opinions I have alleged) thought best to be remitted and
broken: For with these vows men have consecrated themselves unto God, as it is
the chiefest thing required in every godly vow.

These things let Uvynchesters way, and deeply consider, and if he ca^, show
that it is not here made plain, that the same law (whose defense he has
taken upon him) which forbiddethe all that are ons received or must be received
in to the order of prestes or salitarie life, to marye, ca^ not only be
defended by no authority o^ Christ's church or holy fathers, but also is
clean contrary both to Gods very law, and also to the true and catholic
Canons of Gods holy church, and to the wholl consent of all the holy and
right opinionid fathers.

Herin therefore let Uvynchester do the office of a bishop, and show (if he
ca^) by true arguments that we are in an error, and cease to deprave by
such triflinge and ungodly tawntes the dyuine and holy fathers sentenses.
and to peruerte and mistake with his railing sophistry, owre confession
settforthe plainly and holilie, and to scrape to gether with much a do
(wynking at our perfect and sound arguments here and there a word by his
scoffinges and to boaste an derake him self in doubtful places, wherein the
cause consists not, leapinge over to favorably and gently the true
foundations of our confession, and the most clear testimonies of the holy
scriptures.

For these things are far unseemly, not only for a Bisshope, but for an
other man, with that currishe and doggishe eloquence, whereof he could in these
his writings against me, make another measure nor end.

And this I suppose be suffycyentlye spoken concerning the second place of
our defense. Uvherin I took upon me to teach, that the authority of the
holy fathers is clean contrary both to the law of God, and also of his
church: for so much as they require and compel all that are, or must be
admitted to preesthod or monastical life to forswear, and to abstain from
holy matrimony.

Now let us make answer to the lie which Uvinchester falselye and
wrongefullye laythe to my charge, whereof I intended to speak in some certain
place Uvinchester denies that ye same fained matter, concerning the necessite
wherbye ye father should be constrained to give his daughter in marriage, by ye
reason of his small substance, came into his brain, which I affirmed unto
Latomus, I hard of him in our communication together.

I / in faith call to record Christ our lord the iu^ge of the quick and the
dead / and the keaper in memory of all our deeds / and words: and wish his
anger to exte^de upon me / if ever I minded to feign one word against him: and
have not plainly declared without any thought of deceit what so ever I
remember / I hard of him. Certainly it seem to me a very absurd
interpretation / wheter he speak it in erneste / or to prove or mock be with
all. yet as far as I cold gather / ^e seemed to me to speak it in earneste:
notwithstanding he soake many things with great arroga^cie in the same
communication which were no less made. For what manner a thing judge ye this
that he durst defend those princes and rulars to do well / which punish more
straightly a sharply their own laws / then gods: and which make it death / if
any pressed marie a wife / but adultery / and horei^unting they leave
unpunished? This dare I be bold / before God the searcher of hearts to boaste
of his gift / that I ever took care for this / and was very circunspect in
all strife of religon emonge my adversaries / least I should ^ake or declare
their fainges or writtinges otherwise the^ they meant spoke or wrat the^.

In alte^a epistola co^tra Buccerum.
But as holilie and firmly as I deny that I made anielye upon Winchester even
as boldly does he affirm the same. Who therefore shall be the judge betwext us? He
despaireth of witness and writes that I receive no witness / but such as are
conspired: whom I should call Godly men / and worthy credit. And therefore he
requires witness of the marter it self: And as Sophocles purged him self of
dotage by the settinge forth of the tragedy he had at the same time in hand:
So does he demand of the rightous good reader whether it be likely that he
answered me at any time such foolish things / so unsavory / and so far
alienat from all knowleg of scriptures / seeing he wrate those things / that I
should keep secret / and such things again as he publisshed abroad against me
the second time: For he would have these his writings to seem to have some
affinity with the knowledge of holy scripture / and with the quicnesse of
judgment / so that it should be rekened incredible that he answered me any
thing so foolish / and unworthy for him that has taken upon him to entreat
of divinity / these things does he writ in his last epistle against me.

In very deed I will with all my heart admit, Uve admit gladlye any mete
witness.
to give sentence of our communication, any whose judgment and sentense in
such a cause owght and may have any weight. Another do I know any conspired,
without he mean such as have holylye and Godly sworn, as I have done, to
christ, and unto their princes and magistrates. Also I esteem them Godly and
worthy credit, yt may be known to be such by their fructes of godlynes.
Such therefore whether they pertain to his householde, or are peculierlye
joined to me in the lord, may declare and witness, what so ever they remember
of our communication.

Another do I refuse the testimonies of his own writtinges, but a me contented
thereof to judge, both how true Uvinchester is in alleging our sainges, and
how sure and trusty in interpretinge Gods scriptures. Uvinchester complains
ye Bucer keapeth close his writing and yet he sets it not forth in print hi^
self.
He reproved me, because I keep secret his writing: but if he suppose that
his cause has thereby any with the more furtherance, why did not he him self
long a go put them forth? For he affyrmed that he has with him his own
hand writtinge. Truly I thought it ever best to reserve it to mine answer as
now every day the matter it self will declare. But at this present time,
saying I have another time ne place to set out all that, I will show as much
thereof as is requisyte for this present cause, and that will I compare with his
writings imprinted, to thentent all men may se what credit his writings
deserve, and how they should be esteemed. For if so be the law of witness be
commune to us both, that their testimonies may not be received which speak
contrary to themselves. Winchesters own writings shall convince him self of
vanity and quarellinge, and not me.

For in his writing which after our communication he sent unto me, when he had
gone about to prove that this place of Paul (But if any think it uncomely
for his virgin if she pass the time of marriage) should be understood of the
virgin now affyaunced, and whose time is past, when the father promised to give
her to a husband. He writ thus.

But (says Paul) that father being of a fyrme and steadfast mind to keep his
daughter a virgin nothing wavering and which as yet has in his hands to
apointe with him self to marye her or to keep her chaste. Uvinchesters words
out of his hand writi^ge.
Also the which is constrainid by no necessytie that rise the either of that,
that he can not easelie find her a husband, either is alleged, by the reason
of the co^uenantes that are to be observed, is compelled to marye his daughter:
but has the power over his own will so, that as yet he may chose whether he
will give her to matrimonye or no. Finallye has decreed with the sure decree
of his mind to keep his virgin, this father, I say, by Paul's judgment,
which keapeth his virgin by the perpetual stedfastnes of his mind as
consecrated and dedicated unto God, does a deed which profits not only the
virgin, as he said before, but also the father him self before God, And therefore
says Paul, he does well. And this is Paul's proper meani^g, thus much has
he written, which he may know by his hand writing that he has kept with
him,

Truly in these words is not expressidlie set that interpretation, which
Winchester brought in our communication together, concerning the necessity
to marie ye daughter, for ye pe^^rie and small portion of substans, as far as
I understand his words, another do I know what he means by ye necessity to
marie the daughter, which should rise of the dyfficultie to get her a
husband. But that is no maruail, if by ye space of one night given him to
respect, and to invent he changed and correcked yt in our disputation he had
suddenly forgotten, if he have correcked it at all. For I understand not (as I
have said what he means by that necessity to marie ye daughter, which he
writes to spring of the difficulty to get her a husband. For ye se yt he
puts a dobble need, whereby the father should be co^strainid to mary his
daughter, one yt is alleged by the pactes and conuenantes of marriage, an other
that should rise of ye difficulty to get her a husband, which saing if it be
not contrary to it self, yet is it very vna^ply and obscurely co^pacte, for
it appears not what necessity to marie ye daughter, can rise of ye
difficulty to get her a husband, therefore he him self should interpret, what
difficulty to gether a husband he means here, whether that ye rises of the
te^nnitie and small portion of patrimony, or some other.

I will continewe on to show how many ways his writings disagre to the^
selves, and euerte one an other. Uvherof that shall not only be manifest, how
he with his own with witness shall be convinced of falshoode, but also it
shall be known that it is no maruayle, if he changed afterward in writing that
in our disputation he spoke vnaduisidlie, saying he revoked afterward those
things which he writ with great deliberation, and that not only in his
other, but also in the selfsame writing, and that openly publysshed abroad.

Understande ye therefore of this things, which I have brought out of his own
hand writing. First how Uvynchester interpreted this sainge of Paul (and
has no need) not only out of hand, Wintonien adsertor stoicus.
and without puttinge any doubt, and in one simple meaning* but also that he
added unto this his interpretation an assured affyrmans. For this is (says he)
Paul's proper meaning, Afterward, that he has interpreted this place of the
necessity to marie the daughter, and not to keep her. Last of all concerning
the necess^tie yt either rises of the difficulty to gether a husband, either
that is aleaged by ye parts and conuenautes.

Now with these things conferr that he writ against me in his first epistle
which he publisshed abroad. For therein he accuses me of ungodly audacitie,
because I brought of this place of Paul, which is hard and of an uncertain
sense, one sense and that certain, which he will not presume upon him to do.
Uvinchester is an vncertan skeptical coniectu^rar
In very ded (he writes) I take not so upon me Bucer that I can out of hand
opon the hard places of scripture. And my seems it is a point of more
modesty in doubtful things, to make conjecture and to be a Scepticus, than
(as you do) at the first dashe to determine ye wat not what.

And to make men to have a farther opinion of this my ignorance and
arrogantye, he subscrybeth greek glo^es which being of an uncertain author are
asscribed unto one Photius and Oecmenius, another ancient interpreters, nor yet
of any approved authority. And which both interpret this place (And has no
ned) not to marye, but to keep the vyrgyn. And toughe the one of them, Photius
writes that this palce may as properlye be understood of the necessytye to
marye the daughter. Yet does he mean the same necessytie that we which should
come of the condition and will of the daughter, and not that which Uvinchester
has fained, that it should either rise of the diffycultie to get her a husband,
either be alleged by the conueuantes of marriage.

Furthermore this same interpretation of Photius, concerning the necessytie to
keep the daughter which he grants to be long no less properlye to this
place of Paul, then the other he spoke of before. Uvinchester in his hand
writing sent unto me, and in the same also he has imprinted, oppugnethe and
ouerthrowethe with all his might and with his most presumptious scoldinges,
namynge it cold, foulysh, tryflynge, and not agreeable with Paul's words, but
clean contrary unto them, whereof sone after I will speak more.

To be short, besides this, that he oppugneth so greatly, and so shamefullye
rebukes this interpretation, no more owrs and Photius is. Then all the old
very holy fathers, he laith also against us, that in this behalf, we bring
in our own fayninges, and prefarr them before the interpretation of the old
ancient antiquity. For one this manner, after he had alleged in his book the
exposytions of Photius and Oecomenius, of whose antiquity for all that he
has no certainetie that he may effyrme, Se how this Bisshope is prepared to
speak well.
he ^ayleth upon us.

But I leave this to other men's judgment whether we should rather give
credyte to the plain antyquytye, which pleaded the universal cawse of
Chrystians, and settinge a part all affections, had relygio^ in reverence, or
to there arrogancye which being most impudent patrones of the bellye and
filthy lusts, dare defend (all relygion despised and trod under foore)
poluted and wicked copulations before the judges seat of the world, and lest
they should seem to have offended against Godlynes, he labors sore with
horse and sail, hand and foot to draw hedlonge all in to the bottomless
pit of wickedness. These are Uvinchesters words, which declare manifestlye
enoughe what ma^er a Bisshope he is how Godly, how prudent, how meke, how
sober, how chaste, and how quiet.

Thus therefore it is made euydent unto you (most devout men) how many ways
and how greatly Uvinchester syghteth with him self in his writings, and how
he euerteth his own ^amges him self, and not only in his latter writtinge,
those things that he affyrmed in the first, but also in o^e, and the same
writing^ publysshed abroad. For in his hand writing he brought forth unto
us after the manner of a Stoike not o^lye with out any question: but also with
affyrmance of his own authority, one certain and proper exposytyon of this
place of Paul, for all it be hard and dark. But in his imprinted writi^g he
attributes this to ungodly ignorance and arrogauncye, and to the settinge at
naught and contempt of the ancient antiquity, and craketh him self (making
conjecture of diverse and sundry things) that he now seeks not for an
exposytyon of a^ie lykelihood (yet one notwitstandinge, after the custom of
Academikes) but leauinge all affyrma^ce, wauethe vpe and down emonge contrary
sentenses like a Scepticus. And notwithstanding in his hand writing he
expounded this sainge of Paul, for the necessytie to marye the daughter. And
in his imprinted writing he brings forth his gloss me^, and of them bostehte
so, that who so follows them not is very ignorant and arrogant, which
interpret this place to the contrary, for the necescessitie to keep ye
daughter. And all that he casts in our teethe with his hye looks the
authorytye of the old ancient, and these his gloss men, and the one of them
vnderstandethe here with the old auntyent, the necessytye to marie the
daughter, wherbye the father through the state and will of his daughter is
constrained to marye her. Yet in his hand wrytinge he bryngethe a new feigned
lie, unknown to all the old antyquitye, concerning the necessytye that either
spryngeth of the dyffycultie to get her a husband, either that is alleged by
the fathers conuenautes. And in his imprynted writing he oppugnethe with all
his might, and rebukethe with spytifull raylynges the other interpretation of
his Photius and of the old ancient. A point therefore now pow power selves what
credyte a man should give to Uvynchesters wrytinges, which ye se how many
ways they dyssent emonge them selves, and euer^ one an other. And for so much
as he is contrary to him self in his writings and that not only in diverse,
but also in one and the same writings, The conclusion upon Wi^chesters lie.
who supposes not to be credyble enough that he spoke one thing in the same
dysputatyon, and afterward with him self, alone wryt an other?

And seeing he is espied to have wryttenn such absurd things and so far
from the Apostles meaning, and also which are clean contrary to him self
in his wrytynges, and in the one that was sawght, for ye space of three years
(for so much was betwext the communycatyon we had to gether, and the making of
the same writing) who may say, that it is not very lykelye, that this
Sophocles (whose fable so long sawght for before is so ill written) did not
also speak in that troublous and fervent dysputation such things as were far
vnsemly for him, and much less se^bly for an Apostle.

He deniethe that he made any contention with me, How Uvy^chester burned in
our disputation*
in this dysputatyon. But I saw him in such an heat through contention, that
his very vay^es in his hands shook and tre^bled (which I never save in all
my live time in any man before) as often and he herd ought of us that offended
and myslyked him, and specyallye if the very well learned and Godly dyuine
Alexander Alesius (whom I brought in company with me) had spoken any such
thing. But let this be suffycient concerning Uvynchesters lie.

But for so much as here in this point he rebukeht us to be most impudent
patrones of the bel^ye and filthy lusts, and such other his most foul
reproaches, whether they agree more fyttlye in him or us, next after GOD let them
judge which have narrowlye sought forth the open life of us both. Uve
through Christ his grace, give dilligent labor to reprehe^d these works of
the flesh and darkness, and not to defend them, and labor diligently to
restore Christ his sincere religion to her dignity and honor which the
Romans so opprobryously contemn and set at naught. And also take in hand
that we may at the least wise draw some out of the deep pit of ungodliness,
whereunto they have calte headlonge so many milians of men, taking dilygent
head as far as the Lord shall give us grace, that we neither make any
offense against godlynes, ne yet give any occasyon for other to do the same.

If Uvynchester do, Uvynchesters reproaches ha^g in him self.
and endeavor him self to the same, and whether he felt the sauoure sweet
unto him of the luker, which he received o^t of the filthy commune
brothelhouses or stewhouse, and not only of the abomynable whoredom of his
chaplaynes, as certain Bishops of Rome are wont. And whether he him self of
his own accord, or the other King commanded to be a reformation of those his
houses at London, It should have be^ long ere he would have done it him self.
o^t of the which he received such filthy luker, and to be let to hired of
honest parsons, and so to diminysh thereby his abomynable luker, let him
witness of himself, and such as have a farther knowledge in that gere. I
pass over here how he has oppressed with such legerdemaynes and ioyglynges
the true godlynes so many years in consaylynge, prickynge forward and
compellynge as many as he cold with his pernicyous deceyptes, brawlynges,
flatterynges, threatenynges, fair speakynges, bribryes, clokynges, violence
and cruelnes. I am sorye and ashamed to recyte these things by mouth yet ought
they not to be ever wynked at, that by this they may know, which unfeignedly
love Christ his kingdom, that these men are driven to opp^gne holy matrimony
by no true love of chastity, but alonelye by the fervent desire to retain
their tyranny, and licentious liberty into all the filthy excess of life.

But referrynge these things to ye ^uste judge, let us go one with the last
place of our defense, concerning the true interpretatyon of this place of the
Apostle. i. Co. vij
Nevertheless he that purposes surely in his heart, and has no need, but
has power over his own will, and has this decreede in his heart to keep
his virgyn, does well. But before I come to ye interpretation of this place,
Uvhat things were in co^trouersye betwext Uvynchester and Bucer in* their
communication together
I will brefely touch upon what occasyon we came into disputation thereof.
Uvynchester recyteth this truly of our disputation, how he began that,
concerning ye common principles and way (whereby every man may be overcome)
of ye places, which in our relygyon are in co^trouersy. This also is no less
true, yt I judged and confuted it to be not only (...)* but also plain false,
for because he denied yt we had any principles and sure reason at hand, whereby
we might declare the decres of our religion to be true, and confute the
contrary. For I had at hand ready, which I laid against him, namelye that ye
scripture inspired from above, is enough to do both: as the holy ghost him
self has witnessid by Paul. But when Uvynchester had brought for excuse, The
co^futation of ye papists objection yt say every man may wreste and writ ye
scriptures, not regarding ye old fathers of ye church, to what sense he
thiketh best.
this which is a common (...) he in the mouth of the adversaries to the true
doctrine: that every man gives what sense to the holy scriptures he lystethe,
and that the interpretation of the old ancient fathers is no more sent bye: I
answered again that such as want not the faith of Christ, and the zeal to
imitate Gods word, have an easelye demonstration by Gods scriptures both
what they should follow and what eschew in Christ's religyon: and also that
they may obtain without great pains the true fense of scripture* as much
as belongs to the necessary doctrine of our health, which after prayer make
inquisition by the true desire and study of godlynes for the true sense and
meaning of the scriptures, and by those ways only, whereby in other
writtynges the opinyon of authors is to be searched for, when there ryseth any
doubt thereof. But he would have the matter brought to this conclusyon, that
whatsoever the rulars apointe concerning religyon, Uvynchesters horrible
principle yt man's laws are justly ponyshed with greater punyshme^t tha^ Gods,
wha^ they are transgressed.
the same every man should follow. And upon this we fell in disputation about
the power of rulars in such matiers as belong to relygyon: and therein we
spent not the least part of our communication, because Uvinchester took
upon him to defend, that rulars d^ well when they punyshe the transgressyon of
their own laws more sharpelye, then the transpressyon of Gods law. And when
they make it an offense worthy deadlye punyshmente, if any within the sext
weak, eat the flesh of four feted beasts, and birds, in like manner as the
flesh of fyshe: or if a priest or monastical parson marye a wife, though in
the mean season they full of lecherye and adulterye, and killing them selves,
and other with unmeasurable drinking, count it for a sport or play.

And upon this we fell in disputation concerning the iniquity and wickedness of
that law which forbids priests to marye, the right and power of ye which
law to reueng and se kept he would ascribe unto princes upon this. Because
they have no less right and power, over their subjects, then the father has
over his dowghter. Uvynchesters argument The father may keep his daughter
against her will unmarried: therefore may rulars lefully ^o^strain priests to
chastity.
And therefore as the father has that power that he may keep his dowghter
unmarried if he will: So is it also in the hand of princes to make priests keep
them selves chaste, and to fe them fulfill the same, after they have on^
promissed it* There I objected unto him the contraction of this power, which
the holy gooste expressid in these words: And has no need, but has they
powere over his own will. For saying no man can have any power over any man,
without it be to the edif^^ng of Godliness, I said, that the father has no
power given him of God to keep his dowghter unmarried: without he perceive, that
it is and shall be for his daughters furtherance and upon that, ordayn somthinge
for her wherbye she may serve God more conuenientlye and fittlye: if not, that
the father has not so much power in this behalf to keep his daughter a
virgyn, as he has rather necessity to marye her. There Uvynchester denied
that the father has necessity to marye his daughter, of the daughter her
self, and then he came in, with his feigned matter, concerning the tenuite and
small portyon of substance, which sometime constrayneth parents to marye
their dowghters. But I stooke in this undoubted pryncyple of holy scripture,
that the father (...) have no power to keep his daughter, except he perceive
it to be for her profyt. If he fears that it will chance otherwise, that he
has need to marye her, over whom he has the governance in stead of her
GOD, that true father, as far as her profitte extends.

This when Wynchester had belyke wayed more exactely with him self, he sent a
writing unto me, wherein he interpreted this clause, (And has no need) as
before I recyted his words of the necessity to marye the dowghter, which
either rises of that, that he can not easily find her a husband, either that
is alleged by the couenauntes of wedlock. Uvherin before this he brought also
this gloss, that Paul in this place answers of the virgyn now betrothed by
the father, and not clean fre Uvherof he spoke not a word in our
communication together like as he has feigned it of him self alone without
any author. In this behalf Uvynchester writes that I answered him being
trobled in mind with much stammerynge and stutrynge, and therefore had great
maruayll at me. But conjecture you your selves (most worthy people) what troble
or stammerynge might let me in this behalf to answer Uvynchester. For what
things in our communication came into his mind and mouth, ye may easelye
conjecture, for so much as he clothed them afterward with wrytynges depely
purposed for. The which now after what sort they are and how groundlye
Uvynchester has proved them, let us mark diligently.

First he castethe in ower tethe that of this our interpretation, of ye
necessity to marye the dowghter (which the father is constrained to do, if he
perceive that his dowghter is called and given to marriage, and not to
chastity) we be the only authors, and that it is our inue^tion and fayninge.

Secondarily that it is very foolesh, absurd, and nothing agreeable with the
Apostles* words, (...) contrary to them, In fine that it is such an
interpretation which if it take place it must needs be granted yt Paul used
an obscure wrappynge together of words, and nothing pertaynyng to the matter
he would entreat of, and that he cast forth or ^abled words in vain, and
without sense.

This does Uvynchester lay against our interpretation in his first imprinted
writynge against me. The latter two objections he goith about to prove, but
with what arguments we shall se hereafter. First he counts it sufficient,
that he has only made objection against us, saying he alleged the gloses of
Photius and Oecomenius which have interpreted this clawse (and has no need)
otherwise For all that Photius, as I before said, alleged our interpretation,
and declares it to belong no less properlye to this place of Paul, as soon
after we will show.

But that the vanity of Uvynchesters first objection, may more playnelye
manyfeste it self, wherewith he laythe against us, that the same
interpretation, which we alleged here is our own invention and faynynge, we
think conuenyent to bring forth of this owre interpretatyon not the authors
(for the very author thereof is the holy ghooste, of whose words we gathered
it) but the mete and ayte witnesses of the old ancient antiquity of the
church, which folowinge the same authore gave the self same interpretation
also upon Saint Paul's words.

S. Ambrose.
Saint Ambrose therefore upon this (If any man think it uncomely for his
virgyn, if she pass the time of marriage, etc.) for so he interpreted this
place of Paul, after he had spoken diverse things before his interpretation,
after other things writ thus also. If therefore any virgyn be in desire of
marriage, now ripe for a man, the Apostle teaches here that it is better she
marye openly agreeable with the law, then privately do it dishonestlye, and so
turn to her shame. And upon these the Apostles words (nevertheless he that
has stedfa^^^y appointed in his heart, and has no need etc.) he writ so.
This he says, that who so has a virgyn, which has no mind to mary,
should keep her: and not lay unto her the plaster of matrimonye, whom he
perceaueth has no mind to marye.

Truly in these expositio^s ye se clearly how S. Ambrose also meant that the
Apostle would here teach, that it is the office of a good and Godly father to
consider the disposition and will of his daughter: and if he perceive her to
have a desire to mary, to know yt he has no power to keep her but has rather
need to se her married and so behouethe it to be done, least the daughter have
therebye occasyon to fall. But if he se that his daughter has no mind to
marye, that he should then keep her, and in no wise lay the plaster of
marriage unto her, but minyster all necessaryes accordynglye, wherebye she may
keep her virginite to Christ our Lord. And in this commentaryes which are
asserybed to S. Hierom, we read, upon this (And so ought it to be done) if it
shall so be requysite for the daughters will: For the parents ought to keep
her, until she come to her leful age, and to instrucie her to the better. But
if she will not, let that be done which must needs. And upon this
(notwithstanding he that has stedfastlye appointed in his heart etc.) he has
steadfastly appointed, whose virgins agremente establyssheth the will of the
father: and the necessity of the daughter co^pelleth him not to do, that she
would. And therefore it is plain, that this same interpreter saw the same
thing in the Apostles words that we do. To say, that the pore to keep and
necessity to marye the virgin consists in the condition and will of the
virgyn.

The self same thing upon these words of Paul, and in a manner in the same
words did saint Primasyus the Bishop of Utica and disciple of Saint Austyne
writ. S. Primasius.
For this (and so ought it to be done) he interpreted on this sort.
Necessity for ye will of ye maiden
So must it needs be for the necessity of the damsel. And this. (He that has
steadfastly appointed in his heart) He has steadfastly appointed* whose will is
establysshed by the will and mind of the daughter. He byddeth every man to
take counsel of his flesh what he can sustain.
The same also he writteth in this place. If every man confer this matter with
his flesh, and sees that he can not keep his virginite, let him marye, lest
in playinge the adulterer he dishonest him self.

In like manner concerning the daughter, if she will, let that be done whi he
must needs.

The latter interpreters agree also.
In the same meaning did Thomas Aquinas, and the ordinarye gloss, and Nycolas
Lyranus expound these the Apostles words: and Erasmus Roterodamus, who in the
interpretation of the same place a^ded this also. That marriage is a lefull
thing, honest, and for some necessary.

Now let us mark Photius his other interpretation upon this same place of
Paul, whom Uvynchester has brought forth against me, as a chief witness
of the old antiquity. He added this, after his first interpretation,
concerning the necessity to keep the virgyn.

Notwithstanding this sentense (And has no need) may be otherwise taken, and
no less properlye, that he has no need to do the contrary to his daughters
will. For if he se the disposition of his daughter to be so that he must needs
give her to marriage, he ought not to keep her a virgin: and so compel her to
do the contrary against her inclination and will. For virginity is a thing
vuluntarye and not vnuoluntary. For if she be kept a virgyn against her will,
and enclyneth to the evil part, she excuses her self, and laythe the cause
of her fall upon him that constrained her to keep her virginite. This says
Photius.

Here I beseech you, what one thing of all those things, which I have written
about this place, do ye ^ot se expressed? Does not this interpreter also
evidently witness, that to have no need, is as much, as the father is not
constrained by his daughter to marye her? And that the father ought to make
diligent inquisitio^ for those things, yt are in his daughter, (...), that is
the disposition of her nature and inclination of her mind: and not against her
mind to keep her a virgin.

But when Uvynchester forcaste with him self at the first dashe, that I would
obiecte this unto him preventing my objection writteth, that he grants how
Photius judgment is that a man should not keep his virgin against her will.
But by what means (says he)? because she is not called? No, not so. But,
bissope, what is this to your purpos^? Though for all that, when Photius
commaundethe to consider such things as pertain to the dowgther the
disposition of her nature and inclination of her mind, truly he willethe to
have a respect in the virgin both unto her gift, and also unto her vocation:
as it is manifest. Inoughe by the forsainges, and herafter I will make it more
plain. But that Uvynchester co^tended in our communication, Uvynchester will
have that the father may tangle his daughter in ye snare of virginitye.
was this: Saying the father has right by this place of Paul to keep his
virgin against her will, and to tangle her in the snare of virginity which
Paul would not do (For these are his words, in his hand writing unto me) It
is also in the princes hand to tangle any of his subjects who^ he will, be
they never so loathe, in the snare of chastity. Does not Photius such and old
and laudable interpreter of Paul (in wynchesters opinion) planilie speak
against this fained gloss? For he shows very plainlye how the Apostle
teaches here that the father ought not to keep his daughter a virgin against
her will, nor to constrain her against the dissposition of her nature and
inclination of her will. And that virginity is a thing voluntary and not
vnuoluntarie. And if any interprise to give his virgin an occation, that she
sin that shall not be imputed unto her, but to him which has up compultion
constraned her to lead such a kind of life.

It is therefore manifest that so far as the gift and vocation extends,
Photius makes therein, against Uvinchester, with us, because he acknowleged
that the holy ghost teached herebye his Apostle, how the father ought not to
tangle his unwilling daughter in the snare of virginity, and that he should
measure the steadfastnes of his judgment concerning the keaping of his
daughter, by her condition and will, though she be weak of age and kind. And
that it can not therefore be concluded by this place of Paul, that any potestate
of the world has any right to tangle any of his subjects in the snare of
chastity. And finally that Uvi^chester scorneth no less his Photius and other
most holy fathers and true interpreters of the Apostle, then us, for so much
as he writes. Speak Bucer whens comes steadfastnes? Uvinchesters scoffinges.
should he (you being the author) take counsel of the maiden which is weak
both in kind and age? And in his hand writing unto me: The father had need to
be a cunninge physician, and very well practysed that should find by the
behauioure of his daughters body, manners, or words some thing, whereby he may
stedfastlye determine and apoint in his heart about the keapinge of her a
virgin, Photius will have ye gifts and vocation of God considered.
without all ieopardie of fornication. But now let us se whether Photius
wills not, that the Apostle commanded the father to consider Gods gift and
vocation in his daughter, for so much as he granted, that he command the
father to behold and mark such things as belong to his daughter, and the
disposytion of her nature and inclination of her mind. Truly he expounded Paul
and was no peliagian as I suppose. And so saying the Apostle in this self same
chapter makes it the peculier gift of God and certain vocation to take
chastity or matrimony upon one godly, how should not Photius also acknowledge
that the inclination of the daughters nature and intention of her mind to
either kind of lyuinge, is ye gift of God which he has given to the daughter
for her vocation? For what have thou (said the Apostle) which you have not
received?

But what need so much a do about so ungodly and wrangling schoolyshe
brawlynges? For whether (I beseech you) should a godly father consider in his
daughter sooner such things as are vitions of her self, and pernicyous, laid
unto her by the dyuell, or such helthsome things as are given her of GOD, from
whom procedethe all good gift? Should the Godly father count it temerious
desire or ^upiditie in his maiden, or rather whither as Gods will calls her
who le^de^h so his children with his spirit, and so brings to effect in them
to will and to do that that is good, that every man may be the more certain of
his vocation and others that belong unto him, if he search Godly for it after
prayer and observe the tokens and apointme^tes of the same.

And so by this it is manifest that the interpretation which we alleged upon
this place of Paul (And has no need) is known and given as the very proper
and peculier interpretatation both by ye Apostles very words and also by the
true author thereof, the holy ghost, and taken of all that interterprete it
any thing to the purpose both old and new: Yea and even of Photius him
self whom Uvinchester brought against us with such a supercelyous and proud
prejudice, as a witness of all the old antiquity. Uvinchesters manifest
vanity.


Therefore let Uvinchester acknowledge him self her of to be convict not only of
a most impudent lie, saying he dare write, that we are thonlye authors of
this interpretation, and that it is our invention and faiuinge: but also to be
a detestable babbler and railer against the trewthe, and the reverent antiquity
of holy fathers for bycawse those his scoldinges and raylinges (of a foolyshe
interpretation, cold perverse not agreeable to the Apostles words, and clean
con^^^^ye to them) be long no less to them then to us, who gave ye self same
interpretation upon this place, as we do.

Now therefore let us se with what argument Uvinchester went about to show that
she is his reproaches stick in this interpretation, which is no more ours, then
his Photius and all holy fathers that were ye best interpreters of Paul.
^elyke he has suf^ycientlye declared it to be a cold interpretation absurd,
foolyshe and unworthy for an Apostle, by these arguments.

It appears not (says he) if we receive this sense what ambiguitie or doubt
the Apostle made plain here with so many words and so weighty (If any think
that it is uncomely for his vyrgin etc.) or to what dowbt he answered the
Corinthia^s. Another that there is any appointed time to marye a virgin, or that
any man should doubt to keep his virgin that forsakes matrymonye. Also (he
says) the Apostle might have spoken that we interpret, if he had minded to
teach it, in more open and less words, to say. Let the father keep his
virgin, if she be dysposed to live in her virginity: If not, let him marye
her, whereas (if we will ascribe our sense to the Apostle) he should seem to
have used an obscure tumbling together of words, and far from the purposed
matter, and to speak words in vain and without sense. On this fassyon does
Uvinchester reason in two of his writings, in his hand writing that he sent
me and in the first imprinted.

Now therefore we are put to our shifts to show both to what dowbtfull matter
it is lykelye Paul made answer, and with how apt and mete words he did the
same. Surely the holy fathers thought this no strange thing, nor yet do any
at this day think the contrary, if they are endued with the cu^mune sense,
that at the same time in the church of Corinthe, when they sowght for the
Apostles mind in this behal^e, there were not a few fathers (of the which
sort diverse are found emonge ours) which thought it an uncomely thing for
them selves, and their daughters, and that they did not well therein, if they
kept their daughters at whom long after they came to the age, mete to be
married* For Paul says (...) that is, paste their young age. For they lived
emonge the Heythen, and in a city that was so given to lecherye and excess in
carnal pleasures, that thereupon came the proverb. It is not for every man to
visitie Corinthe. And besides that, certain as yet of the Corinthians had in
such estimation the good will, and vicious judgments of the citisyns, and
their frindes which were also of the Heythen, that they communycated of their
Idolatrous sacrifices. And as yet had such perverse judgments concerning
true chastity, that they had need of admonissyon, how Christian men, and
specyallye so many, should ^^e fornication, and that it did expel them out of
Gods kingdom. And furthermore who dowbteth that there was at Corinthe emonge
the holyeste men, which fearinge the judgment of god the^ ye iudme^t^g of ye
common people, supposed to be indecent for them and their daughters to keep
theer daughters past ye age, when as they be ready to marriage, other for fear
of the vice which might be offerid unto the^, or else for ye shame, whereby
their good report might be blemisshed, and specially in such a lycentious
city.

And therefore who sees not that of lykelyhood there was very much dowbt and
more then behoues, emonge the Corinthians, about the keaping of their daughters
in their virginity, after the time of marriage, which the Apostle ought by his
doctrine to put out of dowbt, in the teachinge how they may keep their
daughters Godly, virgins, or marie them. Therefore there is nothing at all
according to our interpretation in this the Apostles answer which may seem
to be in vain, and written for a just and necessary cawse.

As much appearethe therein, that it should seem to be spoken subtyllye,
obscurely or not aptlye and fyttlye to the matter. The Apostle preached to very
many the holy^es and commodities of chastity, so that it may seem thereby (as
Ambrose writ upon this place) that wedlock is unprofitable and nothing to be
regarded. Like as therefore he did in his first answers written in this
chapter, so would he do in this answer also, yt is to say, to take dilygent
head to the estimation and use of holy matrymonye, and to teach by what
devotion the true and exceptable chastytye unto God should be taken and
preserved. For he saw before in speryte yt cruel ruinge and destruction of
the church, which Satan had brought in to it by the preposterous and
superstytyous praysynge of chastity.

He writ therefore. If any man count it little honesty for him self and his
daughter, other for the fore judgments of other men, or in his own
judgment, namelye bicawse he stands in fere, that other vice or reproach
will fall upon his daughter to keep his daughter after ye time, when as they
are counted mete to be married and behooves so to be, let him do what he
lysteth, he synneth not, let her be coopled in matrimony. In these words when
he added. And behooves so to be, did he ^ot euidentlye teach, that the father
owght to have a religious respect of his judgment, and ye Godly, and also to
ponder circonspectlye agreeable to the word of God, what God has appointed for
his daughter, But when he added this also (he sins not let her be coopled in
matrimonye) therbye he confyrmed the holy estimation and Godly use of marriage,
whereof to be diligently admonisshed, if they had no need to whom he wrate at
that present time, yet he saw before that their posterity should have. For he
knew he had the destribution of Gods word, and doctrine, whereby the Godly
should be instructed and governed unto the end of the world. Uvherfor he
admonished such as intended to keep their daughters virgins, in many words,
who (so he says) ha^he surely purposed in his heart, and has no need etc.
Uvherbye he taught how devoutly the father owght to enquire whether God has
ordained and iudued his daughter with his gifts to Godly virginity, and
whether he has given him power to keep his daughter, or offerithe him rather
necessity to marie her, whereupon it behooves not rashlye and without any
aduisement of his own, or his daughters affection or persuasyon to decer^e,
but owght rather to judge by Christ's word and spirit in his heart, to say,
po^deringe wiselye and Godly all things and cyrcunstances, that he may stand
surely in his purpose before God, his conscience not accusynge him, that he has
appointed that of his daughter, which by no means co^duceth to gods glory and
ed^fiynge of the church. Uvhiles therefore we interpret thees the Apostles
words on this manner, what I beseech you, may seem there, specially to godly
men not to be written plainly euydentlye, to the purpose and Godly? But though
Uvinchester supposethe that these words of the Apostle, want their true and
right sense, and seem foolyshe and unmeet for the purpose, yet will they never
judge it, which are endued with ye spyrite of Christ, and a pure mind.

He might have expressid this sente^se (says Uvinchester) if he had minded to
teach the same in few words, and mete for the matter he had in hand. Let
him therefore show him self what according to our interpretation, is
superstuous in them, or disagreeth to the matter he entreated upon. Not only
we perceive no such thing, but also so many most holy fathers and mete
interpreters of ye Apostle saw no such thing. Hereof therefore it may be
sufficie^lye known with what ungodly malepertnes Uvinchester has spitefully
reproched, that this not so much our interpretation, as all the holy fathers,
and his Photius is, and therefore hitherto his own also, is very foolish, cold,
obscure, and which makes the holy ghostes words to be frustrated, and spoken
in vain, and without sense.

Now let us throughlye mark whether in these the Apostles words, taken after
this our interpretation and the holy fathers, there seem to be any (...), or
owght contrary to it self. For that will Uvinchester have to appear by these
his two gloses. The one is that Paul says: Notwithstanding^ if any have
purposed surely in his heart, but there can be nothing steadfastly apoi^ted by
the father, concerning his daughter? If he ought to take into his counsayl her
waueringe condition and will, and specially saying we say that no man at all,
can at any time know for a certainty whether he him self be called to
perpetual chastity. The other is if the father follow Gods vocation in his
daughter, whether he should apoint, to keep her or to give her to matrimonye, he
should ever have necessity of his judgment, and never y^ fre power of his
will, so that it should never be verifyed of him. And has no power, when he
must of necessity follow the vocation of God. Unto the first scholishe reason
we answer, that in very deed no man, and much less the maid being a
virgin, can for a surety know by him self, what God has appointed of him, no
not so much as at the time present, much less for the time to come or for
ever. But such as unfeignedly pray unto god that he would vowchesafe to teach
the^ to know and in all points to follow his will, and to lead them in his
paths those does not the most bountiful father suffer to stycke in any
doubtful deliberations, God makes steadfast the condicious of his.
but opens unto them (as the spalmiste declares) and teach them his ways
and paths. For the lord guides the gentle in the judgment, and teaches the
meek his ways. O who is he? The man I say, that fears the lord, for he
will teach him the way which he has chosen. But this benefit of God and all
other things, must be sowght and prayed for with Godly study and holy
prayers. Therefore the Christian father intendinge to provide for his dowghter,
whi^he now is not so much his as Gods, first of all calling upon the spirit
of Christ by him self and his daughter, withal his household, and with the
wholle church (for out ^ept he estable she ye judgment of the father, what so
ever he ordain shall be variable and vnsteadfaste) shall try out with most
Godly ernestnes, what condition she is of, and what is her intent, and what
gifts she has receiuid of God, and what not, so that herupon God him self
may show to whether kind of life he has called his daughter. And when the
father prays, and makes inquisitio^ one this manner to know and to
accomplish what so ever God him self will have done with her, God our most
boutifull father will grant that he shall so determine of his daughter, and
apoint the thing which like as God has appointed and ordained it before, so
must it needs be to the furtherance and honesty both of the father and of his
daughter. And yt will God hi^ self make so firm and steadfaste, yt ye
daughter shall serve him in the steadfast sanctity of her body and soul,
albeit she be weak and of an uncertain purpose of her self. For ye lords
counsaille endures for ever, Psalm. 39.
and establissheth the work him self, what so ever he works in his, that it
may continue for their furtherans to the very end. And so God will make
fyrme and steadfast holy chastity also, in all them whom he has called
thereunto, so long as it shall be to their furterance. When it begins to be to
ye contrary, it is their duty to follow God yt calls them, and at his
commandment to make a permutatio^ of the unmarried state with holy
matrimonye, and he will not any man^ of vnstedfastes or any other vice,
especially emonge the children of God. For they whom God justifies and
glorifyeth are wont to be condemned, and to be mocking stocks to the men of
this world.

These things may Uvynchesters holiness and stedfastnes now mock and scorn at
his pleasure, yet do such as in yt true obedience of god, study for true
holiness and stedfastnes, place all their times, Psalm. xxxi. Ps lxxiij Ps. Cxi*
and momentes of life in the hand of the Lord, unto him they stretche forth
their right hand, and permit themselves to the vttermoste to be governed in all
things by his counsel, and at all time, and the constance and stedfastnes of
al their counsayles and deeds they demand of him, whose commandments are
al steadfast, and sure for evermore.

These things therefore who so godly ponder, shall know sufficientlye, yt there
is nothing in our interpretation upon this place of Paul, which does not
manifestlye condescend and agree with those the Apostles words, wherewith he
requires, that the father should appoynte and judge stedfastlye in his heart
about the keapyng of his daughter.

But for so much as Uvynchester now again plays the blind sophister about
the necessity of the fathers decree, because the father, after our
interpretatyon, which requires that he follow the vocation of the Lord,
should evermore have the necessity of doing, and never the power over his
own will, because the holy father must needs follow Gods vocation in his
daughter, these things ye se your selves how unworthy they are, that we
should speak much of them. For if the father perceive that his daughter is
called to chastity, has he then any necessity to marye her? But fre power
he has to keep her a virgin. On the contrary part, If he know, she is called
to holy wedlock has he any need to keep her a virgyn? But he has fre power to
marye her although in very deed it behooves, and is necessary so to be
seeing it so pleases God. Uvynchester ever sticks in that error, as
though all necessity should fight with fre will because yt necessity is
against the lyberty of the will, which has in it any compultion or force: but
no such necessity can happen to them, that in true faith follow Gods word.
For like as in God and in the blessed with him upon this, there is great
necessity of right will and life, because it is most fre unto them, Al
necessity is not against fre will but that necessitye only which is of
compultion.
and all will of good and right is most plesaunt so in the faith of Christ,
and in the deeds of faith, wherbye we have here a little taste to live a
heavenly and holy life, there is so much the more fre and glad will, as the
necessity of truth and goodness is more abundaunt in them, that is to say, a
more pure and perfect action of God. It is a requysite thing unto health to
love God: and who so knows him perfectly of necessity also loves God. But
upon that who may say, that they that believe in God, love God against their
will, and have not, as a fre will so also fre power to love God? He that is
borne of God, can not sin, does he therefore abstain from sin being
constrained, or has he not fre power to do well? But here of we entende to
speak more in our just defense against Uvynchesters quarellynges.

Notwithstanding those things we have now spoken are sufficient to thentent,
this may be seen, that it comes not to pass by this Uvynchesters faynynge
the propriete and difference emonge them selves of these voices, and matters of
power and necessity, that any thing is contained in our interpretation,
which in all poi^tes is not agreeable and consentient to the Apostles words and
meaning. And so it is manifest that those Uvinchesters raylinges, of a cold
interpretation, folyshe, perverse, and not agreynge, but fighting with the
Apostles words, be all found in his own gloses: and that not one of them
may cleave or stick in the enar^atyon of this place, whereof we entreat,
which we have alleged after so many holy fathers and approved interpreters of
the Apostle. And that Uvinchester him self, and not we is convict of an
ungodly malepertnes against the words of the Apostle: and against the
ancient antiquity of the church, not only of a proud despecte and
contempt, but also of a wicked detractio^, and ill report.

The co^clusyon.
Thus much I thought best to answer somewhat at large concerning the
interpretation of this place (if any think it uncomely for his virgyn etc.)
against Uvynchesters quarellinges and sophistical determinations: because the
true and natural understanding of this place makes well to our instituted
defense of Christian liberty, which ever extends to holy matrimonye, as
well, as to holy chastity: And also, because Uvynchester in this place
braggeth to importunatelye against us. The matter it self constrayneth me to
serve for our just defense against his checkes and sophystrye, those things
wherein he has played the sophyster against the five prepositions of Paul,
which I noted in my answer unto Latomus he made in the commendation of
chastity, sithe our present answer has stretched so far.

Notwithstanding I think it necessary to admonyshe the reader of two places,
because that by the proper understanding of them, it is very manifest, how
the holy gooste would confirm unto his the lyberty of matrimony, by such
things as in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, the.vii. Chapter, he
disputed concerning the married and unmarried state. And also about the
handelynge of these places, Uvinchester makes great triumphs over us, not yet
vanquyshed. The one of those places is, the agremente and exposition of these
sentenses. It is not good for a man to be alone, And it is good for a man not
to touch a woman The other place is the interpretation of this saying: But for
to avoid fornication let every man have his wife. etc.

It is not good for a man to be alone
Concerning therefore the first place, Uvynchester blames us, because we
affirm, that the saiynge of the Lord, which he spoke of Adam as the pare^t
of mankind, and spoke it not of every man, pertayneth to al men, which are
apt for matrimony: and not called to chastity. But what man not clean
ignorant of Christ his doctrine knows not that they which are another unapt
to matrymonye: nor destyned nor called in mind nor body to the solitary life
for the kingdom of heavens sake, That is to say, which are comprehended in no
kind of those men, whom the Lord has except from the vocation of holy
matrimony (Math. xix.) are (forsomoch as pertayneth to holy matrimony) in the
same condition, that Adam was first made in, so that it is not good for the^
to pass his life with out wives. For because the bountiful God has called
the^ to matrimonye, and wills them to serve him in this vocation, and not in
the unmarried life. And so it is good for these, both to touch a woman, if they
have any (as Uvi^chester grants) and also to take one, If they be without,
which in like manner he must needs grant without he will speak against the holy
ghost in these. If they can not refrain, let them be coopled in matrimonye. It
is better to marye then to burn. I will the younger woman to marye. Albeit the
matter be so about y^ called unto matrimony, yet because we shall at some time
be like unto the Angels of God, It is good for a man not to touch a woman
clean without matrimonye, and the holy ghoost pronounced the^ so much the
more blessed, which by the holy chastity draw nerer unto this felicity.
Uvhy should we not as well say, that it is a good thing by it self for every
man, not to touch a woman for the kingdom of heavens sake. If we mark yt
universal condition, and not the vocation in this life, if it be to matrimonye?

Like as Paul said it was much better for him to be lowsed, and so to be
with Christ, To say, when he saw throughlye his universal vocation, and the
life everlasting recovered by Christ, and yet incontinently after he added to
this his saying. Phil. i
But to abide in the flesh, is more nedeful for you, and therefore hitherto also
better, namely for his vocatyon, and the work of the health of many, which
the Lord intended to do by this his Apostle. And so that which the Apostle
thought to be of it self better and more to be desired, he acknoweleged was
not so good, because of the time, and commandment of God, as the contrary,
and in so doing he requires it the more, but yet for his own time only, by
so much as he knew it to be more necessary, to say more acceptable to god
and greater furtheraunce unto men. As any thing is more necessary, so is it to
ye godly more voluntary
So does necessity and fre will agree together, as I foresaid, in matters of
faith.

These things I desire the (most Christian reader) to look upon more
narrowlye, and then judge thy self if altogether after the same manner the
unmarried life. Yet in no wise y^ for the, which Wynchester fyghteth so
stoutlye, but the Godly and angelycall to say, which al together ser^eth
with great diligence to promote and advance Christ his kingdom by the pure
holiness of the body and spirite^ be not of it self more to be desired for of
all GODS elect, and therefore better, then the married life, because it
conteyneth a more full meditation and taste of the heavenly life, then does
the other? Notwithstanding, seeing God will daily prolonge and bring up men,
eue^ unto the very end of this world, and that by the ministerye of his
saints, which may here also call upon, and glorifye him, every one of his
saints, whom God has called to the married life, may well say with the
Apostle. I would wyshe truly being delivered of the bond of matrimonye, to
stycke without separation unto my God, and to aduau^ce and fornyshe his
kingdom, to serve him so much the more diligently and holilye, and this
should be much better: but sithe I se the other to be more necessary, because
it is my Gods pleasure (upon whom alone depends to be good and profitable,
whatsoever is like thereunto) that I should serve my God under the yoke of
matrimonye, hsy will be done, and let him grant, that in this condityon of
life, which is harder and fuller of calamity, I may perform my ministerye
acceptable unto him, and helthsome to his church.

Uvhat I beseech you, of those things which be long to travail and pains do
we herin confound or meddle together with such things as belong to y^ end ^
reward. Uvherof Uvynchester accuses me, what new thing do we bring, or what
inconvenient? what finally which agrees with no place of scripture, or
disagreeth in one jot with the doctrine of holy fathers? Yet how arroga^tly
and bitterly does this Bishop here delude and stor^e me for this interpretation
and agreement of these recited places. Let every man have his wife.
He did the same, and trustyng to as vayn lies in this, because I interpreted
this: But to avoid fornication Let every man have his wife: let every man take
a wife, as the precept of having is as much in these the Lords saynges. Marc.
i and.ix
Have confydens. Se that ye have salt in your selves. For Uvynchester will have
this word (have) to have as much strength as, Let him keep her, and use her
which he has now already. In deed there want not here to Uvynchester
authors of this his interpretatyon of the holy fathers: as of hsy conjecture
also, which he follows, about the question of the Corinthia^s, whereunto
Paul in this place makes answer. But Uvynchester knows also this, that by
the authority of the holy fathers there ca^ no rule of faith be authorysed
or appointed: nor yet any interpretation of scripture, which all men ought of
necessity to receive. He knows also, yt the demonstration of our opinyon
concerning chastity consists not upon the interpretation of this word
(have) nor yet upon the conjecture of the question of the Corinthians. The
principles whereupon it consists I have here to fore recited: they remain
unto us vnlyfted at, whatsoever he has concerning the question of the
Corinthians, or the proper sense of this precept. For to avoid fornication,
let every man have his wife. The true and natural interpretation of the
which I have granted to hang upon the question of the Corinthyans, whereunto
the Apostle in this place purposed to make answer: but what this question
should be, it must be coniectured by the Apostles answers: for a certanytie
it can not be known. But Uvynchester declares openly as it were for a
suretye, that the Corinthians were in a doubt, Uvynchesters hold affirmans in a
doubtful matter.
whether it were leful for a Christian to cleave still unto his wife which he
married before his Christianity, and that they required of the Apostle to be
instructed thereof: and has no other reason of this his conjecture, but that
the Lord said. Who so forsakes no their parents, wife, and children, can not
be his discyples, and such like things concerning the contempt of the world
and this present life: and that through these the Lords saynges the
Corinthyans conceived such a fervent burning to the unmarried life, that they
were in doubt of matrimonye, whether it might be kept in Christianity: here
have ye the reason and cause of Uvynchesters conjecture. But confer ye this
with those the Apostles reprehentions and admonicions, wherebye he noted the
Corinthians of very great negligence in keapynge the true chastity of the
life, and in dryuynge a way, and expellyng from them manifest uncleanness,
fornication, and adulterye. These reprehentions and admonicyons I say, which
we read in the first Epistle to the Corinth. the.v. vi. and.vij. chapt. And in
the last the xij. chapt. ponder ye godly and then discern, what lykelyhode
Uvynchester and his conjecture and the cause of his conjecture have, and judge
how it agrees with such great desire of chastity as Uvynchester attributes
unto them. For if the Corinthia^s upon those the Lords saynges, wherein he
requires the forsakynge of wives, children, the whole world, and of a man's
own life* began to be so fervent in the desire of the chaste and heavenly life
(which gloss Uvynchester brings in) yt they should stand in doubt, whether
it were leful for a Christian to reserve his wife now married: how cold they
come into so much lightness and astoniyng in christ's discipline, yt they had
need to be quickened of the Apostle with such a sharp taunt, i. Cor. v
and reprehe^tio^, yt they should not suppose such fornication in their
churches to be winked at, or disse^bled, as was not hard of among the gentiles,
yt any should have his step mother to wife? and had need to be taught and
admo^yshed with so many and so sore arguments, yt fornication is to be fled of
Christians, and that it separateth the^ from Christ, and excludes them forth
of his kingdom. Now, after these so sore and quycke reprehentions and
admonitions, i. Co. xij
the Apostle wrate unto them, that he feared him, lest when he returns to
them again, God should humble him, so that he should be driven to take upon
him the sorrow of repentance for them, which did no repentance for their
uncleanness, fornication and wantonness, which they committed. Is it therefore
any thing likely that they were so by yonde al reason fervent in the study of
chastity, that the Apostle (as Uvynchester writteth) should bestow great
labor to moderate the^ in y^ ferue^tnes. May it not much more probable, that
first there were a few in the church of Corinthe, which understood the
making chaste for the kingdom of heavens sake, and in deed took in hand to
receive it, and were to theyrs the authors that they should take it upon
the^. Then that other as well they which were so hardely kept in coupled
chastity, as very many also which by ye misorderi^g of these feared yt
chastity of others, which began to profess chastity, were clean against
this new study of chastity emonge them, and perceived this kind of living
to be other little worthy, or not very expedient for Christians. Like as not
only the wise men of the world, whom certain of the Corinthians as yet
yonglynges in Christ, and carnal, made more of, then it behooves, but also the
Hebrews which professed the doctrine of God, rebuked chastity, and praised
matrimony. For the most ancient among the Hebrews declared them openly, which
remained unmarried after their leful age to mary, if it were not for the cause
to learn Gods law, to be gilty of the crime of blood, sheddinge, and of the
diminisshyng of the glory and honor of God among the people of Israel, and
therefore unworthy to be suffered among Gods people. They made so much of the
office of begettynge children emonge the people of Israel. The wise men among
the Grecyans agreynge with these, were in opinyon, that they which were unmarried
unto five and thyrthye years, should not only be punisshed by the purse, but
also put to shame, and that expressidly, to thentent no man should do them yt
honor, which is accustomed to be done of ye younger unto the elders. By these
cawses therefore it is very like, that there arose contentions emonge the
Corinthians about this matter, as they were besides full of contention. And for
that cawse the wholl church though mete to demand by epistle of the Apostle
whether chastity, and what chasttite should be comelye for Christian relygion?
In deed the Apostle in this place makes far greater a do and tarieth longer
in praising chastity then matrimony, for what should ye praise thereof need
emo^ge them, which were now so fervent in ye study of chastity. But for
somoch as ye Apostle in these his answers passed not matrimonye without
commendation, it seems he did it rather for this cawse, least the
commendation of chastity (which yet came to pass) should be taken in a
backewarde sense of their posterity, then yt the Corinthians had need at that
time to be taught, yt matrimony is lefull and holy, which were so hardlye
persuaded that fornication is unlawful, and against the holiness and profession
of Christians.

Make you judgment both of the conjecture and also of the reasons of ye
conjectures of them both: yet (for all ye see how much our conjectures are
more probable, then Uvinchesters) we stick not unto them in this cause, but
unto those clear, and manifestlye pronunced oracles of God, which I have here to
fore recited, and whereupon I have concluded our demonstrations: Those if
Uvinchester can, let him disconfecte, and bring forth the perfect foundations
of his opinion, not such not trifling sophistry, and querelinge scholishe
reasons. But he in both his epistles against me braggethe hi^ self most in
those places, wherein consists not the state of the state of the controuersyes
betwext us lettinge stippe like a valiant man those arguments whereupon our
doctrine specially consysteth, and the contrary thereof, clean overthrown.

How he has also done in the interpretation of that place, in the first
epistle to ye Corinthia^s the xiiij. chap. which we objected against Latomus,
and other our adversaries which go about to addict the faith of Gods people
to the Pope of Rome, and his obnoxious cou^sailes, let other give judgment,
for because this saing of the Apostle may be understand by ye other prophets
only though it be no necessity, and our interpretation agree much more both to
Paul's words, and to the sentence also, which S. Ambrose in like manner taught,
that by this place it is granted to all in ye church to examine such things
as were hard of the prophets, and to reason therein, as S. Ambrose turned this
word (...). Yet does Uvi^chester so scolde and rail against us because we are
wont to understand yt of all that here in ye church, as though he had found,
yt we would overthrow some principalle article of our faith. In ye mean
season he makes not word of the state it self of our controversy. And though
we grant the authority of this place to our adversaries, yet with how many
evident and undoubted testimonies of scripture have weshewed that which we
contend together in this controuersye, to say that it behooves every
Christian man to know and to judge him self by ye spirit of God, what so ever
be offerid him in ye stead of Gods word or precept, of whom so ever it be
offerid, so that every man should be truly instructed of God, and vnfainidly
believe not man, but God, and reckon it cursed if an Angel come from heaven and
teach yt contrary.

And in every point after the same fassion he invaded us also about the
sacrament of thanks giving and the worshippinge of the same. But of these and
other quarellinges of this man I shall in mete place commune at the full, and
will show what open injury he does me in casting in my teethe both ye strife
he had with such as are of our opinion about this matter, and also the
recantatio^ and retractation of the doctrine they at the first defended. Though
I have declared unto the godly, the wholle drift as it is all to gether
concerning these matters, in my e^arrations and retractatio^s upon the
Euangelystes.

Now sith I have gone somthinge farther then the manner of a preface requires,
I will end to confute this man's quarellinges and sophistries, and will commit
and leave all these things to your and all godly men's iudgemens. And I desire
God and the father of our lord Jesus Christ, that he will vowchsafe to iud^e
with his spirit, and to illumine with the light of his gosspell this man's and
all other men's minds which are not so much adversaries to us, as to the
kingdom of his son, that they may in time turninge from the hope they put in
the^ selves, embrace his son, before his anger waxinge hott against them, they
perish out of the way.

The same savior and our good shepherde, keep and preserve and cumulate with
all his heavenly benediction your most redoubted and famous king both in
godlynes and mighty prowes. The most noble and victorius Protector of all his
realms. The most godly and prudent Archebisshop of Canterburye primate of the
churches of Engeland, And all the kings most honorable counsel. And the
ministers of both ye administrations Ecclesyastical and political, with all
the people of Christ, wherbye when your churches are ous clean reedified,
there may afterward some of them be sent to repair ye churches in many other
nations, as in times paste, when in many places of france and Germany
Christ's religion stood well most in decay, with ye knowledge of holy
scripture and of good arts, your churches gave the right reverend father
Beda, Alcuinus, Claudius Johan Scotus me^ of notable religion and doctrine and
before their time Bonifacius, and many other very studious (as those times by
the secret dispensation of God, permitted) repairers of christ's churches.
That this most large benefit of God, shall through you pass through many
regions of Europa, ye fervent love and vnfeaseable study of your King in
this age, and puissance of royalty which he bears toward Christ's pure
religion and good letters, brings unto us no small hoope, then that singular
and durable benevolence of God toward your realm, wherbye he has vowched
safe to give you eft sons kings which were chief fauores and no wrisshers of
good letters and arts now ever sins ye most prudent king Sigibertus, which
about ye year of our lord D.C.xxx. first of al founded and adourned not only
ye university of Cambrig* but also many other schools through his realm.
By ye which gift of God the most prudent and victorious king Henry the viij.
so excelled that at this day there is not one realm yt has more well learned
and godly men in authority, nor none wherein Bisshops excel in so much
doctrine and purity of life who so ever my Uvinchester has not yet made
subject to the cross of Christ his erudition which he has very largely
received of God.

It is therefore our part, and all others that bear fervent love to Christ's
kingdom continuallye to pray our father most fervently through his son our
lord Jesus Christ, that it would be his pleasure to continewe, and to bring
to pass with like prosperity this his work, begone emonge you so luckily the
work of health, and not of yowrs only, but of many of Gods Children,
throwghe you the restytututyon I mean, of his Kingdom. And to the^^tent this
work (...) with more power incre^se, yt (...) (...) preserve, and of (...)
(...) with his gifts both your^ (...) king, and also al his (...) faithful
^^unsaylers, and ministers ^n the ^y^^ste and ecclesiaticall adminst a (...).
The lord therefore st^re vpe and corroborate with his spirit to pray yt sathe
both (...), us and all his, and ol his mere mercy vowchosafe to give care unto
our prayers, So ^e it.

Ye shall also desire God and our father through his son our Lord Jesus
christ with fervent desires, for us ^ermaine^, that ^^ing he has mad us in
this time the first to spread a broad and to restore his kingdom he will not
permit us through our ingratitude to be the last in the fruition of the
same ben. fy^^.

The Grace of God be with you all.

Amen. Finis. Yowre humble and daily oratoure in the Lord. Martine Bucer.
Imprynted ad London by me Richard Judge dwelling at the nourth door of Poules.

Cum Priuilegio, ad imprimendum solum.


